A /75/PV.98

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

98th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 17 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Mudallali
(Lebanon), Vice-President, took the Chair.

the draft amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.120
contained in document A/75/L.124.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): As ever, we are
very grateful to the co-facilitators, Japan and Guyana,
for all of their work on the text of draft resolution
A/75/L.120, and we look forward to the high-level
meeting on universal health coverage in 2023. But in
proposing draft amendment A/75/L.124 today we come
back to the fundamental question of how the General
Assembly regulates the participation of civil society in
our high-level meetings.

Agenda item 145 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on our agenda, I would like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/75/661/Add.5, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/75/661/Add.4, the Central
African Republic has made the payment necessary to
reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article
19 of the Charter of the United Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
due note of the information contained in document
A/75/661/Add.5?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 131 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/75/L.120)
Draft amendment (A/75/L.124)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom to introduce

We have voted four times now on what the General
Assembly thinks is a good solution, and that solution
is in operative paragraph 10 of the draft resolution
before us. As it stands, the paragraph provides for the
following process. It enables the President of the General
Assembly to provide us, the General Assembly, with a
list of relevant civil-society organizations. Of course,
he already does this in consultation with the Secretariat.
If Member States wish to object to the participation
of one of the civil-society organizations on that list,
they can make it known to the Assembly and we can
take a final decision on whether that organization can
participate. This process puts decision-making in all of
our hands, not the hands of a single Member State or the
Secretariat. It also means that we get to hear from the
civil-society organizations that we want to hear from,
and we get to exclude those that we do not think are
appropriate. It is a good system. We voted for it four
times. It is in operative paragraph 10.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-22670 (E)

*2122670*

A/75/PV.98

With the support of several countries, today we
are proposing — and this is our draft amendment — to
delete operative paragraph 11. We are doing it because
operative paragraph 11 represents a departure from
the approach set out in operative paragraph 10, and in
doing so it seeks to take away decision-making power
from the General Assembly. To be clear, this paragraph,
a new paragraph with new language, has been inserted
into the draft resolution at the behest of the 30-odd
States that have consistently voted against operative
paragraph 10. They vote against it because they do not
like civil society, and they want to be able to control
civil society’s access to our meetings. Their objective
is clear. We are of the view — and again, this is why we
wish to delete operative paragraph 11 — that operative
paragraph 11 is confusing and ambiguous. If I may, I
will briefly read it out.
“Requests the Secretariat to assist the President
of the General Assembly, with the support of other
relevant entities of the United Nations system,
as appropriate, particularly the World Health
Organization, in drawing up the list referred to
in paragraph 10 above, through screening and
evaluation of the requests to ensure relevance to
attend the high-level meeting”.
Now, I think the question for us is who the “relevant
entities” are. What is “appropriate”? Critically, what is
the mechanism for screening and evaluation? What is the
standard for relevance? Who is making these judgments
on our behalf? We know from our own experience on
HIV/AIDS that we are perfectly capable of making
these judgments ourselves. The paragraph inserts an
unnecessary step into the process. It creates confusion
and unnecessary work for the Secretariat, and ultimately
undermines the role of the General Assembly. So I
want to remind members that the language in operative
paragraph 10 is our language. It is the language found
in all three of the most recent consensus modality
resolutions. Operative paragraph 11 is yet another
attempt to degrade the language in operative paragraph
10 in order to take power and decisions out of our hands
and give them to others. I therefore urge members to
stick to the existing position. We call on Member States
to support our draft amendment so that we can hear
from all the relevant voices in our fight for universal
health coverage. We depend on that support. Please
vote in favour of our amendment.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolution A/75/L.120 and the draft
2/14

17/08/2021

amendment contained in document A/75/L.124. In
that connection, I would like to give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1, 2,
3 and 14 of draft resolution A/75/L.120, in operative
paragraph 1 the General Assembly would decide that
the one-day high-level meeting on universal health
coverage to be convened by the President of the General
Assembly shall be held at United Nations Headquarters
in New York on the third day of the general debate of
the Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, from 10 a.m.
to 6 p.m., and consist of an opening segment, a plenary
segment for general discussion, two multi-stakeholder
panels and a brief closing segment.
In operative paragraph 2, the General Assembly
decides that the opening segment, to be held from
10 a.m. to 10.30 a.m., will feature statements by the
President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth
session, the Secretary-General, the Director-General
of the World Health Organization and the President
of the World Bank Group, as well as an eminent highlevel champion of universal health coverage, selected,
in consultation with Member States, by the President
of the General Assembly, giving due consideration to
gender balance. The plenary segment, to be held from
10.30 a.m. to 5.30 p.m., will consist of statements by
Member States and observers of the General Assembly.
A list of speakers will be established in accordance with
established practices of the Assembly, and the time limits
for their statements will be three minutes for individual
delegations and five minutes for statements made on
behalf of a group of States. The closing segment, to be
held from 5.30 p.m. to 6 p.m., will consist of summaries
of the multi-stakeholder panels and concluding remarks
by the President of the General Assembly.
In operative paragraph 3, the Assembly further
decides that the organizational arrangements for
the two multi-stakeholder panels will be as follows.
Two multi-stakeholder panels will be held in parallel
to the plenary segment, one from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
and the other from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. Each of the two
multi-stakeholder panels will be co-chaired by two
representatives, one from a developed and one from a
developing country, to be appointed by the President of
21-22670

17/08/2021

the General Assembly from among the Heads of State
and Government attending the high-level meeting, in
consultation with Member States, taking into account
gender balance, level of development and geographical
representation. The themes of the multi-stakeholder
panels will take into consideration the direction and
outcomes of other, preceding, health processes and
initiatives, as well as the interactive multi-stakeholder
hearing, with a view to ensuring the most effective
and efficient outcomes and potential deliverables and
to sharing experiences and lessons learned to address
any remaining implementation gaps. The President of
the General Assembly may invite parliamentarians,
local Governments, the heads or senior representatives
of relevant United Nations entities, including the
World Health Organization and the World Bank,
development partners, civil society, the private sector,
academia, medical associations, indigenous leadership,
representative organizations of persons with disabilities
and community organizers to serve as speakers on
the panels, taking into account gender balance, level
of development, geopolitical representation and the
representation of youth and older people.
In operative paragraph 14, the Assembly decides
that the proceedings of the high-level meeting and
the multi-stakeholder hearing shall be webcast, and
encourages the President of the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General and the Director-General of the World
Health Organization to give the highest visibility to the
high-level meeting through all relevant media platforms
and information and communications technologies.
With regard to operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of
the draft resolution, it is currently envisaged that
the one-day high-level meeting on universal health
coverage, to be held in New York in 2023, would
consist of three meetings, if the meetings are held
in-person without significant virtual components, or
four meetings if the meetings are in a virtual or hybrid
format, with interpretation in all six official languages.
Those would constitute an addition to the meetings
workload for the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management in 2023 whereby additional
requirements for meeting services would arise in
the amount of $22,000. Furthermore, with regard to
operative paragraphs 1 and 3 of the draft resolution,
it is envisaged that the two multi-stakeholder panels
to be held in parallel with the plenary segment of the
high-level meeting would consist of two meetings
(either in-person, or in virtual or hybrid format), with

A/75/PV.98

interpretation in all six official languages. They would
constitute an addition to the meetings workload for
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management in 2023 whereby additional requirements
for meeting services would arise in the amount of
$11,000.
Also, with regard to operative paragraph 14 of
the draft resolution, the proceedings of the high-level
meeting and the multi-stakeholder hearing would
require resources for webcast services, including
United Nations Television and Video and press
coverage, in the amount of $13,700. Accordingly,
should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.120, additional resource requirements currently
estimated in the amounts of $33,000, under section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management, and $13,700, under
section 28, Global communications, would be included
in the proposed programme budget for 2023.
The statement I just read was distributed through
the Plenary Place on the e-deleGATE portal and will
be made available in The Journal of the United Nations
under the e-statement link for this meeting.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.120 and draft
amendment A/75/L.124, delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote or position on the draft
resolution, the draft amendment or both are invited to
do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I am making
this statement on behalf of Ambassador Kimihiro
Ishikane of Japan and myself.
At the outset we would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly for entrusting us with the
responsibility to serve as co-facilitators and conduct
intergovernmental consultations on the modalities of
the high-level meeting on universal health coverage,
to be held in 2023 in New York. The high-level
meeting will undertake a comprehensive review of the
implementation of the 2019 political declaration on
“Universal health coverage: moving together to build a
healthier world”, in order to identify gaps and solutions

21-226703/14

A/75/PV.98

so as to accelerate progress towards the achievement of
universal health coverage by 2030.
Over the past year and a half, the need for accelerated
action on universal health coverage has become even
more pronounced because of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Strong health systems built to deliver
universal health coverage and supported by sufficient
financial and human resources are fundamental to
ensuring the highest standard attainable of physical
and mental health for all, including as a critical defence
against disease outbreaks. Even before the pandemic,
the world was off the track needed to meet Sustainable
Development Goal target 3.8 on universal health
coverage, with at least half of the world’s population
unable to access the essential health services they
needed, and approximately 100 million people being
pushed into poverty each year due to catastrophic healthcare expenditure, a situation further compounded by
the pandemic. The high-level meeting in 2023 will
provide an opportunity to thoroughly examine the
impact of the pandemic on health systems and discuss
the actions needed to build stronger health systems and
ultimately achieve universal health coverage.
Draft resolution A/75/L.120, presented for adoption
today, is a procedural text that outlines the scope,
modalities and format of the follow-up meeting. It
provides for a format similar to that the 2019 highlevel meeting, with a general debate and parallel
multi-stakeholder panels. Unlike the schedule in the
2019 modalities resolution (resolution 73/131), the time
frame for the plenary segment will run from 10:30
a.m. to 5:30 p.m. without a break, in an effort to enable
more Member States to address the meeting and in
recognition of recent challenges in that regard.
The high-level meeting will approve a political
declaration agreed on in advance by consensus. To
ensure relevance, the zero draft calls for preparations,
including around the theme and substance of the
panels, to be finalized during the seventy-seventh
session, closer to the date of the meeting. Recognizing
the critical contribution of stakeholders across sectors
to the attainment of universal health coverage, the
draft resolution seeks to bring together Governments,
academia, civil society, the private sector and other
professional groups in order to align our agendas and
actions toward common goals.
The paragraphs in the draft resolution related to
the participation of civil society and non-governmental
4/14

17/08/2021

organizations were indeed the most actively discussed
during the consultations. As facilitators we listened
keenly to the views of all delegations, and we consider
that the combination of operative paragraphs 10 and 11
represents the best balance of the different positions.
Operative paragraph 10 is the most recent language
used in the modalities resolutions for the participation
of civil-society organizations, whereby the General
Assembly makes the final decision on participation
from a list prepared by the President of the Assembly of
representatives of relevant non-governmental and civilsociety organizations, academic institutions and the
private sector. A new paragraph, operative paragraph
11, has been added, which factually describes how the
list in operative paragraph 10 is prepared. Specifically,
the list is to be drawn up by the President of the General
Assembly with the support of the Secretariat and the
relevant United Nations entities, particularly the World
Health Organization, following screening and evaluation
to determine the proposed participants’ relevance for
attending the meeting. Operative paragraph 11 is a
proposal made by the facilitators that emanates from
discussions with the relevant United Nations entities.
We reiterate that it is a factual representation of how the
list of relevant civil-society organizations is prepared.
It only stipulates the criterion of relevance, which is
also stated in operative paragraph 10.
It should be noted that silence was broken on both
paragraphs and there were extensive discussions with
the delegations concerned. It is our fervent hope that
this draft resolution, which sets the tone for a very
important meeting on universal health coverage, will
be adopted by consensus and that delegations will
support the text as presented by the facilitators, without
amendment. We would like to take this opportunity to
thank all delegations for their active engagement and
participation throughout the process.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the delegations of the Russian
Federation, the People’s Republic of China, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Republic of Belarus, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and the Republic of Cuba, we are compelled to express
our disagreement with draft amendment A/75/L.124.
Operative paragraph 11 of draft resolution
A/75/L.120, on the scope, modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage, does not introduce any new realities
into the preparatory process for the event. The
21-22670

17/08/2021

paragraph merely records the well-established and
decades-old practice of considering applications to
attend high-level meetings of the General Assembly
from non-governmental partners without consultative
status within the Economic and Social Council. Its
purpose is to provide transparency in the creation of
the initial list of non-governmental bodies, which will
describe the above-mentioned process clearly and
completely rather than selectively.
It should be emphasized that operative paragraph
11 cannot result in any restrictions on the involvement
of specialized non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
in the high-level meeting, since it does not introduce
any additional procedures or selection criteria. The
review of applications for the initial NGO list is in the
hands of the Secretariat and the Office of the President
of the General Assembly, and they are expected to
ensure its alignment with United Nations principles.
Similar formulations are provided for the organization
of United Nations conferences in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1996/31, which is the basis for our
Organization’s relationship with NGOs. I would like
to point out that operational paragraph 11 is already
a compromise. Unfortunately, due to pressure from
a number of delegations during the negotiations, the
wording on respecting the goals and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations was deleted. However,
even after that change, the paragraph still contributes
to the transparency of the process. We thank the
co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of Guyana and Japan,
for their efforts to find mutually acceptable solutions in a
spirit of neutrality, impartiality and consideration of the
interests of all. We regret that despite the constructive
attitude shown by many delegations, the sponsors of the
draft amendment made a choice that does not promote
balanced, mutually acceptable solutions. We consider
this to be a missed opportunity to settle contradictions
surrounding the issue in the Assembly.
We ask you to put the draft amendment to a vote,
Madam President, and we call on Member States to
vote against it.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its 27 member States. The candidate countries
North Macedonia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

A/75/PV.98

We would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly and the co-facilitators, Japan and Guyana,
for their efforts.
Agreeing on the modalities for the high-level
meeting today is an important milestone for the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage, and we
therefore welcome draft resolution A/75/L.120. I
would like to turn to the importance of civil-society
participation in the high-level meeting, which is a high
priority for the European Union and the reason why
together with others, in a broad cross-regional initiative,
we have sponsored draft amendment A/75/L.124,
requesting the deletion of operative paragraph 11. In
our view, the language in operative paragraph 11 was
not previously agreed on and, frankly, was not properly
negotiated. Although the EU voiced strong concerns
about the paragraph and requested further consultations
when breaking the silence, no further meaningful
engagement took place. Operative paragraph 11 creates
a new role for the Secretariat in screening civil-society
organization applicants that is inconsistent with
previous practice.
Furthermore, the EU believes that the language
is extremely vague and creates many unanswered
questions. It neither specifies the basis and criteria
for the evaluation nor what the consequences of such
a screening and evaluation process are to be. That is
not acceptable when dealing with such an important
question and potentially limiting the scope of the
General Assembly’s decision-making on the matter.
The EU feels that this particular paragraph attempts to
detract from and weaken the highly important language
on civil-society participation in operative paragraph 10.
Operative paragraph 10 clearly states that the Office
of the President of the General Assembly puts forward
the list of civil-society organizations. Member States
then have an opportunity to consider the list, after
which the General Assembly debates and decides on
the matter. It is a perfect intergovernmental process
accompanied by intergovernmental decision-making.
We note that operative paragraph 10 has already proven
its functionality. It has not only been adopted in various
previous modalities resolutions but has also been tested
in practice, and it has shown clearly that it works. We
can see an example of that in the context of the highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS held in June (see A/75/
PV.74), enabling an open and transparent process that
produced a final decision on the list of civil-society
organizations for the General Assembly.

21-226705/14

A/75/PV.98

Operative paragraph 11, however, re-establishes a
veil of secrecy over the process through its ambiguous
language and unclear implications with regard to the
list presented to the Assembly. The EU and its member
States, together with many other delegations, have
consistently raised strong concerns about rejections
of civil-society organizations that have been exercised
in an arbitrary manner. We cannot accept the unclear
pre-screening processes that would be introduced
through operative paragraph 11 and that might
undermine the transparency of the intergovernmental
decision-making process according to operative
paragraph 10.
Universal health coverage is a matter of concern to
all. It is fundamental not only to meeting Sustainable
Development Goal 3 but also to the eradication of poverty
in all its forms and dimensions, the achievement of
gender equality and women’s empowerment and many
other goals across the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Furthermore, universal health coverage
is crucial to ensuring the right of every human being,
without discrimination of any kind, to the enjoyment of
the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health. The activities of civil-society organizations have
played a crucial role and made extensive contributions in
this area, as demonstrated by their active participation
in the 2019 high-level meeting on universal health
coverage and the Africa Health Agenda International
Conference 2021. Civil-society organizations like the
more than 850 organizations under the Civil Society
Engagement Mechanism for Universal Health Coverage
2030 influence decision-making through advocacy,
provide essential capacity-building in the global
South and represent the voice of marginalized and
vulnerable people.
The high-level meeting will discuss how to achieve
universal health coverage, ensuring that all individuals
and communities have access to the quality essential
health services they need without suffering financial
hardship. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, which, among other things, has threatened
and hindered the ability of health systems to provide
other essential health services in many countries
around the world, has demonstrated that this discussion
has become increasingly important. To ensure that we
are informed, we need to hear experiences from all
involved. We cannot afford to let important experiences
go unheard. We cannot afford to miss out on the support
of any stakeholder when it comes to universal health
6/14

17/08/2021

coverage. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that
when it comes to health, this is very much indeed an
issue that belongs to all. Deleting operative paragraph
11 constitutes a return to recently agreed modalities for
high-level meetings and well-established modalities of
previous years in the United Nations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft amendment, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
amendment A/75/L.124: Albania, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Ukraine.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.120, in accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall
first take a decision on draft amendment A/75/L.124. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
21-22670

17/08/2021

Against:
Algeria, Barbados, Belarus, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Cabo Verde,
Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Namibia, Nepal, Oman, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sudan, Suriname, Togo, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen,
Zambia
Draft amendment A/75/L.124 was adopted by 64
votes to 43, with 33 abstentions.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of China to introduce an oral amendment
to draft resolution A/75/L.120.
Mrs. Xu Daizhu (China): I have the honour to
introduce an oral amendment to operative paragraph
10 of draft resolution A/75/L.120 jointly proposed by
the Republic of Belarus, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Russian Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and my own country,
China.
Our proposal is to delete the last part of operative
paragraph 10, which reads

A/75/PV.98

level meeting to renew our commitment to achieving
universal health coverage and promoting the welfare of
all. We always welcome and appreciate the important
contribution that civil society makes, including through
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), in engaging
constructively with Member States and the United
Nations system, and are glad to see that around 6,000
NGOs are currently enjoying active consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council.
We are also pleased that a number of years ago
the General Assembly came up with the consensusbased “non-objection basis” practice to ensure the
participation of NGOs that do not have consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council while
respecting the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly and the intergovernmental nature of its work.
The practice has worked successfully for many years.
However, we regret that this decade-long consensus has
been broken since February. The established rules of
procedure and methods of work of the United Nations
have been challenged, provoking unnecessary division
and undermining Member States’ unity and solidarity.
Belarus, China, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have therefore
proposed an oral amendment deleting the controversial
and non-consensus language in operative paragraph 10.
We call on all Member States to vote in favour of
our oral amendment and in favour of unity, solidarity
and consensus. We call on all Member States to vote
in favour of the established rules of procedure of the
General Assembly and the intergovernmental nature of
its work. We call on all Member States to vote in favour
of established practice in United Nations negotiations
and to avoid unnecessary division.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom on a point
of order.

The whole paragraph would therefore end after the
words “non-objection basis”.

Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I think the oral
amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.120 proposed by
China on behalf of a group of States reveals their true
intentions, both through the draft resolution’s operative
paragraph 11, which was just rejected, and with respect
to civil society more broadly. But first I want to tackle
a couple of erroneous statements just made.

We thank the Permanent Representatives of Guyana
and Japan for their efforts as the co-facilitators of the
draft resolution and look forward to the upcoming high-

The first is that the language in operative paragraph
10 is somehow controversial and a break with previous
practice. That is not the case. The language in operative

“and to bring the list to the attention of the
Assembly for a final decision by the Assembly on
participation in the high-level meeting”.

21-226707/14

A/75/PV.98

paragraph 10 is a return to the practice of the General
Assembly and the long-established practice of the
Assembly prior to 2012, when this language was first
amended. And it was amended in 2012 to try to restrict
the access of civil-society organizations. Consequently,
there is no way in which operative paragraph 10, as it
currently stands in the draft resolution, is controversial.
The second suggestion was that the language
of operative paragraph 10 as it stands does not have
consensus support. It is absolutely true that some
States have challenged this language in the last four
modalities resolutions and that we have voted on the
language. However, in previous votes, more than 90
members of the General Assembly have voted in favour
of this language, and a few more than 30 have voted
against it. It is therefore clear where the majority of
support in the General Assembly resides. Therefore the
suggestion that we are creating unnecessary division
in the General Assembly is of course nonsense. We
are simply proposing a paragraph that has the majority
support of the General Assembly.
But my biggest concern is about what is behind
the draft amendment from the Chinese delegation and
others. What they are trying to delete is the last part
of operative paragraph 10, the part that reads “and to
bring the list to the attention of the Assembly for a final
decision by the Assembly on participation”. That final
sentence guarantees the General Assembly’s oversight
and democratic decision-making with respect to the
participation of civil-society groups. The reason that
China and the States supporting it want to delete that
line is because they want a veto over civil-society
groups. There are people they do not want to hear
from, and they want to be able to decide unilaterally
to exclude them. So I am asking Member States to vote
against China’s oral amendment and in favour of access
for civil-society groups, of a paragraph that we in the
General Assembly have confirmed our support for on
four occasions now and of a meeting that enjoys the full
participation of civil society in a way that helps inform
our discussions on a critical issue.
The Acting President: The representative of the
United States has asked to make a statement. Is this
a statement in explanation of vote? If so, would you
please wait until after all decisions are taken to make
your statement? Is this an explanation of vote after the
voting?
8/14

17/08/2021

Mr. Mack (United States of America): This is
an explanation of vote before the voting on the newly
introduced draft oral amendment.
The Acting President: It seems that there is no
rule for that. I respectfully ask that you wait until after.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): A draft
amendment was just orally introduced, and so all
delegations should be able to take a position on the
amendment before it is acted upon.
The Acting President: It seems that the Secretariat
has a different view. Would the representative of the
Secretariat please explain to the representative of the
United States why he cannot speak now?
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The General Assembly
plenary has two windows for explanations of vote, one
before the voting and one after the voting. When there
are multiple proposals, regardless of the timing of those
proposals, there is one window for explanations of vote
before the voting on any of the proposals and a second
window after action on all proposals.
The Acting President: Is that acceptable to the
representative of the United States? You can make your
statement after the voting.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): Yes, in such
a case, the United States would like to make a statement
in explanation of vote before the voting instead of after
the voting.
The Acting President: I apologize but according
to the rules of procedure, you cannot speak now. You
must wait to speak after.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the oral
amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.120 proposed
by China.
I give the floor to the representative of the United
Kingdom on a point of order.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I would like to ask
the representative of the Secretariat to explain on what
basis he allowed me to speak.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The representative of
the United Kingdom spoke on a point of order to request
21-22670

17/08/2021

A/75/PV.98

a recorded vote on the oral amendment proposed by the
delegation of China.

The oral amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.120
was rejected by 82 votes to 23, with 28 abstentions.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on the oral amendment. A
recorded vote has been requested.

The Acting President: Since the oral amendment
proposed by the representative of China was not
adopted, we shall proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.120, as previously amended.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malawi, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Cabo Verde, Central African Republic, Côte
d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Nepal, Oman, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Singapore, Sudan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.120, as amended, entitled “Scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on universal health coverage”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.120, as amended?
Draft resolution A/75/L.120, as amended, was
adopted (resolution 75/315).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote or position after the voting, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States engaged constructively in the negotiations for
this modalities resolution (resolution 75/315), and
we look forward to the 2023 high-level meeting on
universal health coverage. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has reinforced the critical importance of a
solid global architecture for pandemic preparedness,
complementing strong existing health systems,
including ensuring that each country can progress
towards achieving its own path to universal health
coverage and sustainable health-care financing systems.
In order to achieve universal health coverage, we must
ensure that all stakeholders, including civil society, are
included in the high-level meeting, given their critical
role on the ground.
Civil-society organizations continue to serve as
the collective eyes and ears on the ground, providing
critical information and perspectives on achieving
universal health coverage. Their perspectives add great
value to our efforts because they work across countries,
regions and issues, and they push each of us to do
better as Governments. The voices disagreeing with
Governments are as important, if not more important,
in shedding light on problems. With and through the
meaningful involvement of a diverse and independent
civil society, key populations are served and individual
human rights upheld. Without civil-society voices at
the table, advancements in the global efforts to achieve

21-226709/14

A/75/PV.98

universal health coverage will be less effective and
ultimately incomplete.
We are pleased that operative paragraph 10 remains
in resolution 75/315 in its entirety. Operative paragraph
10, which also appears in five recent consensus
modalities resolutions, recognizes the importance of an
inclusive dialogue when we address important issues
here at the United Nations. In the event of objections
to the participation of a non-governmental organization
(NGO), it is important to ensure that it is the General
Assembly that decides on such participation rather than
a single Member State or small group. That increases
transparency and accountability. Such decisions should
not be determined behind closed doors or by the
objections of one or a few Member States. The General
Assembly, meaning all of us, not just one or two,
must consider the criteria set forth by the Committee
on Non-Governmental Organizations in determining
eligibility for participating in a meeting and push back
against attempts to politicize the work of civil society.
When the non-objection basis was introduced in the
General Assembly in 2012, it was in the hopes that it
would be used properly. However, it has been abused,
which is why we have seen the change in the past five
modality resolution adoptions.
We are pleased to see operative paragraph 11 deleted
from today’s text. That language was introduced very
late in the negotiation process, with little transparency,
and has not appeared in any prior modalities resolutions.
United Nations agencies are already involved in
crafting the list of civil-society organizations that will
participate in high-level meetings, and this paragraph is
not needed to affirm that existing role. Furthermore, the
paragraph potentially changed existing good practices
on selecting civil-society participants in United
Nations high-level meetings. We have a lot more work
to do collectively to increase civil-society participation
across the United Nations, and we will continue those
efforts for future modalities and meetings.
Mrs. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
regrettable that the General Assembly has once again
adopted a resolution (resolution 75/315) on modalities
for a General Assembly high-level meeting without
consensus and that existing rules and institutional
arrangements for the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in high-level meetings of the
General Assembly have once again been ignored.
The Assembly’s established practice with respect to
consideration on a non-objection basis, formed over
10/14

17/08/2021

the years, was once again undermined, damaging the
consensus and weakening the unity of Member States.
For those reasons, China dissociates itself from the
consensus on operative paragraph 10.
China has always supported NGOs in participating
in United Nations activities, in an orderly manner
and in compliance with regulations, so that they can
contribute actively to the work of the Organization. The
United Nations is an intergovernmental organization
of sovereign States. The non-objection basis has been
an established practice of the General Assembly over
the years that not only facilitates NGO participation
in United Nations meetings but also helps maintain
the intergovernmental nature of the United Nations.
The claim by a small number of countries that such
practices will prevent NGOs from participating in the
work of the United Nations is a misinterpretation and
intentional distortion of such practices.
China calls on Member States to continue extensive
and in-depth discussions and do their utmost to seek
consensus and unity. China stands ready to continue
open and constructive consultations with all parties on
this matter to ensure NGOs’ active participation in the
work of the United Nations on a basis that maintains the
rules and practices of the General Assembly.
Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation thanks the Permanent Representatives of
Guyana and Japan for their efforts as co-facilitators of
resolution 75/315, entitled “Scope, modalities, format
and organization of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage”.
We believe that health is a prerequisite for
sustainable development in its three pillars, as well
as one of its results and one of its indicators. For that
reason, the holding of a high-level meeting on universal
health coverage is part of the efforts to ensure that no
one is left behind and to build a healthier world for
everyone. It will also accelerate our efforts to achieve
universal health coverage by 2030, ensure that people
have healthy lives and promote the well-being of all at
every stage of life.
My country’s delegation participated positively,
with transparency and in good faith in the negotiation
process on today’s resolution. At every step of the way
we stressed the importance of adopting it by consensus,
because we believe in the importance of respecting the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, especially
when it comes to the participation of non-governmental
21-22670

17/08/2021

organizations (NGOs) in its meetings. Unfortunately,
however, new, controversial language that had to be
voted on was once again introduced regarding the
non-objection basis, which has proved successful
for the past 10 years. Regrettably, our concerns and
those of a significant number of other delegations
went unheeded. We reiterate that our concerns are not
about objecting to the participation of NGOs in the
meetings of the General Assembly, as the Permanent
Representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States have said. Given the intergovernmental nature
of our Organization, we believe that the participation
of NGOs that do not have consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council must be governed by the
applicable rules of procedure of the United Nations.
The opinion of one or two countries is enough and
must be taken into account when a decision is made by
this Organization.
Needless to say, the long-term practice for
negotiations at the United Nations is that when there is
no consensus among Member States, the best solution
is to go back to previously agreed language, and that
did not happen during the negotiation process or today,
undermining the solidarity which must prevail in our
work. For that reason, my delegation dissociates itself
from the consensus on operative paragraph 10 as it
stands, especially regarding the non-objection basis.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus supported the adoption of resolution 75/315.
We consider the holding of the high-level meeting
on universal health coverage an important element
in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We note the efforts made by the co-facilitators
within the process to reach a consensus document
and take everyone’s positions into account. We are
concerned about the fact that some delegations expressed
diametrically opposite views on the same issues, and
we consider that an inconsistent and selective approach.
Here in the General Assembly Hall we often talk about
the transparency and effectiveness of cooperation
with non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We are
therefore surprised by the negative attitude of some
delegations to the importance of NGOs’ responsibility
regarding the requirements for their participation in the
high-level meeting.
Guided by the interests of Member States in their
cooperation with NGOs, Belarus fully supports the

A/75/PV.98

procedures proposed in operative paragraph 11 of the
draft resolution. The approach in operative paragraph
11 merely describes what takes place in practice, and
we therefore joined the countries that requested that
draft amendment A/75/L.124 be put to a vote and that
voted against it.
We decisively supported the oral amendment to
paragraph 10 removing the current wording , which
is constantly being put to the vote and concerns the
General Assembly’s final decision on participation in
the high-level meeting. We are therefore concerned
about the continued attempts to promote non-consensus
provisions that run counter to established practice
when it comes to the participation of NGOs, which have
become systemic and do not conform to the principle of
multilateralism. We are fully in favour of maintaining
the existing practices regarding the participation of
those NGOs that do not have consultative status with
Economic and Social Council and the right of States to
determine which NGOs participate in intergovernmental
processes. We therefore continue to state consistently
that we dissociate ourselves from operative paragraph
10 as it stands.
Mrs. Iileka (Namibia): My delegation would like to
briefly explain its vote regarding the draft amendment
A/75/L.124, presented earlier by the United Kingdom.
My delegation abstained in the voting, but not because
we do not see civil-society participation as necessary
and critical. The Namibian Government has consistently
supported the participation of civil society in the work
of the General Assembly and the United Nations as a
whole. The participation of civil-society organizations
has always been an important pillar of the work of the
United Nations, with such organizations often on the
front lines of initiatives and doing the work on the
ground. But we were concerned about the language in
operative paragraph 11, which was ambiguous, lacked
clarity and set out a role for the Secretariat that was
new and required further consideration. However, we
also saw the text presented by the co-facilitators as a
genuine attempt to bridge the gaps between the various
positions, and we thank them for their valiant effort.
As the world starts to rebuild from the coronavirus
disease pandemic in what we hope will be an equitable
and transformative way, it is imperative to ensure that
the Assembly can speak with one voice on critical
matters such as this. We believe we must all now strive
to show flexibility and compromise, the principles that
form the bedrock of this Organization.

21-2267011/14

A/75/PV.98

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Mrs. Carolyn Rodrigues-Birkett and Mr. Kimihiro
Ishikane, the Permanent Representatives of Guyana and
Japan, respectively, who ably and patiently conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations on resolution
75/315 in informal consultations. I am sure the members
of the Assembly join me in expressing our appreciation
to them.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 131.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets
Draft resolution (A/75/L.123)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.123.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.123, entitled “Impact of rapid
technological change on the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals and targets”, for the
consideration of the General Assembly. This draft
resolution, which Mexico has the honour to introduce
for the third time, addresses a series of pressing needs
in the digital context. As of today, 57 per cent of the
world’s population lacks access to the Internet. Faced
with the confinement caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, that means that more than
half the world has been disconnected and left behind.
Some have been able to adapt the way they conduct
their businesses, studies and lives, but most have faced
digital exclusion at a time when connectivity is vital
to recovery.
Rapid technological change refers not just to
science, technology and innovation but also to human
and institutional capacity to adapt to such change. Along
with vaccines, global connectivity is another sine qua
non of human development in the twenty-first century
and deserves our full attention. As we have seen from
the exponential growth of recent years, technologies
can help us meet the Sustainable Development Goals.
The management of technology, however, also involves
12/14

17/08/2021

challenges that must be addressed in international
cooperative projects. The text of the draft that we
are introducing today takes into account the main
multilateral advances made in this area during the past
two years and identifies ways to close digital gaps and
increase Internet access, calling on Member States and
other stakeholders to ensure universal and affordable
access to the Internet by 2030.
Building capacity and infrastructure is essential
and urgent. That is why the draft resolution calls for
investment in the digital skills of our populations,
especially those in vulnerable situations. It highlights
the contributions of rapid technological change
in important areas for the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That
means health, energy, agriculture and food security,
governance, education, economy, finance, employment,
well-being and gender equality. In other words, we
believe that rapid technological change should have
a positive and incremental impact that supports the
inclusion of all people, online and offline. Against a
backdrop of recovery from the pandemic caused by
COVID-19, we are at a key point for strengthening
international digital cooperation. Although we have
already affirmed that the 2030 Agenda is a road map
for sustainable recovery, it is now up to us to join forces
to accelerate its implementation. None of that will be
possible without the full digital inclusion to which we
all aspire.
The Secretary-General’s road map for digital
cooperation (A/74/821) contains a number of important
recommendations for adapting to rapid technological
change. In this text Member States have had an
opportunity to discuss some of the recommendations,
and we have proposed some specific actions in support
of improved digital cooperation. Mexico believes
that the United Nations should play a prominent role
in this area. For that reason, we consider the work of
the Technology Facilitation Mechanism and the Office
of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Technology to
be vital.
Mexico thanks all the delegations that
participated actively in the open, transparent and
inclusive consultations. Together we have achieved a
comprehensive draft resolution that — beyond taking
into account the institutional advances of the past two
years — reflects the priorities of the international
community in the face of the socioeconomic effects
of the pandemic. We reiterate our appreciation to all
21-22670

17/08/2021

A/75/PV.98

Member States that contributed ideas and language
to the text. We believe firmly that multilateralism
represents the best way to move forward and close
digital gaps. The text to be adopted represents our
collective will to harness rapid technological change
for all and for sustainable development, human rights,
governance and inclusion.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.123,
entitled “Impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and targets”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.123: Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Cameroon,
Chile, Colombia, Georgia, Guinea, Honduras,
Indonesia, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan,
Palau, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda,
Singapore, Tunisia, Turkey and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.123?
Draft resolution A/75/L.123 was adopted (resolution
75/316).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position after adoption,
I would like to remind members that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Rose (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
is committed to harnessing the power of rapid
technological change for sustainable and inclusive
development, and we welcome Mexico’s efforts to
bring the issue to the General Assembly. We would
like to express our appreciation for the fact that the
negotiations on resolution 75/316 produced a more
focused text. We are happy to join the consensus on
the resolution but would like to take this opportunity to
share our views on some aspects of the text.
We believe that the resolution’s value is in its focus
on the impact of rapid technological change on achieving

the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We do not
think there is value in duplicating language in existing
initiatives, which is why we called for a streamlined
approach and questioned the need to repeat language
from other resolutions. We will continue to advocate
for this approach in future iterations of the resolution.
The United Kingdom underscores the value and
principles of multi-stakeholder cooperation. We firmly
believe that we must do more to harness the strengths of
Governments, international organizations, the private
sector, civil society and the technical and academic
communities. We must work to include all stakeholders
in these efforts if rapid technological change is to
contribute to achieving the SDGs.
We also fully support language recognizing the
importance of closing the gender digital divides and
reaffirming the role of digital technologies in enabling
women and girls to fully participate in political,
economic, social and cultural life and to exercise their
human rights. Human rights should be protected online
as they are offline. We strongly supported language
emphasizing that adaptation to rapid technological
change should be considered with respect to the
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The United Kingdom recognizes the importance of
State obligations to uphold international human rights
law and to make national policies compliant. As well
as language on the relevance of the right to privacy,
as set out in article 17 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, we would also have liked
to see greater recognition of all other rights, including
freedom of opinion and expression and of peaceful
assembly and association, among others.
We underline our commitment to ensuring the rights
of children, online and offline. Our understanding of
operative paragraph 4 of the resolution is that efforts
to protect children online must fully comply with
international human rights law.
We thank Mexico again for its commitment
throughout the negotiations and for advocating for this
important topic. The United Kingdom looks forward to
continuing to engage constructively on the issue.
Mr. Leiby (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
75/316 and appreciates Mexico’s efforts to facilitate it.
We would like to share our views as they pertain to it.

21-2267013/14

A/75/PV.98

The United States dissociates itself from the
resolution’s preambular paragraph 13 to the extent
that the paragraph promotes technology transfer and
the distribution of intellectual property rights that
are not both voluntary and on mutually agreed terms.
We believe firmly that the strong protection and
enforcement of intellectual property rights provide
some of the critical incentives needed to drive the
innovation that can address the health, environmental
and development challenges of today and tomorrow.
The United States understands with respect to this
declaration in general, and preambular paragraph 13
in particular, that references to the dissemination of
technology and the transfer of or access to technology
are to voluntary technology transfer on mutually agreed
terms, and that all references to access to information
and knowledge are to information or knowledge that is
made available with the authorization of the legitimate
holder. The United States underscores the importance
of regulatory and legal environments that support
innovation. From the perspective of the United States,
the language in preambular paragraph 13 concerning

14/14

17/08/2021

technology transfer does not serve as a precedent for
future negotiated documents.
The United States understands the reference to the
right to privacy in operative paragraph 4 of the resolution
to refer to the right not to be subjected to arbitrary or
unlawful interference with one’s privacy, as set forth
in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and article 17 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. In operative paragraph 8,
the United States does not consider the list of specific
platforms, technologies and goals comprehensive, nor
do we believe it accurately describes the priorities of
the international community as highlighted elsewhere
in the resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 136?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11:35 a.m.

21-22670
