S/PV.7350

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7350th meeting

Thursday, 18 December 2014, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Maes
Mr. Adejola
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sana
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

14-70265 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1470265*

S/PV.7350

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): At this
meeting, the Security Council will hear a briefing by
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent Representative
of Australia, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution. The
present report covers the period from 13 September to
17 December 2014, during which time the Committee
held two informal meetings, on 20 October and
8 December, and conducted additional work using the
no-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of
the guidelines for the conduct of its work.
In view of the recent developments relating to
the Joint Plan of Action, the Committee welcomes
the renewed commitment of all parties to continue
negotiations towards finding a comprehensive
agreement. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
once again that the Security Council measures imposed
under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008)
and 1929 (2010) remain in full effect as negotiations
between the P5+1 and Iran continue, and States have
an obligation to implement them duly. The Committee
remains fully committed to the implementation of all
the relevant resolutions and stands ready to provide
guidance to Member States that request assistance.
It is my hope that the extension will encourage Iran
to engage constructively with the Council and the
Committee.
In that respect, while no new incidents were
reported to the Committee during the current reporting
period, I would recall that the Committee twice reached
out to Iran earlier this year in relation to incidents
investigated by the Panel of Experts on the Islamic

2/11

18/12/2014

Republic of Iran. The Committee wrote on 27 March
seeking Iran’s comments in relation to a carbon-fibre
interdiction, and on 9 July in relation to an interdiction
in the Red Sea of a cargo of conventional arms. Iran
has not yet provided a response and the Committee
continues to call on Iran to do so.
The Committee continues to assist States and
international organizations in implementing the
relevant Security Council measures. They include
considering requests for guidance on a range of issues,
including whether proposals for providing technical
assistance to Iran in the fields of energy efficiency and
mine action, as well as other cooperation proposals,
are permitted under the sanctions measures. The
Committee welcomes such engagement on matters of
implementation and compliance and encourages parties
to continue to seek guidance from the Committee on
the application of the Council’s measures.
Paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and
paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007) allow for
payments owed by a designated entity under a contract
that entered into force prior to its designation to
be made from that entity’s frozen funds, subject to
prior notification to the Committee. The Committee
received such a notification from a Member State in
accordance with paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006)
and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007). Similarly, a
Member State notified the Committee of its delivery of
equipment, intended for use in a light-water reactor, to
the Bushehr nuclear power plant, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006).
During the reporting period, the Committee received
a delisting request from an entity that is currently on
the Committee’s sanctionsl list through the focal point
for delisting established under resolution 1730 (2006).
As mentioned in my previous briefings to the Council,
the Committee had considered a similar request from
the entity earlier. On 30 September, the Committee
again rejected the delisting request and communicated
to the focal point the reasons for the rejection, which
the focal point has transmitted to the entity. In view
of actions taken by Member States to implement the
relevant Security Council measures, the Committee
encourages States that have not yet submitted reports
to do so as soon as possible, in recognition of the fact
that national implementation reports are an important
means of enhancing the implementation of the sanctions
measures.

14-70265

18/12/2014

Non-proliferation

In connection with the Panel of Experts, the
Committee considered the Panel’s midterm report, which
was submitted to the Security Council on 8 December.
As mandated by resolution 2159 (2014), in advance of
the submission to the Council, the Committee discussed
the Panel’s report during its latest informal meeting on
8 December. The midterm report offered a snapshot of
the Panel’s range of activities and the ongoing actions of
States in taking environmentforcement action related to
sanctions. That includes the Panel’s investigations into
ongoing procurement by Iran, the transfer or alleged
transfer of items alleged to be for Iran’s nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes and possible violations of
the travel ban. During the Committee’s consideration
of the Panel’s midterm report, members welcomed the
report and took note of the Panel’s key activities since
the renewal of its mandate in June. The Committee also
continued its consideration of the 2014 final report of the
Panel of Experts (see S/2014/394), in particular in view
of any follow-up action by the Committee. Taking into
account the report’s conclusions, the Committee intends
to continue its deliberations on the recommendations
of the report. On behalf of the Committee, I would
like to recognize the significant efforts of the Panel in
assisting the Committee’s work, and wish its members
success and continued close and fruitful collaboration
with the Committee and the incoming Chairmanship.
Lastly, I wish to note that this will be my last
briefing to the Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Committee. I would like to convey my thanks to
the members of the Committee, the Panel and our
colleagues in the Secretariat for their hard work and
assistance in advancing the Committee’s work. It has
been a privilege to serve as Committee Chair for the
past two years.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and
for his leadership of the Committee over the last two
years. Because of his diligence and commitment, the
Committee’s work has been energized. He and his team
have done a great job helping the Committee carry out
its mandate, improve the transparency of its work and
tighten relationships with other international bodies.
I ask him to please accept the United States deep
appreciation of his efforts.

S/PV.7350

The Security Council established this Committee
eight years ago this month, back in 2006, because the
international community had serious doubts about
the peaceful intentions of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Since then the Committee’s work has been an integral
element of our broader diplomatic strategy. That
Committee has helped many countries implement the
increasingly robust United Nations sanctions. With
the support of its Panel of Experts, the Committee has
investigated serious sanctions violations and developed
an impressive understanding of Iran’s proliferation
networks. The Committee has also cracked down on
Iran’s arms smuggling, stemming the flow of weapons
to a volatile region. Yet today, several years later, the
international community still does not have confidence
in Iran’s nuclear programme. To resolve these issues,
Iran is now in serious dialogue with the P5+1 countries.
To give those negotiations the best chance of success,
last month we decided to extend them for an additional
seven months.
While we continue to believe that the best way
to achieve our goals is through diplomacy, we are not
going to sit at the negotiating table forever. As we have
said many times, we do not just want any agreement,
we want the right agreement. Plainly and simply, the
negotiations must find ways to ensure that Iran does
not, and cannot, acquire a nuclear weapon. As the
talk continue, we should consider how the Security
Council’s Iran Sanctions Committee can best support
them. Our advice to the Committee is simple: keep
doing what it is doing.
During this period the Committee must absolutely
continue its vital work monitoring and improving the
enforcement of these critical sanctions. Similarly, the
Panel of Experts should continue its work in investigating
violations and reaching out to Member States. Unless or
until the Security Council modifies the sanctions, the
pace and intensity of this work should remain robust.
Recent reporting from the Panel of Experts reminds
us why that is so important. We know that Iran is
still trying to procure sensitive nuclear technology.
We know Iran is still smuggling arms in violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). And we know that Iran’s leaders
forthrightly reject the Council’s resolution, as they
speak publicly about their destabilizing arms shipments
to Syria, Hizbullah in Lebanon and Iraq.
Responding effectively to those violations is at
the core of the Committee’s mandate. Any breach of
the sanctions is a serious matter, as it is dangerous,

14-702653/11

S/PV.7350

Non-proliferation

violates international law and undermines the Security
Council’s credibility. In the coming weeks and months,
we will continue to work with Committee members to
ensure that the Security Council’s resolution are not
violated with impunity. The Committee’s outreach
work in advising Member States and answering
questions about the sanctions is critically important.
The Committee and the Panel must continue to remind
Member States of the need to sustain the full and robust
implementation of the sanctions.
Our determination to prevent Iran from obtaining
a nuclear weapon remains clear. We are committed
to resolving this issue peacefully through diplomacy.
Sanctions are critical to that effort, and we intend to
ensure that this important body is able to carry out its
mandate effectively.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing. Over the past two
years, Ambassador Quinlan and his team have worked
hard to promote the Committee’s work. China wishes to
express its appreciation and thanks for all of that. China
has always attached great importance to the work of
the Committee, and we are ready to continue our
cooperation with the new Chair and work with all the
parties to implement the work plans of the Committee.
Not long ago, the five permanent members of the
Security Council plus Germany and Iran decided to
extend the negotiations on a comprehensive agreement,
thus allowing more time and space for diplomatic
efforts. Yesterday, the six countries and Iran began a
new round of negotiations in Geneva on a comprehensive
agreement. That positive momentum does not come by
easily and should be valued by all parties. The most
important task in the next stage is to take advantage of
the momentum, adhere to the consensus, focus on and
bridge the differences, on the basis of the principle of a
step-by-step approach and of reciprocity so as to reach
a comprehensive win-win and mutually beneficial
agreement at an early date.
China is pleased to see that the cooperation between
the International Atomic Energy Agency and Iran has
continued to maintain its positive momentum. We hope
that the Agency will play a constructive role in placing
Iranian facilities under safeguards and promoting a
peaceful solution of the Iranian nuclear issue. China
encourages Iran to further strengthen its cooperation
with the Agency so as to continue to promote the
solution of the outstanding issues on the Iranian nuclear
file.
4/11

18/12/2014

Over the recent period, all parties have maintained
close communication with regard to the relevant
work of the Committee. All Member States have the
obligation to implement the Council’s resolutions on
sanctions against Iran seriously and precisely. But
sanctions themselves are not the end of the resolutions,
and the reinforced sanctions are not the criteria
whereby to judge the work of the Committee. Under
the current circumstances, both the Committee and the
Panel of Experts should take a long-term view, have
the big picture in mind and support and cooperate with
the diplomatic efforts to resolve the Iranian nuclear
issue. At the same time, all parties should, in a spirit
of objectivity, impartiality and pragmatism, continue
an in-depth discussion and reach conclusions based on
consensus.
China has taken note of the midterm report
submitted by the Panel of Experts and we acknowledge
the efforts of the experts. We hope that, as mandated by
resolution 1737 (2006) and guided by the Committee,
the Panel will continue to strictly carry out its work
prudently and soundly. China has all along believed
that dialogue and negotiation are the only right way to
solve the Iranian nuclear issue appropriately. We have
been acting in an objective and fair and responsible
manner to push for talks and a peaceful solution. We
have played a constructive role in promoting negotiation
on a comprehensive agreement. China is ready to work
with all parties and make its contribution to reaching a
comprehensive, appropriate and long-term solution of
the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing and forf the unstinting work he accomplished
with his team over the past two years at the head of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). The dynamism, vigour and high
professionalism were the essential characteristics of
the Australian delegation in carrying out that important
task, and we are particularly grateful to them for that.
We should also like to wish to every success to Spain
taking up the chairmanship of the Committee in 2015.
As underscored by Ambassador Quinlan in his
briefing and, as is explicitly stated in the Joint Action
Plan, Security Council resolutions remain in full force
in the framework of the negotiations under way, as well
as in the period preceding a comprehensive settlement
to the proliferation crisis in Iran. It was therefore with
concern that we welcomed the midterm report of the

14-70265

18/12/2014

Non-proliferation

Panel of Experts of the Committee, which was provided
to the Council a few days ago. The information in
the report on Iran’s attempts to acquire proscribed
sensitive materials and the possible movements of
individuals on the sanctions list reminds us that it is
essential to continue to exercise vigilance regarding
Iran’s activities.
The Committee is indeed still waiting for Iran’s
response regarding the weapons intercepted on board
the Klos C ship coming from Iran, which the Panel has
confirmed were illegal and in violation of Security
Council resolutions.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Panel for it tireless work, and necessary to the work
of the 1737 Committee.
Since the adoption of the Joint Plan of Action, a
little over a year ago, the E3+3 have been negotiating
with Iran along clear lines: Iran has every right to
develop nuclear energy for civilian purposes, but it
should not develop nuclear weapons. A long-term
agreement must therefore include all the guarantees
necessary to establish the exclusively peaceful purpose
of the Iranian nuclear programme.
The most recent negotiations have resulted in
extensive and useful exchanges among members of the
group of six and Iran. Despite the lack of flexibility
demonstrated at this stage by Iranian negotiators, we
want to believe in Tehran’s political will to reach a
long-term agreement. We therefore expect it to make
the strategic choices and take the courageous decisions
that are necessary.

S/PV.7350

We remain fully engaged and committed to
reaching a credible, robust and durable agreement
that serves the goal of peace and security and restores
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
An improvement in the cooperation between Iran
and the IAEA is also needed, in particular regarding the
possible military dimension, both past and present, of
its nuclear programme. While Iran had complied until
August 2014 with the cooperation framework approved
last year with the Agency, the Agency reported in
its most recent report the lack of any progress on the
issues that had been identified, and this situation is
very worrying. The settlement of all issues related
to the possible military dimension of Iran’s nuclear
programme is indeed a key element for restoring
confidence, and therefore for achieving the long-term
agreement that we all want.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which he
chairs, for this reporting period. As this is Mr. Quinlan’s
last briefing as Chair of the Committee, we would like
to thank him and the Australian delegation for chairing
that subsidiary body of the Security Council for the past
two years. We note the efforts of the Panel of Experts,
which provided useful assistance. We continue to
carefully study the midterm report of the Panel, which
was recently discussed at the Committee’s meeting.

During the series of negotiations in Vienna in
November, new ideas were presented that deserved
careful consideration by the members of the Panel. It
is in that context that the E3+3 and Iran have agreed
to an extension of discussions and negotiations, under
the terms of the Joint Plan of Action, until 30 June
2015. During that period, Iran must continue to meet
its commitments under the interim agreement of
24 November 2013, which has been implemented thus
far.

On 24 November, in Vienna, another round of
negotiations was concluded on one of the most difficult
issues in current international relations, that is, settling
the matter of the Iranian nuclear programme. In spite
of the fact that those negotiations have been ongoing
for some time now, just in the last year, new impetus
was provided to them, after a Joint Plan of Action was
agreed in Geneva. In that regard, we would like to note
that the manifest progress achieved in this area was to
a great extent the result of thinking outside of the box
and creative technical and political ideas presented by
the Russian delegation.

In that respect, the crucial role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in verifying Iran’s
compliance with these commitments should be
welcomed. It is a significant effort on its part, and France
will play its full role by making an extrabudgetary
financial contribution to support the IAEA monitoring
and verification activities.

Over the past year, the Plan was strictly complied
with, thus allowing for significant progress in moving
towards a decisive agreement. The talks will go on, as
demonstrated by the recently concluded Geneva round
of consultations of political directors. At the three-tofour-month mark, a document must be produced that
sets out all the basic principles. The parameters for their

14-702655/11

S/PV.7350

Non-proliferation

implementation will then be discussed in technical and
drafting consultations.
For the moment, we consider it important to
underscore that, at this critical stage of the negotiations
progress regarding Iran’s nuclear programme, any
activities of the Committee that could be interpreted as
extending beyond its direct purview would be harmful.
This applies equally to the essentially pointless repetition
of the idea that all legitimate sanctions against Iran will
remain in full effect. Any conscientious member of the
international community understands that fact without
prompting from the outside.
Demonstrating excessive zeal is sometimes
dangerous, as stated by the great Talleyrand. What is
important today is that all participants in the negotiations
aim to work energetically in an uninterrupted manner.
For our part, we will continue to do everything
within our area of responsibility for a definitive and
comprehensive solution to all issues having to do with
the Iranian nuclear programme and the lifting of the
sanctions against Iran pursuant to Security Council
resolutions.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Gary
Quinlan for his very comprehensive briefing and for
his efforts and leadership as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We would also like to thank the Panel of
Experts for their efforts in preparing the report.
Jordan is pleased with the extension of negotiations
and the new meeting between Iran and the E3+3 in
Geneva yesterday. That confirms a true desire on the
part of all stakeholders to achieve a comprehensive
agreement regarding Iran’s nuclear programme.
Nevertheless, we reiterate that the Committee must
carry out its responsibilities in parallel with the efforts
undertaken for a comprehensive agreement, pursuant
to the relevant Security Council resolutions. In that
context, my delegation calls upon the Committee to
continue its investigations regarding violations and to
engage with the Iranian Government so as to obtain
clarifications regarding those violations over the
reporting period.
Moreover, we appreciate the role of the Committee
in assisting States and international institutions in
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, namely, by considering requests from
States regarding the provision of technical assistance in

6/11

18/12/2014

the energy and extractive industries. That allows States
and institutions to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Regarding the number of States having presented
their reports on measures undertaken to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions, we encourage
States to present those reports as quickly as possible
and to coordinate with the Panel of Experts. The
success of the work of the Committee depends on
States’ presentation of those reports.
Finally, I would like to wish Ambassador Quinlan
every success in his future endeavours. It was our
pleasure to work with him and his team.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Like others before me, I, too, would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Australia, Ambassador
Gary Quinlan, for his briefing. I would also like to
congratulate him and his entire team for the excellent
work they have achieved in the past two years as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to express the appreciation
of my delegation to the independent Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) for their
valuable contribution to the work of the Sanctions
Committee.
Although the last round of talks between Iran and
the E3+3 Group did not lead to the achievement, on
24 November, of the desired result, we would like to
believe that a breakthrough on the path to resolving
the Iranian nuclear issue remains possible. The new
extension, this time for seven months, of the Joint Plan
of Action offers an opportunity to bring to an end the
considerable reconciliation efforts being undertaken
by both sides for more than a year. The resumption of
negotiations yesterday in Geneva between Iran and the
E3+3 is, in this respect, an encouraging development.
However, while negotiations resume, and in
the absence of an agreement on a comprehensive
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue, the relevant
Security Council resolutions continue to apply in their
entirety. The obligations of Member States under these
resolutions also remain fully in force.
Ultimately, it is up to the Iranian authorities to
make the necessary choices to open a new chapter in
their relations with the international community. In that
regard, the crucial issue is trust. Iran must fully honour
its obligations and provide the necessary assurances
so that the international community will have trust
14-70265

18/12/2014

Non-proliferation

in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. If doubts remain in this regard, then the
distrust of the international community will persist as
well.
However, in his latest report, of 7 November,
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) continues to deplore the lack
of cooperation on the part of Iran concerning the
clarification of pending questions linked to the possible
military dimensions of its nuclear programme. Such
a lack of transparency is not likely to reassure others
about the purpose of Iran’s intentions. Restoring
confidence also requires better cooperation between
Iran and the IAEA on these issues.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate the
full support of Luxembourg for the diplomatic efforts
being made by the E3+3 Group to achieve with Iran
a complete, negotiated and long-term resolution of
the nuclear issue. We also express the hope that the
progress made so far will be able to be completed in
the near future.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of Catherine Ashton, who in recent years has led
the efforts of the E3+3 Group with great energy and
a tireless commitment. We wish her every success
in her new functions as Special Adviser of the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, responsible for facilitating
the talks with Iran on the nuclear issue.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for introducing the
quarterly report of the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We greatly value and acknowledge the role of
Australia as Chair of the Committee for the past two
years. We also want to thank the Panel of Experts and
its coordinator for introducing the midterm report made
to the 1737 Committee on Monday, 8 December.
With respect to the negotiations between the P5+1
and Iran, we appreciate the commitment achieved by
the parties to renew the Joint Plan of Action until the
end of June 2015, which will allow the dialogue to
continue in the search for a comprehensive settlement.
Chile also notes the report of the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
and we call on the IAEA to continue supporting the
Joint Plan of Action through the ongoing monitoring

S/PV.7350

and verification activities of the voluntary measures
contemplated in the Plan.
We believe that, despite the challenges, it is essential
to maintain the positive atmosphere that has prevailed
in the negotiations. The Council must continue to
make a constructive contribution in this case, with the
understanding that it is in the common interest that an
agreement be achieved to restore international trust.
Lastly, we encourage Iran to improve its cooperation
with the Committee and the Board of Governors of
the IAEA. If we do not achieve a comprehensive
and satisfactory agreement, the measures taken by
the Security Council with regard to Iran’s in nuclear
programme will remain in force.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): At the outset, I thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan and his very able team for
the 90-day report, as well as for his chairmanship of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) during the last two years. My delegation truly
appreciates his efforts in promoting a consultative
approach in the work of the Committee, as well as
the active encouragement of the outreach activities
by the Panel of Experts at a time when it is crucial to
remind Member States that during the E3+3 and Iran
negotiations, Security Council measures remain in full
force.
Lithuania welcomes the decision by the E3+3 and
Iran to continue their diplomatic efforts with a view to
completing negotiations by March 2015 and finalizing
possible remaining technical and drafting work by the
end of June 2015. We also note the commitment by
Iran and the E3+3 to extend the implementation of all
measures foreseen in the Joint Plan of Action, and in
particular the European Union’s decision to extend the
sanctions relief. Finally, we welcome the appointment
of Catherine Ashton as Special Adviser of the European
Union High Representative for facilitating the nuclear
talks with Iran.
Lithuania fully supports efforts by the E3+3 and
underlines that Iran’s willingness to show flexibility
in bridging remaining gaps will determine the
eventual success of the process. Iran must engage
constructively with the E3+3 on all outstanding issues
to achieve verifiable confidence by the international
community in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. The momentum in the negotiations
should not be lost and parties should complete them in
the shortest possible time. We welcome yesterday’s

14-702657/11

S/PV.7350

Non-proliferation

meeting in Geneva at the level of political directors in
this regard.
Lithuania also closely follows the dialogue and
cooperation of Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) under the Framework for Cooperation.
While we welcome the implementation of practical
measures, we are concerned by the conclusion by the
IAEA that Iran has not provided any explanations that
could enable the Agency to clarify the two outstanding
practical measures related to the initiation of high
explosives and to neutron transport calculations. It is
also unfortunate that Iran has not yet proposed further
practical measures, despite repeated calls by the
Agency. We reiterate that the provision of all pertinent
information as well as unimpeded access to various
facilities are key to enabling the Agency to have a clear
understanding of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Turning to the work of the Committee, it is
important to reiterate that the Joint Plan of Action does
not have any effect on sanctions measures imposed
by the relevant the Security Council resolutions. All
Council sanctions imposed on Iran therefore remain in
full effect as negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran
continue, and States have an obligation to implement
them. The work of both of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts in verifying compliance should also remain
unaffected.
In that regard, we encourage Iran to engage with
the Committee in facilitating its investigations. Four
letters by the Committee are now awaiting a response
by Iran. In particular, Iran is yet to provide information
on the attempted transfer of concealed rockets, mortars
and related material on the Klos C vessel, which was
recognized by the Panel of Experts as another violation
of Iran’s obligations pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We thank the Panel of Experts for the midterm
report, which offeres useful insights into Iran’s ongoing
procurement practices and possible violations of the
travel ban. We look forward to the Panel’s further
investigations in that regard.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
hope that Iran’s engagement in the E3+3 talks will lead
to a comprehensive, negotiated and long-term solution
that will strengthen international confidence in the
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing on the work
8/11

18/12/2014

of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We appreciate his excellent leadership as
Committee Chair for the past two years. We also thank
the Panel of Experts for the valuable support they have
provided to the Committee.
The Republic of Korea has been closely following
the talks between Iran and the P5+1, as well as between
Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), on resolving the Iranian nuclear issue. We
reaffirm our support for the continuing diplomatic
efforts and look forward to the achievement of a
comprehensive solution within the newly extended time
frame. In that regard, we welcome the decision of the
P5+1 to resume the negotiations in Geneva yesterday.
At the same time, we emphasize that Iran’s cooperation
with the IAEA is essential in order to clarify current and
past unresolved issues, including the possible military
dimension of the nuclear programme. A comprehensive
agreement would strengthen the regime of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and send
a positive signal on other non-proliferation issues.
Regarding the Committee’s work, as the Chair
highlighted, the measures imposed in the relevant
resolutions remain in full effect and States’ obligations
to implement them are unchanged. We expect the
Committee and the Panel of Experts to continue to assist
Member States in implementing those obligations.
We welcome the submission of the midterm report
of the Panel of Experts. It provides a useful point of
reference on the status of the Panel’s activities and the
implementation of the relevant resolutions, and reminds
us that we should be vigilant about continued activities
prohibited under those resolutions.
Lastly, we note that Iran has yet to respond to
letters from the Committee, including two sent this
year relating to a carbon fibre interdiction and an
interdiction of a cargo of conventional arms in the Red
Sea. We urge Iran to cooperate constructively with the
Committee, since that is crucial if we are all to move
forward. Once again, we commend the work over the
past two years of the Chair and his team, as well as that
of the Panel of Experts and the Secretariat. Though the
Republic of Korea is also soon to leave the Council,
we will continue to support its work and that of the
Committee.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) under the leadership of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
14-70265

18/12/2014

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7350

continued work in supporting implementation of the
Security Council’s resolutions on Iran. The United
Kingdom would like to pay warm tribute to Ambassador
Quinlan’s efforts during the period in which he has
chaired the Committee.

and investigations carried out by the Panel of Experts.
Notwithstanding the progress of the nuclear negotiations,
Member States should continue to be vigilant and
willing to report any violations, in accordance with the
requirements set out in the resolutions.

As is well known, following negotiations in
Vienna in November between the E3+3 and Iran on
the comprehensive agreement regarding Iran’s nuclear
programme, agreement was reached on continuing
negotiations and extending the terms of the interim
nuclear deal until the end of June 2015. We aim to have a
political framework for a final deal as soon as possible.
The recent Vienna talks were tough and intensive, but
progress was made. Both sides are committed to a deal
that we still believe is possible. Extension does not and
must not mean a pause. We have momentum towards a
deal and must capitalize on that. Further talks have also
just concluded in Geneva on continuing to explore with
Iran ways to bridge some of the significant gaps that
remain. Iran needs to show greater flexibility with its
programme, and take some tough decisions, if we are
to achieve a lasting deal. In return, the E3+3 is willing
to give substantial sanctions relief that would have a
positive impact on Iran’s economy.

The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a negotiated and lasting solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. A comprehensive deal with Iran is in all our
interests, and the ongoing discussions provide the best
opportunity in years to achieve it. For the international
community, it would provide reassurance that Iran’s
nuclear programme is exclusively for peaceful purposes,
as well as a safer region in a time of great unrest and
instability. For Iran, it would mean the ability to trade
freely with the world again and to reset relationships
with the international community.

As today’s report reminds us, and as the Chair of the
Committee has just emphasized in his remarks, while
negotiations continue the bulk of sanctions, including
all United Nations sanctions and obligations on States
Members of the United Nations arising from Security
Council resolutions, remain in place and fully in force.
Turning to the work of the Committee, the United
Kingdom remains concerned about breaches by Iran
of its international obligations, and by Iran’s failure to
respond to the concerns of the international community,
represented by the Committee. We note in particular
Iran’s continued failure to respond to previous requests
for information on the interdiction on 31 March of a
vessel carrying a cargo of conventional arms on the
Red Sea. We urge Iran to reply to the Committee’s
letter of 9 July seeking comments on the incident. We
also urge Iran to respond to the Committee’s letter of
27 March concerning a carbon fibre interdiction. We
continue to call on Iran to engage with the Committee
on such incidents.
The Committee must continue its work to robustly
implement and enforce the relevant Security Council
sanctions measures on Iran. We therefore welcome
its guidance and assistance to Member States and
international organizations, and the range of activities

Mr. Adejola (Nigeria): I too would like to thank
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Gary Quinlan,
for his presentation of the report of the Committee.
Nigeria commends the Committee for its continued
assistance to States and international organizations in
their implementation of the relevant Security Council
measures on the 1737 (2006) sanctions. It is essential
to protecting the integrity of the decisions taken by the
Council and ensuring that States do not unknowingly
flout the Iran sanctions regime. It is important that
States continue to seek guidance from the Committee
on proposals for technical cooperation with Iran on
matters within the Committee’s purview.
The Chair’s report indicates that the Committee
has requested comments from Iran on two incidents
investigated by the Panel of Experts. We are concerned
that Iran has not responded to those requests. It is
important that the Iranian authorities demonstrate
their cooperation with the Committee by responding
to the requests for comment without further delay. We
commend the efforts of the Panel of Experts, which have
contributed significantly to the Committee’s work. We
note that the Committee is continuing its consideration
of the Panel’s 2014 final report, and look forward to
the Committee’s decisions on the recommendations it
contains.
Nigeria has been following with keen interest
the negotiations between Iran and the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany. We
note that negotiations resumed in Geneva yesterday and
that the deadline for reaching an agreement has been
extended to 1 July 2015. We urge the Iranian authorities

14-702659/11

S/PV.7350

Non-proliferation

to continue to negotiate in good faith with a view to
reassuring the international community of the peaceful
intentions of their nuclear programme.
Since this is the last briefing by Ambassador
Quinlan in his capacity as Chair of the 1737 Committee,
on behalf of the Nigerian delegation I would like to pay
tribute to him for his astute leadership of the Committee
over the past two years. We are honoured to have worked
with him and would like to take the opportunity to wish
him the very best in his future assignments.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I thank Ambassador Quinlan
of Australia for his presentation of the 90-day report
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). I wish to reiterate our appreciation for the
tremendous work achieved by the Committee under his
able leadership. I hope that the work of the Committee
will continue to grow under the leadership of the
incoming Chair, Spain.
Rwanda commends the continuing efforts of
the Committee in ensuring full compliance with
resolution 1737 (2006) and other relevant resolutions.
Rwanda joins the voice of the Committee’s Chair
in welcoming the renewed commitment of the P5+1
and Iran to continuing negotiations towards finding
a comprehensive agreement in the framework of the
Joint Plan of Action. Although we believe that the 1737
Committee and its Panel of Experts must endeavour
to respond to the efforts of the P5+1 and Iran, we
also agree that while we wait for a comprehensive
agreement, measures imposed by the Council in its
numerous resolutions must remain in full effect and
States must continue their full implementation.
We commend the continuing assistance of the 1737
Committee to national and international organizations
in implementing relevant Security Council measures,
notably the consideration of requests for guidance
covering a range of issues, including whether a proposal
for providing technical assistance to Iran in the field
of energy efficiency and mine action, as well as other
cooperation proposals, are permitted by the sanctions
measures. We value and encourage the strengthening
of such information exchange between the Committee
and national or international organizations in relation
to the implementation of resolution 1737 (2006) and
other similar resolutions.
On the issue of communications between Iran and
the Committee or its Panel of Experts, it is unfortunate
that Iran has not yet responded to two letters written

10/11

18/12/2014

by the Committee, respectively, on 27 March in
relation to a carbon fibre interdiction, and on 9 July
in relation to an interdiction in the Red Sea of a cargo
of conventional arms. In that context, we once again
urge the Government of Iran to cooperate with the
Committee and its Panel of Experts by responding to
the communications seeking clarification on suspected
Iranian violations of resolution 1737 (2006) and other
pertinent resolutions.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, as this is the last meeting in which
Ambassador Quinlan will act as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), I should
like to thank him and his team for their dedication and
effective work in steering the Committee over the past
two years.
Like the Chair of the Committee, I welcome the
renewed commitment of all parties to continuing
the negotiations towards achieving a comprehensive
agreement between the Iran and the P5+1. We believe
that extending the timeline for the agreement highlights
the value of diplomatic measures in achieving solutions
through negotiations. Likewise, we welcome the fact
that the P5+1 and Iran have requested the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to pursue its nuclear
energy monitoring and verification activities as a
requirement in implementing the Joint Plan of Action,
and that the Board of Governors has approved those
functions.
With respect to the most recent report of the
Director General of the IAEA, we are encouraged by
the holding of technical meetings between Iran and the
Agency to consider the two pending practical measures
agreed in May for the third phase of the cooperation
framework to resolve pending, current and past issues.
Moreover, we wish to highlight the Agency’s readiness
to accelerate the resolution of all pending issues. At
the same time, however, we consider it crucial that
Iran cooperate actively with the Agency and adopt the
measures necessary to fully implement its obligations,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Concerning the work of the Committee, I wish to
thank the Panel of Experts for its mid-term report and
its work in the fulfillment of its mandate. Moreover,
as this is the last meeting on the item in which my
delegation will participate as a non-permanent member
of the Council, I should like to mention the holding of
regular open briefings as a useful practice leading to

14-70265

18/12/2014

Non-proliferation

strengthened ties between the Security Council and all
Member States. We therefore encourage the Committee
to pursue its efforts along those lines.
Similarly, we reiterate the importance of ensuring
that the lists of persons and entities subject to sanctions
on the part of all of the sanctions committees are
available in all six official United Nations languages.
That is crucial in guaranteeing the full implementation
of the sanctions measures by Member States. Therefore,
while we highlight the standardization of the listing
format, we encourage the Secretariat to ensure its
availability in all of the official languages as soon as
possible.
We also refer to the process for the selection of
the experts comprising the panels that support the
committees in carrying out their work. As we pointed
out in the Council on 25 November (see S/PV.7323),
we believe that persons with the necessary expertise
and specialized training should be selected to ensure
that each Committee fulfils its mandate. We must also
respect geographical distribution and gender parity.
Likewise, we understand that the process to identify
the most qualified candidates must be transparent
and that the committees must participate in selecting
the experts — after an initial intervention by the
Secretariat — and make decisions with respect to each
and every available vacancy.
To conclude, I again highlight my country’s
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. At the same time, I reaffirm the
inalienable right of all States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to develop,
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I too wish to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan,
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to

S/PV.7350

resolution 1737 (2006), for his briefing. Chad takes
note of the quarterly report just presented by the
Chair on the activities of the Committee from
September to December. We commend the assistance
and guidance provided by the Committee to Member
States and international organizations concerning the
implementation of Security Council measures. We urge
the Committee to pursue its activities and to strengthen
its communications with Member States, in particular
through country visits, so as to encourage them to
submit national implementation reports regarding
Security Council measures.
Regarding negotiations between Iran and the P5+1
in the framework of the Joint Plan of Action, we regret
that the negotiations aimed at resolving the nuclear
issue continued through 24 November without leading
to a decisive agreement. We note, nevertheless, that
the negotiations resumed yesterday, 17 December, in
Geneva, Switzerland, and are scheduled to continue to
30 June 2015. It is our hope that those diplomatic efforts
towards a comprehensive long-term solution will bear
fruit in this round.
In conclusion, given that Ambassador Quinlan has
taken the floor before the Council for the last time in
his capacity as Chair of the 1737 Committee, on behalf
of my delegation I would like to pay a heartfelt tribute
to him and his entire team for their leadership and
commitment at the head of 1737 Committee over the
past two years. I wish every success to his successor,
the Permanent Representative of Spain.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

14-7026511/11
