S/PV.7960

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7960th meeting

Wednesday, 7 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/434)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15811 (E)
*1715811*

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

07/06/2017

Letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/436)

2/27

17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of the victims of terrorism
in Tehran
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I vigorously
condemn the atrocious terrorist attack committed in
Tehran. The members of the Security Council express
their deepest condolences to the families of those who
have lost their lives and their solidarity with the people
and Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The members of the Security Council observed a
moment of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/434)
Letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/436)
The President (spoke in Spanish): : In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.

S/PV.7960

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Davor Ivo Stier, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of the
Republic of Croatia. I request the Protocol Officer to
escort him to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Davor Ivo Stier, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
the Republic of Croatia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/434, which contains the text of
a letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council. I also wish to draw the attention of members
to document S/2017/436, which contains a letter dated
17 May 2017 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for the support given to the Tribunal.
(spoke in English)
It is both an honour and a privilege to once again
address the Security Council in my capacity as President
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
which just two weeks ago commemorated 24 years
since its establishment by the Council pursuant to

17-158113/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

resolution 827 (1993). As Council members are aware,
the Tribunal will close its doors on 31 December.
This is therefore one of the last occasions I will have
to address this body, and I am here today to present
the Tribunal’s penultimate completion strategy report
(S/2017/436, annex II).
Beginnings and endings are one shared aspect of the
human experience across the great diversity of peoples
and cultures of the world. Endings provide us with a
chance to reflect on achievements and challenges alike,
as well as on how far we have come. While the Tribunal
remains on track to complete the mandate it was given
by this body many years ago, back in 1993, there are
significant obstacles that require the urgent attention
of the Council. In the Tribunal’s final year, we are all
the more aware of the legacy that we share with the
Security Council and of what will be written in the last
pages of the Tribunal’s history. Any unfinished business
will remain a disturbing footnote in an otherwise
successful — indeed, groundbreaking — attempt to
hold persons accountable for the most heinous crimes
that can be imagined. History will certainly judge us.
In relation to the remaining judicial workload,
the Tribunal has made considerable progress towards
completing the final trial and appeal proceedings. At
trial, the case of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić remains
on schedule and the Trial Chamber is fully engaged in
deliberations and drafting of the judgement. Similarly,
on appeal, the case of Prosecutor v. Prlić et al. is on
schedule, with the Appeals Chamber in full deliberations
and judgement-drafting mode. Judgements in both
cases are planned to be delivered in November, as
previously forecast.
As outlined in the completion strategy report,
the Registry continues to provide full support to the
Tribunal’s judicial activities through the effective
management of various sections, such as those
concerning communications and outreach, victims
and witnesses, conference and language services, as
well as the United Nations Detention Unit, which runs
a programme in line with or exceeding international
humanitarian standards and is visited and monitored
by the International Committee of the Red Cross on a
regular basis.
The Tribunal, however, continues to face serious
challenges. In the pending contempt case against Petar
Jojić, Vjerica Radeta and Jovo Ostojić, the Republic
of Serbia has failed to comply with its duties under
4/27

07/06/2017

the Tribunal’s statute by refusing to cooperate with
the Tribunal and to execute the arrest warrants of the
accused that were issued almost two and a half years
ago — I repeat, almost two and a half years ago. I
remind the Security Council that I have raised this
issue on a number of occasions — in my address of
8 June 2016 to this Council (see S/PV.7707) and to the
General Assembly on 9 November 2016 (see A/71/
PV.44), as well as in the Tribunal’s completion strategy
reports of May and November 2016 (S/2016/454, annex
II, and S/2016/976, annex II)). More recently, I formally
reported the Republic of Serbia’s non-compliance in
my letter of 1 March 2017 to the then-President of the
Security Council.
I must emphasize once more that the charges against
these individuals are extremely grave and that any
interference with the Tribunal’s witnesses undermines
the nature and effective functioning of a judicial
institution, especially one established by this very
Council. Such allegations must be swiftly adjudicated.
To speak plainly, the Republic of Serbia is in violation
of its international obligations every day that these
arrest warrants and orders for transfer are not executed.
The Security Council has the capacity to tackle this
issue, and it is imperative that it take decisive action.
Time is of the essence for the Tribunal to adjudicate
these contempt proceedings before the end of its
mandate, and they will — concluded or not — be an
element of the shared legacy of the Tribunal and the
Council, and of the efforts of the United Nations
to end impunity. The Tribunal was created by the
Security Council as part of these efforts, and the
alleged interference with witnesses must not — indeed,
cannot — go unanswered. We are ready and willing
to try these individuals if they are delivered to The
Hague, but we await the Council’s urgent action. Let me
be clear. I do not play games. As I have demonstrated
throughout my presidency, I do what I say and I say
what I mean. Neither I nor anyone at the Tribunal seeks
to use this case to prolong the Tribunal’s life.
Turning to other challenges, despite the fact that
we are optimistic about completing all judicial work by
31 December, I must warn once again that the Tribunal
continues to struggle to retain staff. Staff attrition will,
in the final six months, pose a substantial — indeed,
critical — threat to our ability to complete the
remaining work on time. Although the Tribunal has
done everything it can to retain staff, key staff members
are leaving for more stable and long-term employment
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

elsewhere in light of the Tribunal’s imminent closure.
This does not call their loyalty into question, but
reflects the simple reality that our staff members seek a
continued livelihood beyond 31 December.
I take this opportunity to publicly acknowledge all
the staff members and Judges of the Tribunal — one of
whom is present here next to me — and to thank them
for their outstanding work and dedication. Our talented
staff members are integral to the Tribunal’s ability to
function, and it is only through much personal sacrifice
on their part that we are making strong progress in the
remaining cases and will be able to complete all work
before our closing date. The Tribunal is deeply grateful
for their service on behalf of international justice.
Incentives to retain staff would enable us to ensure
that our mandate is completed in an optimal manner.
The Tribunal urgently needs the support of the United
Nations in that regard.
In addition to the judicial workload, the Tribunal’s
liquidation efforts are continuing full-steam as
we approach our end date. Those efforts include
the scheduled downsizing of staff at various times
throughout this year; the disposal or sale of Tribunal
assets; the transfer or finalization of all commercial
and non-commercial contracts; the disposition of all
physical and digital records; and the handing over of
any residual activities to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I can assure all
Member States that the Tribunal remains committed
to a timely and efficient liquidation process and to
learning from the experience of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Finally, I turn to the Tribunal’s legacy, which, as
I noted at the outset, will be shared by the Security
Council. The last year of the Tribunal’s operations
presents a unique opportunity to ask what our enduring
legacy will be, as well as to cement that legacy by
engaging with those most impacted by the Tribunal’s
work, and ensure that it will continue to have an impact
in the future. For those reasons, while the primary
focus is on concluding the remaining judicial work
and a successful liquidation, the Tribunal is this year
hosting a number of legacy and closing events designed
to mark the end of a historic chapter in international
criminal justice and to enable others to build upon the
Tribunal’s achievements and experience. Those events
are completely reliant upon external funding. I wish to
publicly acknowledge Austria, Finland, Germany, Italy,
my own country of Malta, the Netherlands, Switzerland

S/PV.7960

and, last but not least, the European Union, which have
pledged funds and support thus far.
It is to that end as well that the Tribunal is involved
in an ongoing project of establishing information
centres within the region of the former Yugoslavia, as
requested by the Council in resolution 1966 (2010). By
providing local access to the Tribunal’s public records
and information about the Tribunal’s work, the centres
will play an invaluable role in continuing the legacy of
the Tribunal in the region. The first information centre
will open in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
Tribunal has re-initiated discussions with Croatia to
establish a similar centre in Zagreb. Those discussions
are at an advanced stage. The setting up of a third
centre, in Srebrenica-Potocari, is awaiting the signing
of a memorandum of understanding. It is my hope, and
that of the Tribunal in general, that an information
centre will also be established in Belgrade, Serbia.
As we look to the closure of the ICTY, in only a
few short months, and to the Tribunal’s final annual
and completion strategy reports, we can be immensely
proud of what we have achieved together since those
early days in 1993. No institution can restore what was
lost in the Yugoslav wars, or undo the terrible crimes
committed during them. However, the Tribunal has
demonstrated that, when the international community
has the will to cooperate and to stand for what is right
and just, those responsible for the most egregious
violations of international humanitarian law can be
held to account.
I ask that all members of the Security Council
continue to stand for what is right and to support the
Tribunal in the last six months of its life. We cannot
conclude our mandate without the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge Agius
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is my great pleasure today to
brief the Security Council once again on the progress
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in the implementation of its mandate, and to
do so under the presidency of Bolivia. I wish Bolivia
great success in its leadership of the Council during this
month. I would also like to express my congratulations
to the incoming members of the Security Council, with
whom I very much look forward to working over the
coming period.

17-158115/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

I also wish to take this opportunity to express my
sincere gratitude to the Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals for its considerable
support and attention paid to the Mechanism. I am
particularly appreciative of Uruguay’s skilled and able
leadership of the Group.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge
the sustained and sustaining support provided to the
Mechanism by the Office of Legal Affairs under the
outstanding leadership of Under Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel
Miguel de Serpa Soares and Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs Stephen Mathias. I remain
deeply grateful to them and to their colleagues for all of
the assistance they provide to the Mechanism.
During my presentation today I will not refer to
those matters fully addressed in my written report
submitted on 17 May of this year (see S/2017/434,
annex I), but will simply draw members’ attention to
some of the most salient issues and several important
developments since the filing of the report.
Before I turn to my update on the work of the
Mechanism, I would first note that, since I last
appeared before the Council (see S/PV.7829), upon his
appointment by the Secretary-General, Mr. Olufemi
Elias joined the Mechanism as Registrar on 1 January.
Mr. Elias has been working closely with colleagues at
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) to ensure that the Mechanism is ready to take
responsibility for all remaining functions of the ICTY.
In that respect, I fully anticipate that the Mechanism
will be entirely self-sufficient, including in terms of
its administrative capabilities, upon the closure of the
ICTY at the end of this year.
Turning to the Mechanism’s core judicial work, I
am very pleased to inform the members of the Council
that, on the whole, the Mechanism continues to make
excellent progress in the handling of its judicial work
and is indeed seeing a steady increase in judicial
work over time. In 2012, the Mechanism rendered 25
decisions and orders; in 2013, it rendered 79; in 2014,
it rendered 192; in 2015, it rendered 209; and in 2016,
405 decisions and orders were issued. As of 1 June
2017, 146 decisions and orders have been issued. I
should note that, in carrying out their judicial work, the
judges are directly supported by a very small group of
approximately 25 legal and administrative Chambers
staff — spread over the two Branches of the Mechanism
6/27

07/06/2017

and working as a unified team, fully in line with the
Council’s vision of the Mechanism as one institution.
A number of the rulings from the current reporting
period were issued in the major trial and appeal cases
currently before the Mechanism. In that respect, I am
pleased to report that the retrial in the cases Prosecutor
v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović is scheduled
to commence next week at The Hague Branch of the
Mechanism. The beginning of that trial — the first trial
for the Mechanism — represents an important milestone.
The briefings in the appeal cases Prosecutor v.
Radovan Karadžić and Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj
were completed in the course of the reporting period,
and preparations for appeal hearings in those caes is
progressing rapidly. All the judges on those cases, with
the exception of myself, continue to work remotely and
will be called to the seat of the Mechanism when the
cases are ready for hearing. Updated projections with
regard to the rendering of a judgment in both cases are
set forth in my report.
I should underscore that the judicial work of the
Mechanism is not limited to the major cases I just
identified. Indeed, the Mechanism is regularly seized
of requests relating to everything from allegations
of contempt and challenges pertaining to the non bis
in idem principle, to motions seeking a review of
judgement, applications for early release and requests
for access to confidential information. For the most
part, those matters are assigned to single judges
working remotely and constitute a substantial portion
of the Mechanism’s judicial activity.
A significant number of those requests are
made by national authorities or others engaged in
proceedings in national jurisdictions who are seeking
access to confidential materials or information held
by the Mechanism. Of the 366 decisions and orders
issued between mid-May 2016 and mid-May this year,
164 — or approximately 45 per cent — are related to
requests for a variety of protective measures and other
motions seeking access to confidential evidence or
information. We welcome those requests, which reflect
the degree to which national authorities are actively
seeking accountability for core international crimes.
A crucial component of those national efforts
involves the proceedings that have been referred
to national jurisdictions for trial and that are being
monitored by the Mechanism, in accordance with its
statute. In that area, too, there was important progress
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

over the reporting period, with a trial judgement
being delivered in Rwanda in the Munyagishari case
and, according to information received following the
submission of my written report to the Council, the
completion of the judicial investigation in France in the
Bucyibaruta case.
In sum, the Mechanism is making excellent
progress with its judicial work in general, all the while
continuing to learn from experience and recalibrating
internal practices as necessary to ensure optimal
efficiency and economy. However, as members of the
Council are aware, substantive proceedings in one
case — the Ngirabatware case — remain at a standstill
due to the continued detention of Judge Aydin Sefa
Akay by the Turkish authorities.
As Members are aware, the United Nations Legal
Counsel formally asserted diplomatic immunity for
Judge Akay in October 2016 and, as I reported to the
Council shortly thereafter, the failure to resolve the
matter in a manner that respected the privileges and
immunities of Judge Akay under article 29 of statute
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals places in jeopardy the integrity of the remote
model of judging envisaged by the Council under
article 8 of the statute. More fundamentally, the failure
to properly resolve the matter undermines the principle
of judicial independence — the core principle of any
judicial institution that abides by the rule of law.
The situation has been further exacerbated over
the course of the year by Turkey’s failure to comply,
without undue delay, with a judicial order issued
by the Mechanism in January 2017 to cease all legal
proceedings against Judge Akay and to release him.
Instead of complying with binding obligations under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
domestic trial proceedings against Judge Akay
commenced earlier this year and have since been
adjourned repeatedly.
In two weeks, Judge Akay will have been in
ongoing detention for no less than nine months. By any
measure, that is an extraordinarily long period for the
resolution of the detention of an international judge,
whatever the legal complexities may be. The status quo
on the matter is untenable, and I call upon the Council
to take such measures as may be necessary to achieve an
appropriate resolution to that unprecedented situation,
consistent with the Mechanism’s statute and with the

S/PV.7960

obligations incumbent upon all States under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter.
I am pleased to report on important developments
at the Mechanism in three other areas.
First, as members are aware, the Council has
repeatedly expressed concern as to the ongoing situation
of acquitted and released persons, and has called
upon States to facilitate progress in that area. In that
regard, I am very pleased that, after intensive efforts
by the former ICTY Registrar, Mr. John Hocking, in
December 2016 two such individuals were relocated to
a West African State. I am deeply grateful to that State
for its collaboration and commitment in response to the
call of the Council.
The number of such persons remaining in Arusha
has accordingly declined to 11 individuals. Our new
Registrar, Mr. Elias, is focused on achieving further
progress in respect of this long-standing humanitarian
challenge, both in building on existing relationships
with relevant States and exploring new opportunities.
I urge Council members to continue to support the
Mechanism in its efforts to achieve a full resolution of
that difficult situation.
Turning to the enforcement of sentences, I am
pleased to note that in May a revised agreement on
the enforcement of sentences was concluded with the
Government of Benin that reflects best practices in
the field and cementing further the strong relationship
that Benin and the United Nations have enjoyed over
many years.
Meanwhile, with the Government of Senegal, we
are in the final stages of the implementation of its
decision in principle to accept eight prisoners into cells
in Senegal that were refurbished with the support of
the United Nations. That new capacity will allow for
almost all of the remaining 10 prisoners in the United
Nations Detention Facility in Arusha to be considered
for transfer to serve their sentences. I am deeply grateful
for the broad and generous commitment of both of those
Governments to work with the Mechanism in the key
area of enforcement of sentences and for the sustained
support of other Member States that have likewise been
faithful partners in that regard.
Finally, I wish to note the commencement by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services of preparatory
work for its evaluation of the methods and work of the
Mechanism, as mandated by the Council in its resolution

17-158117/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

2256 (2015). My colleagues and I look forward to
collaborating closely with the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in its review of the Mechanism’s
work practices and to making the evaluation report as
valuable a document as possible for the Council and for
the Mechanism itself.
Today, we — and particularly the members of the
Council — face a number of challenges in the realm of
international relations. In a number of quarters, we are
witnessing a rise in suspicions and doubts concerning
global and regional institutions and undertakings.
To some extent, we are witnessing a retreat from the
shared vision of what the international community,
acting together, can achieve.
In many respects, it may all simply reflect the
natural ebb and flow of international affairs. We
cannot, however, allow a temporary tide to erode any
of the vital progress that the United Nations — and,
in particular, the Council — has made over the past
quarter of a century in strengthening the rule of law
and in ensuring greater accountability under and in
accordance with international law. Now, perhaps more
than ever, is the time to redouble our efforts in that
respect, to learn from and build upon the past and strive
for ever greater success going forward.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge Meron
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the activities of the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague.
My Offices continue to be firmly focused on the
same priorities, which are expeditiously completing
trials and appeals, locating and arresting the remaining
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and assisting national
jurisdictions in investigating and prosecuting war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
In The Hague, in just a few months, the ICTY
will complete its mandate and close its doors.
Judgements in the two final cases, already mentioned
by the President — Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and
Prosecutor v. Prlić et al. — continue to be expected
by the end of November. The successful completion
8/27

07/06/2017

of those important cases will be a fitting tribute to the
long fight for justice that the Council began in 1993.
During the reporting period, my Office made further
significant strides in prosecuting the cases transferred
from the ICTY to the Mechanism. We successfully
prepared and submitted our written arguments in the
Karadžić and Šešelj appeals. We also continued our
pre-trial preparations in the Prosecutor v. Mićo Stanišić
and Stojan Župljanin case. As the President reported
earlier, that trial is expected to commence next week. I
can assure the Council that my Office will expedite the
presentation of its evidence in that case consistent with
our duty to prove the charges beyond reasonable doubt.
At the Arusha branch, no trials or appeals are
currently ongoing. However, my Office continued to
investigate and litigate proceedings arising out of the
ICTR’s cases that were concluded. During the reporting
period, we also commenced a thorough review of the
case files against the three fugitives expected to be tried
by the Mechanism so as to be prepared to commence
those trials as soon as possible following an arrest.
That brings me to our ongoing efforts to locate
and arrest the eight fugitives indicted by the ICTR
who remain at large. I would like to underscore our
commitment to arresting and bringing those fugitives to
justice. The victims of the Rwandan genocide deserve
nothing less. There are three major developments on
which I would like to report today.
First, during the reporting period, we established
two task forces, focused on Africa and Europe
respectively, to support our fugitive tracking efforts.
Those task forces bring our Office together with a
number of key partners, particularly INTERPOL and
national law enforcement agencies, in an operational
structure that will be flexible and responsive. We would
like to express our deep appreciation to the Government
of Rwanda and the Secretary General of INTERPOL
for their strong support to the establishment of those
task forces.
Secondly, as a result of our ongoing review, my
Office is transitioning to a structure that is more
appropriate to our operational requirements. We will
take a more proactive approach to our work, which
means pursuing new lines of investigations, including
financial and telecommunications. That in turn requires
the right investigative and analytical capacity.
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Finally, my Office is aware that the window of
opportunity to locate and arrest fugitives will not
remain open forever. At the same time, we recognize the
budgetary constraints facing the United Nations, and
the Council’s expectations in that regard. Quite simply,
we recognize that our efforts to locate the remaining
fugitives cannot continue forever. Accordingly, in our
2018-2019 budget, my Office is proposing to temporarily
increase our resources with the clear understanding
that they are time bound. If we do not demonstrate a
track record of success over the coming few years, we
will have to consider alternatives, which would include
the option of fully transferring responsibility for the
fugitives to national authorities. We would be grateful
for Security Council support for that proposal.
During the reporting period, my Offices continued
to assist national judiciaries prosecuting war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia. We are providing access to our
evidence collection, assisting colleagues with advice on
concrete cases, engaging with counterparts to identify
challenges and solutions and monitoring developments
at both the country and regional levels.
In terms of our efforts, I would like to report
briefly on a few examples. We are committed to
deepening our cooperation with tRwandan authorities
and strengthening the exchange of information and
evidence. Accordingly, during the reporting period,
we began planning for improvements in our electronic
databases to increase the amount of evidence made
available to Rwandan authorities and the ease with
which they can access that evidence. We are also now
discussing with the Prosecutor General of Rwanda the
practical steps we can take to ensure better coordination
and communication between our offices.
Just a few weeks ago, and together with the
Prosecutor General of Rwanda, we conducted a
five-day, intensive skills-based training for prosecutors
from Rwanda and other East African countries on
the investigation and prosecution of war crimes.
Through that kind of peer-to-peer capacity-building
and knowledge transfer, we hope to better assist our
national colleagues in improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of their work.
Finally, later this month, my Office will launch
the translation of our publication on the prosecution
of conflict-related sexual violence at the ICTY into
the Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian language. We further

S/PV.7960

plan to prepare a comprehensive training programme
for judiciaries in the former Yugoslavia. We hope that
national prosecutors and judges can benefit from our
work and achieve greater justice for the victims of
sexual violence crimes.
I have previously reported that regional judicial
cooperation in war crimes justice in the former
Yugoslavia is heading in the wrong direction, and,
unfortunately, that is still the case today. My written
reports (see S/2017/434 and S/2017/436) provide further
details on this and other matters in the area of national
war crimes justice.
We hope that the relevant national authorities
will give our reports full consideration and undertake
concrete steps to resolve the significant issues that we
have identified. However, today, I am compelled to
report on an issue that must be deeply concerning to this
Council and the international community — namely,
the ongoing, widespread denial of crimes and refusal to
accept facts established by the ICTY and ICTR.
The horrors of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda are recorded in the Council’s deliberations
and resolutions. All of us remember the images and
reports in the media. In order to establish the facts
and hold individuals accountable for their crimes, the
Council created the ICTY and ICTR. Over two decades
of work, independent and impartial international judges,
who ensured fair trials and heard immense bodies of
evidence, determined the truth of what happened. After
what took place in Rwanda 50 years after the Holocaust,
a new generation came to understand the meaning of
genocide. As the ICTR established, it is a universally
known fact that between 6 April 1994 and 17 July 1994,
there was a genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi ethnic
group. The conflicts in the former Yugoslavia taught
the world a new vocabulary for the horrors inflicted on
innocent civilians: ethnic cleansing. In case after case,
the ICTY found that throughout the former Yugoslavia,
senior political and military officials implemented
criminal campaigns of ethnic cleansing.
After the Council first saw the compelling evidence
of mass graves around Srebrenica, my Office proved
beyond reasonable doubt that genocide was committed
in Srebrenica in 1995 through the execution of more
than 7,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys, while up
to 30,000 women, children and elderly were forcibly
expelled. Yet today, genocide is denied. Ethnic cleansing

17-158119/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

is denied. The individual guilt of senior political and
military leaders is denied.
A few days ago, the Minister of Education of the
Republika Srpska declared that he would ban textbooks
that teach students about the recent past, including
about the Srebrenica genocide and the siege of Sarajevo.
Those facts are taught in classrooms around the world
but not in the country where the crimes were committed.
Tomorrow night, a ultranationalist singer who has been
banned in several countries is expected to perform at
a benefit concert in Mostar for the six accused in the
case of the Prosecutor v. Prlić et al. Such unacceptable
provocations, which are but the latest in a very long list,
are an insult to the victims, to this Council and to all
who believe in justice.
The message of denial and revisionism is loud
and clear. They recognize their victims but not the
other side’s. The other side’s war criminals are their
heroes. When irresponsible officials use division,
discrimination and hate to secure power, conflict
and atrocities can gain a logic of their own. That was
true two decades ago when the genocide and ethnic
cleansing began and it remains true today.
With the closure of the ICTR and the upcoming
closure of the ICTY, it is now more important than
ever to address that challenge. In order to secure a
peaceful future, there must be a shared agreement on
the recent past.
In conclusion, the ICTY will complete its mandate
before the end of the year. That will close an important
chapter that the Council began 24 years ago. Yet, the
work of justice for the victims of war crimes in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda will continue. My
Office will expeditiously litigate the small number of
remaining trials and appeals before the Mechanism.
We will intensify our efforts to locate and arrest the
remaining eight ICTR fugitives so that the victims of
their crimes can finally see them brought to justice.
And, crucially, prosecutions of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide must continue in
national courts in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
which my Office will support. We are grateful for the
continued support of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
10/27

07/06/2017

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Presidents Carmel
Agius and Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefing on the
reports of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.
Uruguay reiterates its firm commitment to the work
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and the International Residual Mechanism. Uruguay
recognizes the contribution that those institutions have
made to international criminal justice, national and
regional reconciliation in the countries concerned, and
international peace.
With regard to the International Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, we note with satisfaction the
progress of its judicial activities and its adherence to
the schedule for completing its judicial work time and
achieving its closure by the end of 2017. Likewise, the
liquidation activities of the Tribunal are well under
way, which is undoubtedly a very good sign.
We share the concern of President Agius over the
continuing attrition of Tribunal personnel looking for
more stable and durable jobs. We hope that the talks
between President Agius and the various authorities
of the United Nations will lead to a solution that will
allow the most critical personnel to be retained for
the proper completion of the Tribunal’s work. The
temporary and exceptional nature of any measure to be
adopted for that purpose should be an element of its
favourable consideration.
An issue that deserves our special attention is the
situation created around the arrest warrants of Petar
Jojić, Jovo Ostojić and Vjerica Radeta, who are accused
in connection with the trial against Vojislav Šešelj.
President Agius informs us that the arrest warrants
have been pending execution since 19 January 2015. In
his letter of 1 March 2017, he requested the Security
Council to act.
With regard to the International Residual
Mechanism, we note with satisfaction the progress that
it has made in several of its areas of activity. We share
the belief that the Mechanism ought to be devoted to
the search and prosecution of the 8 persons indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who
remain fugitives.
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

The situation surrounding the arrest of Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay and its repercussions in the case of
The Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware, of which
President Theodor Meron has informed the Council
on several occasions, most recently in his letter of
dated 9 March, is also cause for concern. The State’s
cooperation is essential if the International Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism are
to comply fully with the mandates bestowed upon them
by the Security Council. The mandates refer to no less
than imparting international justice and prosecuting and
punishing those guilty of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and crimes of genocide. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council to not allow those institutions
to be weakened, since they embody the credibility of
the international criminal justice system and are the
custodians of the confidence it inspires. The Security
Council, collectively or through the actions of its
members, must make its best efforts to ensure that the
principles essential to the effectiveness of the work of
those institutions, as well as their working methods,
are respected.
Presidents Carmel Agius and Theodor Meron, as
well as Prosecutor Brammertz, have brought to the
attention of the Security Council two concrete cases
and requested its action. We cannot feign ignorance of
the situations at hand. The weakening of the institutions
responsible for imparting justice and defending the rule
of law, as well as the impunity that may result from
that weakening, lead to the repetition of human rights
violations and the lack of protection of the victims.
To conclude, we would like to express our gratitude
to the Office of Legal Affairs and the Secretariat for
their ongoing support for our work in our capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. On a personal note, I wish to underscore
the high regard in which we hold the officials of the
international criminal tribunals who are with us
today. I would also like to express our admiration for
the work they are doing to champion international
criminal justice.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the Presidents
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius, and of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Meron, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz, for their
briefings today in this Chamber.

S/PV.7960

As far as the ICTY is concerned, we welcome
the fact that work is proceeding according to plans to
ensure completion by the end of 2017. We commend
the President and the entire work force of the ICTY for
these efforts.
Concerning the Mechanism, we are pleased to see
that it is up and running, and functioning effectively.
Under the leadership of President Meron, many
important steps have been taken, as we have heard,
to ensure the effective handling of the wide range of
crucial functions with which the Mechanism has to
deal. We are ready to support the Mechanism. We are
also confident that the remaining tasks in the area of
the search for fugitives, relating to the Rwandan cases,
and all prosecutions and other proceedings regarding
both the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and ICTY are in safe hands with Prosecutor
Brammertz at the helm.
I agree entirely with Judge Carmel Agius that we
have a collective responsibility to keep building on the
legacy of the two ad hoc Tribunals, working with the
Mechanism as well as with other international criminal
courts and tribunals, including the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council as a whole has contributed to the
establishment of the age of accountability and must be
coherent in upholding its main principles in the face of
the many challenges we confront in order to abide by its
commitment. Also, in my capacity as Vice-President,
in New York, of the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
I would like to make three additional comments of a
general nature.
The first point is on the primary responsibility
of States to ensure that justice for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide is carried
out in accordance with international standards. The
international community must provide the necessary
assistance and be ready to step in when domestic
jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to ensure that
justice is done. We must never tire of underlining this
crucial aspect of our work, on behalf, of course, of the
victims of all the crimes committed.
Secondly, cooperation is an essential element of
the functioning of international criminal tribunals.
Failing that, such organs would be giants without arms
or legs. States must assist the tribunals by lending
them their enforcement powers. We note that lack of

17-1581111/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

cooperation is still an issue of concern at the ICTY and
the Mechanism; this is not, of course, a positive sign.
The so-called completion strategy is based on the idea
that there must be swift cooperation with tribunals and
a commitment to the fight against impunity. That fight
does not end with the closing of the ad hoc tribunals.
Thirdly, and finally, the Council should assume
full ownership of the work done by these subsidiary
organs, established in the 1990s, and should incorporate
their lessons into its activities. Together with the
Secretariat, we need to find ways to have these issues
featured more systematically and analysed in greater
depth. Accountability must become part of the broader
prevention strategy of the United Nations. There is
virtually no situation of which the Council is seized that
does not require attention in terms of accountability:
from Syria to Yemen, from Iraq to South Sudan, from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Central
African Republic.
We might have different views, but it is precisely
for this reason that we should be able to find a forum
where we can discuss these different views thoroughly
and consider all aspects of justice more systematically.
We must not shy away from discussing concerns so
long as we have not found viable solutions.
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli of Uruguay, together
with his team, have done and are doing an excellent
job in steering the work of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals; I would like to
thank him for that and support his call for action.
The future should be about continuing this job with a
stronger and broader collective engagement with these
issues. As long as crimes continue to be committed,
and there is abundant evidence that they do continue
to be committed, the Council must consider situations
including from the angle of accountability and, on the
basis of the work done by the ICTY and the ICTR, and
now the Mechanism, redouble its efforts to be united in
the fight against impunity.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to thank
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their reports (see S/2017/436 and
S/2017/434) and briefings. Japan is deeply committed
to the rule of law and fully supports the activities of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. We commend their role in the fight
against impunity.
12/27

07/06/2017

We welcome the ICTY’s steady progress on the
closure of the Tribunal at the end of this year, especially
regarding the Mladić and Prlić et al cases. We appreciate
the Tribunal’s strong commitment to maintaining the
projected timeline on these cases despite serious staff
attrition. Japan hopes to see the judgments issued this
November and appreciates the strong leadership of
President Agius.
In order for the Tribunal to function effectively
and to perform its mandated tasks, full cooperation
by Member States is needed. We are concerned by
continued instances of non-cooperation and reiterate
that the relevant States must meet their obligations.
Let me now turn to the Mechanism. We are very
pleased by the Mechanism’s efforts to provide a
more detailed projected timeline for its cases, while
recognizing that concrete dates are difficult to project
at this early stage. Effective and efficient delivery of
judgments must be balanced with due process. We
appreciate the coordination between the Mechanism
and the ICTY’s Prosecutor offices to share expertise
and experience under the one-office approach.
Arresting the eight remaining fugitives is a priority
for the Mechanism. We note the Prosecutor’s suggestion
on transferring these responsibilities to national
authorities in future if the situation does not improve,
but we hope that task forces within the Prosecutor’s
office will lead to arrests as soon as possible.
As with the ICTY, Member States’ full cooperation
with the Mechanism is required to deliver justice.
We welcome the cooperation of a number of States,
especially in the area of the enforcement of sentences,
and hope to see the transfer completed soon. We take
note of the situation with regard to Judge Akay. We
hope that it will be resolved as soon as possible.
Before concluding, let me reiterate Japan’s support
and appreciation for the activities of both the ICTY
and the Mechanism. We strongly hope that the work of
both organs will bolster the rule of law and help victims
see justice.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have attentively studied the reports of the
leadership of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (see S/2017/436
and S/2017/434, respectively) on the past six-month
period. We note that as stated in the report of the ICTY,
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV.7960

judicial proceedings are under way on schedule and
will be completed in November 2017. We call on the
Tribunal’s leadership to make every effort to reduce
these timetables, as has been repeatedly called for by
the Security Council, particularly in resolutions 2193
(2014), 2256 (2015) and 2329 (2016).

repeat them. However, we would mention that the
contempt case must not influence the trial nor the
Tribunal’s closure dates, and consideration of the issue
of inclusion of the Council in this matter is something
that we continue to believe is unsubstantiated, especially
in the light of previous practice in similar cases.

Although the ICTY has entered the final stage of its
operations, everything possible must be done to address
the imbalances that have accrued in the past few years.
They discredit the very idea of international criminal
justice. We have discussed them at length in the past.
This certainly does not have to do only with a failure
to comply with the rules about the duration of trials
and pre-trial detention. In particular, we reject attempts
to put forward assessments that implicitly place blame
for crime on peoples, Governments and others, thereby
creating certain biases. The Tribunal must operate on
the basis of the core principle of criminal law, namely,
that criminal responsibility is individual in nature. The
role of establishing guilt vis-à-vis specific individuals
was assigned by Security Council to the Tribunal, and
we cannot go outside this framework.

Briefly, on the work of the Residual Mechanism,
we are closely following the trials, particularly in
the light of the negative experience of the ICTY.
The Mechanism, which was established pursuant to
resolution 1966 (2010), has a limited mandate with
regard to both the substance of its functions and the
duration of its operations. For this reason, it is officially
referred to as a Residual Mechanism.

Our delegation is deeply disheartened by the refusal
of the ICTY Trial Chamber to grant the request of
Ratko Mladić for provisional release on humanitarian
grounds so that he could receive medical treatment in
Russia. Information about the significant deterioration
of the health of Ratko Mladić was ignored, as was
the guarnatee of his timely return to The Hague and
compliance with other conditions that might be put
forward by the Trial Chamber. Related safeguards and
the assurances were also rejected. The judges refused
to give the individual the opportunity to receive highly
qualified medical assistance at a stage of the trial that
did not require his individual presence. Previously the
Tribunal had agreed to provisionally release individuals
who were present with less weighty circumstances.
Of course, the ICTY bears full responsibility for this
decision and its potential repercussions.
We have repeatedly voiced concern about the
quality of medical treatment of ICTY indictees. Once
again, we call for an investigation into the operation of
the medical unit of detention facilities of the ICTY by
the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We trust that
this investigation will take place promptly.
On the whole, our assessments of the operations of
the ICTY, including staffing issues, have been voiced
during previous meetings, and we will certainly not

The mandate of the Mechanism hinges on biannual
Security Council review cycles of its activities. We
believe that the Mechanism must not overstep its
mandates. In particular, it must not analyse mindsets
in a given country or historical views or, for example,
prospects for European integration. We call for avoiding
getting sidetracked by issues and tasks unrelated
to the Mechanism’s mandate. They draw attention
from attaining the goals set forth by the Charter and
Council resolutions.
We trust that officials in the Mechanism will
plan the course of criminal trials and other statutory
activities in a qualitative manner. We anticipate sound
forecasts, maximum effectiveness, transparency,
efficiency and strict compliance with standards of
justice, including the duration of proceedings and
schedules. The Mechanism has all procedural and other
capacities to that end at its disposal.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States extends its sincere appreciation to President
Meron, President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their briefings today on the ongoing work to achieve
justice for victims of the vicious atrocities committed
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda that stained the
history of humankind. As we look towards December
and the anticipated closure of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
merging of essential functions with the Mechanism
for International Criminal Tribunal, the United States
wishes to underscore that it remains as committed to the
work of the Tribunal as it was when it was established
nearly a quarter-century ago.
The completion of the Tribunal’s mandate
is essential. We applaud the completion of trial

17-1581113/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

proceedings in the case of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić
and look forward to the delivery of a judgement later
this year. While we can never undo the horrors of war,
bringing cases to their conclusions, as was done last
year when former Republika Srpska President Radovan
Karadžić was found guilty and sentenced to 40 years
in prison for genocide, crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws and customs of war, goes a long
way towards closing a dark chapter of history and
creating a legacy of showing would-be perpetrators of
atrocities elsewhere in the world that they cannot act
with impunity.
The United States has consistently emphasized that
the Tribunal and the Mechanism establish facts through
judicial process. This process is critical to countering
those who seek to distort facts, revise history, engage
in genocide denialism or rewrite reality. The United
States continues to be greatly concerned about the
detrimental impact of increasingly divisive political
speech in the region on the pursuit of justice for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia. Such
inflammatory rhetoric harms regional cooperation
among the States of the former Yugoslavia, which is
essential to promoting accountability for war crimes.
In this regard, the United States would like to express
our sincere appreciation for the contribution of these
Tribunals, including the Office of the Prosecutor, to
developing a historical record of the facts to counter
those who seek to deny the nature of the widespread
crimes, including genocide, that took place.
The kinds of hateful ideologies that led to these
horrific acts persist to this day, and together we must
continue our efforts to relegate them to the past. The
United States also remains concerned that three arrest
warrants for individuals charged with contempt of
court in relation to witness intimidation in the case of
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj have remained unexecuted
in Serbia for nearly two and a half years. Cooperation
with the Tribunal is an ongoing, binding obligation.
The United States calls on Serbia to execute these
arrests without further delay, and we look to the newlyappointed Serbian war-crimes prosecutor to play a
constructive role in that process.
The Security Council should be unified in the
message to Serbia that failure to fully cooperate
with the Tribunal in accordance with its statutes and
the resolutions of the Council compromises the core
functions of the international justice system and must
be addressed with appropriate urgency. The United
14/27

07/06/2017

States commends the ongoing work of the Office
of the Prosecutor to reshape the fugitive-tracking
programme, so that the eight remaining fugitives from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda may be
swiftly located, arrested and brought to justice.
We are happy to see these changes. This effort is
not window dressing. The restructuring that has been
done appears capable of having a significant impact on
tracking efforts, both by improving information-sharing
and placing a renewed emphasis on timely and effective
intelligence and analysis. We remain committed to
the apprehension of the remaining fugitives and look
forward to engaging with the two new Task Forces
focused on Africa and Europe in this effort. We call on
all States, especially those in the Great Lakes region, to
cooperate with efforts to apprehend these fugitives. To
that end, the United States continues to offer a reward
of up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest
or transfer of these eight men.
With regard to management and the transition,
the United States appreciates the careful planning
and ongoing work of both the Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and Mechanism Registrars to navigate a
complicated issues during this period of transition
for both institutions. We are happy to hear of the
significant progress made to downsize offices and
reduce costs, as the Tribunal looks to close at the end of
the year. We also note the ICTY’s concerns about staff
attrition and we thank it for its considerable efforts to
retain core staff, including by providing training and
making other accommodations, and urge it to continue
these initiatives. We are grateful for the personal and
professional sacrifices the staff of both Tribunals
have made.
In addition, we are glad to hear that the four audit
reports of the Mechanism, issued by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services during the reporting period,
found satisfactory management and controls and that
the Mechanism is striving to take necessary actions
where recommendations for improvement were made.
The United States remains deeply concerned that
the mechanisms case work is being severely impaired
due to the situation of Judge Aydin Sefa Akay. We
continue to emphasize the need for this matter to be
resolved fairly and expeditiously. The mandate of the
Tribunal may be nearing an end, but its work to end
impunity and promote justice will be enduring. Even
more, the work of the Mechanism and Tribunal reminds
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

us daily of the critical need to seek accountability
where atrocities against civilians have so far been met
with impunity in places like Syria and South Sudan.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation is grateful to the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for having a
organized this briefing on the International Criminal
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I would like to thank in particular
Judge Carmel Agius, President Theodor Meron and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their comprehensive
reports (see S/2017/434 and S/2017/436) and for their
briefings on the work of the Tribunals and on the
completion strategy for their work.
I take this opportunity to also wish the new
Registrar, Mr. Olufemi Elias of Nigeria, every success.
He is joining the Mechanism at a crucial juncture
in its transition and in the transfer of functions and
responsibilities from the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to the Mechanism. My
delegation would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative of Uruguay,
and his entire team for their remarkable work as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on International
Criminal Tribunals.
In reading through the reports, we are very
satisfied to see the headway that is being achieved in
dealing with pending cases, particularly the fact that
a new trial will soon be opened in the case of Stanišić
and Simatović, which should begin on 13 June. We
also welcome the fact that preparations are under way
for the appeal of Mr. Karadžić and Mr. Šešelj. The
beginnings of these cases and appeals is an important
step forward. Moreover, my delegation acknowledges
the importance of legal responsibility and welcomes
the adoption of a professional code of conduct for the
judges of the Mechanism, although we note that there
are no provisions for sanctions within that professional
code of conduct should a judge fall short of the content
therein. This shortcoming has already been pointed
out by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in its
2016 evaluation report of the ICTY and deserves to be
addressed quickly.
We welcome President Meron’s decision to have
his Office review the possibility of establishing
an enforcement mechanism allowing for the
implementation of a code of ethics that will take into
account the evolution of international practice in this

S/PV.7960

area. However, we note that certain questions remain
pending, namely, that the issue of staffing, issues
related to cooperation and arrest warrants, the search
for fugitives found to be guilty by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the reintegration
of acquitted or released individuals after they have
served their sentences, the optimal use of financial and
administrative resources and the issue of the archives
have not yet been fully resolved. These are issues that
are of concern to all of us and deserve our attention.
We also appeal to States, particularly those in which
the fugitives might have taken refuge, to redouble their
efforts to apprehend them and to ensure that they can
stand trial.
Turning our attention now to the matter of Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay, we welcome the efforts of the Office
of Legal Affairs and the Informal Working Group to
seek a happy conclusion to this matter and we welcome
all cooperation lent by Turkey. We call upon all
parties involved to keep the channels of dialogue and
consultation open in order to find a swift solution to
this matter.
We acknowledge the key role played by the
International Criminal Tribunals and the work done by
the officials who lead them. We reiterate our support to
them. I also assure them of the tireless support of my
country to upholding the principle of the independence
of justice.
We would also like to pay tribute to the significant
contribution by the Tribunals to international justice
with regard to crimes against humanity, war crimes
and crimes of genocide, as well as to accountability and
reconciliation efforts. That is why Senegal is firmly
committed to being responsible for the eight cells that
have been refurbished by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda in accordance with international
prison standards and to making them fully operational.
I would like to assure the Mechanism’s authorities
that the related administrative procedures are in their
final stages.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings on the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Over the past six months, the ICTY has continued
to make it progress in all aspects of its work. Under the

17-1581115/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

leadership of President Agius, it has overcome many
difficulties, including staff attrition, and implemented
in earnest the relevant Security Council resolutions in
a tireless effort to wrap up its judicial work before the
end of November. China commends the ICTY on its
work and hopes that it can redouble its efforts during
the remaining months to ensure the timely completion
of its judicial work and its closure before the end of
the year. The Tribunal has begun to plan closure-related
events. China will consider sending people to attend
these events.
Over the same period, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, under the leadership
of President Meron, has made continued progress with
the beginning of the Stanišić and Simatović trial case in
June and the ongoing Karadžić and Šešelj appeal cases.
The Residual Mechanism has issued 152 decisions and
orders and conducted its judicial activities in an orderly
fashion. It has adopted measures such as remote judging,
double hatting and single judge adjudication to meet the
requirement of being small, temporary and efficient. It
has also successfully reintegrated one person who was
acquitted and one person who was released.
China commends the Residual Mechanism for
its progress over the past six months. We expect the
Mechanism to continue its strict implementation of
resolution 1966 (2010) and other relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, as well as the statute of the
Mechanism, and to diligently discharge its duty so as to
ensure steady, orderly and efficient progress in its work
on all fronts.
The ICTY will close before the end of the year.
China expects it to wind up its work in a smooth
and efficient manner. We hope that the ICTY will
collaborate closely with the Residual Mechanism in
order to effect a smooth transfer of the remaining work
from the former to the latter. China will continue to
support both institutions.
Finally, China would like to express its appreciation
to Uruguay, as Chairman of the Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the Office of Legal Affairs
for the excellent work they have done.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to Judge
Meron, Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings. We have carefully reviewed the
contents and considerations of the two periodic
reports (see S/2017/434 and S/2017/436). I would like
16/27

07/06/2017

to commend the progrees made in the implementation
of the mandates of both Tribunals and to underscore
our support of their efforts to complete their mandates,
as scheduled.
The Security Council established the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
to uphold the principles of justice and the rule of
law, to demonstrate the sincerity of the international
community in addressing war crimes and crimes
against humanity, to ensure that the perpetrators are
held accountable for their actions and to anchor the
principle of zero impunity at the international level.
The two Tribunals have played a commendable role
in that respect and will continue to do so through
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague. In that connection,
we salute all efforts to ensure a smooth transition and
handover. The mandate of the ICTY is drawing to a
close. The Council’s support of the Tribunal is essential
if it is to optimally fulfil its mandate and duly finalize
the cases of which it is seized.
We urge Member States to continue cooperating
with the Registry of the Tribunal in accordance with
its mandate, as outlined in its Statute. In that respect,
I wish to underscore the need to use all available
financial and administrative resources effectively in
order to facilitate the work of the Residual Mechanism
and the ICTY, as required.
The International Criminal Tribunals are an
important tool for the international community in the
administration of justice and the punishment of those
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. The experiences gained and the
lessons learned from the ICTR, the ICTY and the
International Residual Mechanism, therefore, merit
consideration as a reference for the future. We must
build on the positive aspects and avoid any failures
or shortcomings.
In that respect, the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, in accordance with the mandate of the
Council, reviews the working methods of the
Mechanism and reports thereon, as it did with regard to
the ICTY. That serves our objectives, but it is important
for the group responsible for the review, whether at the
assessment or recommendation level, to pay heed to the
nature of the Mechanism as a judicial institution and
to ensure a balance between improving administrative
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

performance and efficacy, on the one hand, and not to
prejudice the independence of the international judges,
on the other.
Therefore, seeking the help of seasoned,
experienced judges as part of the group responsible
for the review is essential to fully understanding the
nature of the work of the Mechanism. In that respect,
agreement on a reference methodology for such reviews
will facilitate communication between the Office and
the Mechanism, while preparing future reports. That
will have a positive bearing on the nature of outcomes
and their implementation when the Council establishes
similar tribunals and mechanisms in the future.
In conclusion, I would like to note that Egypt
continues to follow the case of the detention of Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay in Turkey on the grounds of certain
accusations made against him. We look forward to
arriving at a satisfactory solution that preserves the
dignity and independence of the international judiciary
and is in line with the rules of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We too would like
thank today’s briefers for their extremely important
contribution to this meeting and to assure them of
Ukraine’s full support. I would also like to extend a
warm welcome to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of the
Republic of Croatia.
We would like to commend the steady progress that
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals have made since December
2016 in litigating trials and appeals, reforming and
strengthening efforts to locate and arrest the remaining
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
fugitives, assisting national jurisdictions in prosecuting
international crimes committed in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.
Unfortunately both institutions are experiencing
problems and challenges in performing their mandates.
There is a challenge of staff attrition, along with the
added pressure to meet deadlines in anticipation of the
planned closure of the ICTY and to ensure a smooth
handover of remaining issues to the Mechanism.
Although they are natural and hardly avoidable under
the circumstances, we hope that those difficulties
will not affect the operational capabilities of both
institutions at this important stage of their work.

S/PV.7960

Yet there are challenges of quite a different nature.
The need for States to cooperate with international
criminal courts and tribunals is constantly stressed,
including in the unanimously adopted resolution 2329
(2016). That is why we are concerned that States’
non-compliance with tribunals’ orders remains an
outstanding issue that impedes their efficient work.
We are therefore particularly concerned about Serbia’s
defiance of the Tribunal’s arrest warrants and orders to
surrender three indictees to the Tribunal’s custody. We
call upon that country to comply with its obligations
under article 29 of the ICTY statute and respective
Security Council resolutions to render all necessary
assistance to the Tribunal.
It is of the utmost importance for international
justice and crime prevention that all cases before the
Tribunal are completed by the time its activities are
concluded. It is imperative to send the strong message
that no one can avoid accountability for serious
violations of international humanitarian law. In that
respect, we welcome INTERPOL’s issuance in March
of Red Notices in relation to pending warrants.
We urge all States to cooperate with the ICTY
and the Mechanism and to respect their mandates in
line with obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions. Courts cannot deliver justice by themselves.
The international community must be consolidated
in its support of the Criminal Tribunals’ work to
ensure the right to universal justice for all victims of
mass atrocities.
Let me touch upon another technical but critical part
of the current stage of the Tribunal’s liquidation-related
activities. We have seen strong commitment to a
timely and efficient accomplishment of that task. We
are satisfied with the downsizing process, the transfer
of assets and contracts to the Mechanism, as well as
records and archives of the Tribunal. With regard to
the Mechanism, my delegation commends its judicial
activities and the issuance of more than 150 decisions
and orders during the reporting period, including
through the remote procedure. We also support
continuing efforts in reducing the costs and streamlining
the internal working methods and processes to ensure
efficient and transparent work by the Mechanism.
In conclusion, we would like to hail successful
events held as part of the ICTY legacy dialogues
series and the launch of an enhanced version of the
Mechanism’s website. The knowledge and expertise of

17-1581117/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

international criminal tribunals should be accessible to
a wider public, thus contributing to efforts to maintain
international peace and deliver justice around the world.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their very comprehensive briefings.
France reiterates its gratitude and support to the
entire staff of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their efforts in
conducting successful judicial proceedings. Although
the ICTY is now in its final year of operation, it is
extremely important that it continue to be supported by
its entire team until the very end. As the Mechanism
strengthens, it is also important for us to ensure that
the model adopted by the Security Council and the
tools and resources provided to enable it to effectively
discharge its duties with reduced costs, are sustainable.
We commend President Agius’s firm commitment
to staying the course and completing the work of the
ICTY in 2017. The confirmation of the very good
progress made in the most recent proceedings at both
the first instance and appeal stages, as well as the start
of liquidation-related activities, is in line with the
expectations of the Security Council when it extended
the Tribunal’s mandate for the final time through
resolution 2329 (2016).
The Tribunal will close its doors this year. France
commends the ICTY for its tremendous work in
advancing reconciliation and peace — a process that is
still under way for the peoples of the region. An overall
review should also be conducted this year to assess
progress made and identify good practices and areas in
which improvements can be made in dispensing justice
more effectively. We know that the ICTY’s experience
is vital. The ICTY would be the first Tribunal to
share its experience with other international judicial
institutions. The legacy of the ICTY must be preserved
and maintained in order to strengthen international
criminal justice, as a whole. France will participate in
the events planned for the closure of the ICTY, which
will be held in New York at the same time as the opening
session of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
As the ICTY nears the completion of its work,
France reiterates that, now more than ever before,
States of the region are responsible for cooperating
fully with the Tribunal, in accordance with the relevant
18/27

07/06/2017

resolutions of the Security Council. Such cooperation
extends to the Mechanism. We call on all States to do
their utmost to ensure that the eight fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) are arrested. We support the efforts of the
Prosecutor to restructure his teams and to strengthen
cooperation with his partners. All individuals suspected
of committing crimes during the genocide in Rwanda
must be brought to justice. In that regard, France
recalls that cases referred in 2007 by the ICTR are still
ongoing and are the subject of regular discussions with
the Prosecutor of the Mechanism, as well as with the
Mechanism’s specially appointed observer.
During this pivotal year, my delegation reiterates its
full support for the smooth transition to the Mechanism
and welcomes the fact that the ICTY and the Mechanism
assist each other, taking into account, in particular
the ICTR’s experience in handing over functions to
the Mechanism. France welcomes President Meron’s
determination to rely on the good practices of the ICTR
and the ICTY in prosecuting cases and in working
with the Mechanism. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates the importance of the recommendations put
forward by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in
the review of the ICTY conducted in 2016 and calls on
the Mechanism to follow those recommendations with
regard to its operations, developing a code of ethics
and establishing a disciplinary mechanism for judges.
France would also like to recall that the diversity of
legal systems, which we know President Meron holds
dear, is a factor in the success of the mission of the
Mechanism and of all international criminal courts.
Finally, France reiterates its support for the
activities of the ICTY and the Mechanism that seek
to build national judicial capacity. Such actions are an
invaluable contribution to the fight against impunity
and access to justice throughout the world. We welcome
the training courses envisaged in the Central African
Republic, which would bolster the Special Criminal
Court. We encourage the Mechanism to continue
those activities.
The Security Council decided to establish
international criminal tribunals in the 1990s because
it believed that the States concerned and their citizens
would be their primary beneficiaries through the
gradual strengthening of the rule of law, which ensures
the independence of the judiciary and acknowledges
full accountability.
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their updates.
Kazakhstan notes with satisfaction the progress
achieved over the past six months in the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
in the effective implementation of the strategy for the
Tribunal’s closure, despite the continued serious issue of
staff attrition. We appreciate the leadership of President
Agius in his efforts to ensure the proper functioning
of the Tribunal under the difficult circumstances. We
hope that the various challenges encountered will not
be a setback in the Tribunal’s timely completion of the
trials of the remaining pending cases. In addition, it
is imperative that effective solutions be found for the
existing administrative issues facing the Tribunal.
My delegation closely follows the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and hopes that all efforts to assist the victims
of some of the most inhuman of crimes will be carried
out successfully.
We see the value of the significant role played by
the international judicial and quasi-judicial bodies
in preserving our faith in international law and in
inevitably punishing the perpetrators of serious crimes.
Kazakhstan commends the respect for and strict
adherence to the important principles of objectivity,
independence and impartiality that the Tribunal
followed in conducting its work.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli, Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and the
Permanent Mission of Uruguay for their tireless efforts
and diligent dedication to their duties on behalf of
the Council.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
thanking the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron; the President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius;
and the Prosecutor of the ICTY and the Residual
Mechanism, Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Elbio Rosselli for his efforts
and leadership as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals.
We believe that the process of truth, justice and
reconciliation is important for peacebuilding, restoring

S/PV.7960

the rule of law, fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability, as well as for supporting victims in
post-conflict societies. In that regard, we acknowledge
the significant contributions made by ICTY, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the Residual Mechanism.
In relation to the ICTY, we appreciate the work
undertaken during the reporting period to ensure a
smooth transition from the Tribunal to the Residual
Mechanism, including in the context of liquidation,
downsizing and transferring records to the Residual
Mechanism. We welcome the work of the Tribunal’s
Judge and its staff and their dedication to concluding all
judicial activities and complying with the completion
strategy. which outlines its closure by the end of 2017.
We also welcome the resource-sharing arrangement
between the Office of the Prosecutor of ICTY and the
Mechanism under the one-office approach, as it enables
the Tribunals to address their challenges in relation
to staff attrition. Such measures taken by the ICTY
will increase its efficiency and lead to the possible
completion of pending cases, as well as its fulfilment
of its commitment to ending its work by the end of 2017.
Furthermore, we commend the collaboration between
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism
and the ICTY, as well as national judicial authorities
in relation to access to information and evidence. Such
collaboration would support the proceeding of the
relevant national courts and enable public prosecutors
to bring to justice persons who have committed serious
crimes under international law.
With regard to the Mechanism, we appreciate its
work in relation to follow-up cases referred to national
courts, as well as the Mechanism’s enforcement
of sentences. We have noted from the Prosecutor’s
report (see S/2017/434, annex II) that the Mechanism
continued its double-hatting arrangement with the
ICTY during the reporting period. In our view, such
an arrangement will enable it to function as a small,
temporary and efficient tribunal. We also welcome
the cooperation between Senegal and the Mechanism,
which has facilitated the enforcement of sentences
of prisoners of the ICTR, and the work that has been
achieved in relation to that cooperation.
While welcoming the cooperation of Member States
in relation to the relocation of acquitted and released
prisoners, we note with concern the challenges raised
in the report in relation to the lack of comprehensive
solutions regarding the resettlement of released and

17-1581119/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

acquitted persons. In that regard, we note the reports of
the early release in recent years of more than 14 persons
convicted for genocide-related crimes, based on earlyrelease arrangements without proper consultations with
the Office of the Prosecutor, the victims or the country
concerned. We are of the view that such practices do
not seem to be commensurate with the gravity of the
crimes committed. It may have grave implications
for the victims when, in many cases, the mindset
that gave rise to the crimes committed has not been
abandoned, as indicated in the Prosecutor’s report.
Therefore, we would like to encourage the President
of the Residual Mechanism to continue his dialogue
with Member States, including in the context of the
Informal Working Group, to find a durable solution to
the challenge at hand. We have noted that the report
raises the issue related to Judge Akay. We would like to
encourage the Mechanism to work in cooperation with
the Government of Turkey to resolve the matter.
We have noted the challenges raised in the reports of
the ICTY, the Mechanism, as well as the reports of the
Office of the Prosecutors of the ICTY and the Residual
Mechanism in relation to the trafficking of fugitives
and a lack of cooperation. The continued cooperation
and assistance of Member States with the ICTY in its
remaining period is critical for the successful completion
of all cases before the Tribunal and a smooth transition
to the Mechanism. It will also be absolutely necessary
in the conlusion of pending cases with the time frame
outlined in resolution 1966 (2010).
To conclude, I would like to underscore the need
for the Mechanism, the ICTY and the Office of the
Prosecutors of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism to
continue their dialogue and cooperation with Member
States in fulfillment of their functions and completion
of pending cases, including through tracking the
remaining eight at-large fugitives.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
express my appreciation for the comprehensive briefings
and reports on the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals by President Carmel
Agius, President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz. Let me also welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Croatia.
The role that international criminal tribunals
have played in the fight against impunity for the most
20/27

07/06/2017

horrendous crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, cannot be overestimated.
By acknowledging and recognizing the trauma that
remains after conflicts have ended, and by providing
a framework to hold those responsible to account, their
work has helped rebuild the foundations for affected
societies so that they can move forward. Ensuring
justice in the aftermath of conflict is essential for
healing the wounds of war and to sustaining peace.
Holding perpetrators to account in international or
national courts is key to national reconciliation.
We welcome the fact that the two remaining cases
before the ICTY, those of Ratko Mladić and the appeals
case Prlić et al, will be concluded in November. As we
move towards the conclusion of the ICTY’s mission,
we welcome President Agius’ plans for a structured
and timely transition to the Residual Mechanism. We
would like to takethis opportunity to thank the staff of
ICTY for their invaluable contributions to international
justice. We would also like to recognize the efforts of
President Agius to lead his team until the completion of
all of the Tribunal’s work.
It is important that there be no outstanding cases
at the time of the ICTY’s closing. We urge Serbia to
cooperate fully with the Court, as it has done on other
occasions. We call on itto carry out the three arrest
and surrender orders pending since January 2015.
Denying the reality of what happened in the past will
only undermine prospects for peace in the future. We
therefore share the Prosecutor’ss deep concern about
widespread denial of crimes and facts established by
ICTY in relation to its cases, which could have real
consequences for reconciliation in the Western Balkans.
Making a decisive and irreversible break with the past
can happen only when there is truth and accountability.
We look forward to a smooth and effective
transition from the ICTY to the Residual Mechanism.
In that regard, we are encouraged by reports that
ICTY and the Residual Mechanism are considering
lessons learned from the transition of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) a few years
ago. We welcome the work already under way by the
Residual Mechanism.
It is commendable that the Residual Mechanism
issued over 150 decisions and orders during the reporting
period. It has made good use of its flexible organization.
The system of distance judges has proven cost-effective
and efficient. We appreciate the conscious effort to
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

ensure gender balance within the Residual Mechanism,
as well as the appointment of specific focal points on,
for example, inclusion, gender and issues related to
lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender persons.
Finally, it is of concern that eight individuals
indicted by the ICTR for serious crimes remain atlarge. We encourage all States to cooperate fully with
the Residual Mechanism for the speedy arrest of those
individuals. We also encourage all States to assist
the Residual Mechanism in carrying out its mandate,
including by ensuring that its personnel are not hindered
in performing their duties.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank the Presidents of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and
the Prosecutor for their reports (see S/2017/436 and
S/2017/434) and their presentations.
At the outset, let me reiterate the United Kingdom’s
continued support for the ICTY and the Mechanism and
for all that they do to end impunity for the most serious
international crimes.
As the ICTY progresses through its final year, the
international community as a whole must continue
to support the Tribunal so that it leaves behind a
continuing and enduring legacy. Completion of its
judicial work remains the priority. We welcome the fact
that the Tribunal remains on track to deliver its final
judgments in the cases of Mladić and Prlić et al before
the end of the year. Let me commend the work of the
judges and staff as well as the Tribunal’s efficiency
measures, such as the prosecution’s “one office” policy,
which have made this possible. We also pleased that
the transfer of residual functions from the ICTY to the
Mechanism remains on track.
We are, however, very much aware of the challenges
that the ICTY faces. We share the Tribunal’s concern
over continued stuff attrition, and we welcome the
measures taken to address this issue. We hope that staff
will feel able to see their work through to the finish.
The United Kingdom is very concerned that
more than two years on, the arrest warrants for the
three individuals in the Jojić et al contempt case have
still not been executed. We strongly urge Serbia to
cooperate fully with the ICTY in all respects, including
complying with its international obligations in this
matter. Failure to do so risks undermining the central

S/PV.7960

principles of international justice and the rule of law by
allowing those suspected of interfering with witnesses
to avoid accountability.
It is essential that the ICTY’s vast experience and
lessons learned not be lost. Its legacy must reflect
its achievements and make a lasting contribution to
regional peace and stability. We are therefore pleased to
note its forward-looking approach to maximizing digital
outreach and transforming the ICTY’s website into a
permanent repository for the Tribunal’s digital legacy.
The legacy of the ICTY should be a clear and
resounding message to those who commit such crimes
that they cannot escape justice. Whether it takes two
years or 20, history will eventually catch up with them.
With regard to the Mechanism, we note that it
has entered an important phase, shortly commencing
a retrial in Stanišić and Simatović and undertaking
complex appeals in Karadžić and Šešelj. We look
forward to the Mechanism’s continuous, expeditious
and efficient treatment of these cases and to receiving
updates as they progress.
We remain concerned at the fact that the situation
of Judge Akay has not yet been resolved and by
consequent ongoing delays in the Ngirabatware case.
We hope that a pragmatic resolution can be found as
quickly as possible.
We fully support coordination between the
Prosecutor’s Office, national enforcement agencies
and INTERPOL with regard to apprehending the eight
remaining fugitives, and we welcome the Prosecutor’s
initiatives to improve tracking activities. We hope that
they can be brought to justice soon, and we urge all
States to cooperate to this end.
We also welcome the relocation of two further
acquitted and released persons from Arusha and
support the Mechanism in its ongoing work in this
respect, recognizing the challenges.
In addition to the work of the Mechanism and the
ICTY, there can be no doubt that effective national
prosecutions are vital in achieving justice for the
victims of atrocities and holding perpetrators to account
for their crimes. So we are troubled by the Prosecutor’s
report for the ICTY that regional judicial cooperation
is moving in the wrong direction. It is imperative
that all States work together to achieve justice.
We strongly urge all relevant authorities to initiate
discussions immediately so as to remove any barriers to

17-1581121/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

investigating and prosecuting the most serious crimes
of international concern, and we call on regional States
to work with the Office of the Prosecutor to develop
practical proposals to improve the situation as soon as
possible. Individuals suspected of war crimes cannot
continue to be shielded from justice simply by virtue of
their location.
We are also deeply disturbed by the Prosecutor’s
reports, both for the ICTY and the Mechanism, of denial
of crimes, in particular genocide and revisionism. If
such crimes are to be prevented in future, it is essential
to accept the ICTY and Mechanism findings and rulings
on the tragic events of the not-so-distant past.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia welcomes the reports of the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius; the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron; and the Prosecutor
of the ICTY and the Mechanism, Mr. Brammertz (see
S/2017/436 and S/2017/434). We take this opportunity
to convey our support to them in carrying out the work
entrusted to them.
We also express our gratitude for the work done by
Ambassador Rosselli and his team in his capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. We also thank the Office of Legal Affairs
for its support and cooperation in connection with
facilitating the work of the Informal Working Group.
It is important to underscore that the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
through resolution 827 (1993), of 25 May 1993, and
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
through resolution 955 (1994), of 8 November 1994,
have contributed significantly to justice through the
fight against impunity and have played a key role in
restoring the rule of law in the countries of the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
In the more than 20 years that both Tribunals were
up and running, the international community saw that
they represented a key element in the quest for justice.
As they have done a great deal of work, the Security
Council must provide them the necessary support so
that they can conclude their mandate, and also urge
22/27

07/06/2017

the Mechanism that it assist in this process in the best
possible conditions.
Against this backdrop, and in order to ensure that
the Tribunal can fully discharge the mandate conferred
upon it by the international community and complete
the remaining cases by December 2017, as set out in the
completion strategy, it is vital that all States cooperate
with its work.
We listened very carefully to the update on Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay, which is a very delicate case when it
comes to the work of the Mechanism. We hope that a
swift resolution to this issue can be found. We also pay
tribute to the dedicated work of the staff of the Tribunal
through the lifetime of its mandate and reiterate that its
cooperation and assistance will be key also during its
drawdown period. We deem it important to ensure that
the Tribunal has the resources necessary to facilitate the
work of the Mechanism and the closing of the Tribunal.
We stress and welcome the work done in terms of
preserving the Tribunal’s legacy through dialogues with
academia and with the general public, as was done in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia. We believe that
those awareness-raising activities are clear testimony
of the efforts made by the Tribunal to ensure the right
to truth, justice, reparations for harm caused, keeping
memories alive and most of all to ensure that such
events are never repeated, and that in all circumstances
dialogue and conciliation should be used to resolve
conflicts, as set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, Bolivia looks forward to the events that
will take place in December both in The Hague and in
New York prior to the closure of the Tribunal, as well
as the high-levels symposiums that will mark the end of
24 years of work.
Bolivia is firmly committed to the fight against
impunity and to the maintenance of international peace
and security, which are the cornerstones of the Charter
of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Croatia.
Mr. Stier (Croatia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
Bolivia’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Council and towish you a successful month as you fulfil
your mandate.
(spoke in English)
I welcome the Presidents of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
Residual Mechanism, Judges Agius and Meron, as
well as Prosecutor Brammertz. I thank them for
today’s briefings and their reports (see S/2017/436 and
S/2017/434) and assure them of Croatia’s continued
support for their efforts aimed at ensuring accountability.
It is little wonder that, some 25 years ago, Croatia,
at the time under brutal aggression, was one of the
States strongly supporting the establishment of a
tribunal mandated to adjudicate and punish the most
serious violations of international humanitarian
law. The expectations of all those who cried for help
and justice were extremely high. Global television
audiences witnessed appalling scenes of Croatian
towns and villages being levelled to the ground and
their population savagely “cleansed”. One such place
was the village of Škabrnja, the scene of the most
gruesome atrocities committed in 1991, when 84 of
its inhabitants brutally perished. Most of them were
executed on their doorsteps or in their basement
shelters, massacred in the streets or thrown under the
treads of passing tanks. After causing the carnage, the
perpetrators wrote a cynical message on the wall of the
destroyed elementary school in large letters: “Welcome
to a dead village”. Although he was not indicted for
the events in this Croatian village, it was in Škabrnja
and the surrounding towns and villages that, in 1991,
Ratko Mladić, whose trial is still pending before the
ICTY, began his warpath, which later continued in
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The ICTY, whose work we are discussing today,
will soon enter history with a significant legacy, in
particular with its achievements in the fight against
impunity. Equally important is the Tribunal’s role
in giving a voice to the thousands of victims of
horrific crimes.
It could be said that the Tribunal is far from
satisfying the cries of all those who experienced, in the
worst manner possible, the brutality and cruelness of the
perpetrators. It might also even seem that the Tribunal
is far from upholding important legal principles and the
mandate it was established to fulfil, that is, proceedings
of reasonable length and the application of existing
rules and principles of international humanitarian and

S/PV.7960

criminal law. While little can be done about a number
of those complaints, a stringent application of existing
rules and principles, so important for both the legacy of
the Tribunal and international criminal law in general,
must now be our focus.
It is worthwhile repeating that in creating the ICTY,
the Security Council strictly confined the Tribunal to
the application of existing international humanitarian
law and did not in any way authorize the creation of
precedents or “legislation” in that branch of law. Such
an understanding was also clearly expressed in Security
Council members’ official statements following
the adoption of resolution 827 (1993), by which the
Tribunal was formally established (see S/PV.3217),
as well as in the report of the Secretary-General on
the establishment and functioning of the ICTY (see
S/25704), which explicitly limited the application of
international humanitarian law by the Tribunal to rules
that are beyond any doubt part of customary law.
In that context, let me remind Council members
how, for example, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir David Hannay, in his discussion
after the adoption of resolution 827 (1993), stated that
“[t]he Statute does not, of course, create new law,
but reflects existing international law in this field”.
The Permanent Representative of Spain, Mr. Yañez
Barnuevo, summarized the Tribunal’s role by saying that
it is not established “to create new international law or to
change existing law but to guarantee effectively respect
for that law”, while Ambassadors Arria and Sardenberg,
of Venezuela and Brazil, respectively, also voiced their
understanding of the Tribunal’s limited jurisdiction to
the application of existing international law.
While completing its task of establishing individual
criminal responsibility in the armed conflict on
the territory of the former Yugoslavia and thereby
contributing to lasting peace and security in the area,
the ICTY must live up to the highest standards with
regard to the scrupulous interpretation and appropriate
application of existing international humanitarian law,
in accordance with its statute. Furthermore, pursuant to
article 6 of the ICTY statute, the Tribunal does not have
the competency to make findings on State responsibility.
Defining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction further, articles 6
and 7 are appropriately entitled “Personal jurisdiction”
and “Individual criminal responsibility”.
Any attempt to expand beyond the limits I just
mentioned, and especially any attempt to impose

17-1581123/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

individual criminal responsibility without requiring a
sufficient causal relationship between alleged criminal
purpose and actual crimes, or even without requiring
a specific intent to commit those crimes, which is the
extended form of the joint criminal endeavour, also
known as JCE III, is inconsistent with the current state
of international humanitarian law and has the potential
to seriously damage international criminal law — and
not only international criminal law.
Indeed, if mere foreseeability of illegal violence,
which always and inevitably looms over any military
operation, automatically engages liability of all military
or civilian officials with any kind of authority over the
forces engaged, then all military and civilian officials
with de jure or de facto authority over those forces
would automatically be held liable for all criminal acts
committed by any member of those forces. According
to this concept, State and political leaders could be
held responsible for offences committed by others
who may share their goals, regardless of whether those
leaders shared an intent to commit specific criminal
offences as a means of achieving those goals. This
novum in international criminal law and international
humanitarian law, if confirmed, would seriously
jeopardize, if not disable, States, including those
whose representatives are sitting around this table,
from conducting any kind of legal military operations,
peacekeeping operations included, and would turn
them into unpredictable endeavours.
Allow me to add that this type of liability of
military and civilian officials, based seemingly more on
the conflation of political considerations with criminal
activities than on anything else, was already rightly
rejected by the Tribunal in a number of its cases. It was
also recently rejected by the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia and, before that, by the
first permanent criminal court to adjudicate the most
serious international crimes, the International Criminal
Court, and it has never even been contemplated in
national jurisdictions.
Finally, let me stress that Croatia is confident that,
in the last miles of its path, by strictly adhering to the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council to apply
the highest standards of international humanitarian
law, the ICTY will make an immense contribution to
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
24/27

07/06/2017

Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
I would like to thank the leadership of both the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals for their reports (see S/2017/436
and S/2017/434) and today’s detailed briefings on the
progress of work of their respective institutions.
We note the continued progress and steady work
of the ICTY as it approaches the end of its mandate
and forecasted closure at the end of this year. We also
understand that certain circumstances continue to
impede the work of the ICTY, but we hope that the
Tribunal will finish its work in an efficient manner
within the anticipated time frame in line with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
We welcome the continued activities carried out by
the Residual Mechanism in the reporting period as it
increasingly assumes its designated responsibilities. We
hope that the Mechanism will draw and build upon the
best practices of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and fulfil all conditions necessary
for the successful completion of its mandate, with
continued support from the international community.
Throughout the years, the cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the ICTY has been steadfast and
full, as evidenced by the statistics of the Tribunal. In
the same vein, we remain committed to contributing
actively to the Tribunal’s efforts to accomplish its
mission, and we will continue in the same manner with
the Mechanism.
In addition to cooperating with the ICTY, Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to improving the
efficiency of domestic war crimes proceedings, bearing
in mind that only an independent judiciary, as a basic
pillar of democratic institutions, is able to render
justice in an impartial way. In that regard, Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to further strengthen its
national judicial system at all levels in order to bring to
justice all those responsible for war crimes. The justice
sector reform strategy adopted for the period 20142018 remains crucial to the long-term reinforcement
of the rule of law and the further consolidation of the
judicial system, including measures to improve judicial
independence and efficiency.
We welcome the support of the European Union
for the implementation of the strategy, and the support
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations Development
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

Programme (UNDP), principally in connection with
witness-protection activities and the appropriate
assistance and support to victims.We are further pleased
that the European Union has agreed to extend the joint
European Union/ICTY training project for national
prosecutors and young professionals from the former
Yugoslavia, as it has played a very important role in
building the capacities of the national justice sector for
the past eight years and the efficient transition from the
ICTY to national war crimes prosecutions.
The national war crimes strategy plays a crucial
role in enhancing public trust in judicial institutions,
and above all in the promotion of reconciliation. Its
consistent implementation will continue to improve
the consistency of juridical practices throughout
the entire country at all levels. The implementation
of the strategy is a complex process in which many
institutions at all levels of authority in Bosnia and
Herzegovina participate. Despite numerous challenges,
important results have been achieved. This is reflected
in a steady increase in the efficiency in prosecutions
of war crimes cases and some progress in resolving
outstanding Category II cases, as well as in issuing
important indictments.
We believe that consistent cooperation among
the Prosecutor’s offices and the relevant authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia,
in accordance with the principles of international
justice and rule of law, is crucial to investigating and
prosecuting pending war crimes. The promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation
therefore remains our priority, as a matter of principle,
dedication to justice and reonciliation in our region.
Finally, the fight against impunity is a crucial
precondition for sustainable peace, reconciliation
and the rule of law. And it does not end with 2017.
Processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to achieving our goal of building
a peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina
integrated into the European Union.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Backović (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to speak to the Council today as
representative of the Republic of Serbia. I take this
opportunity to welcome the Presidents and Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia

S/PV.7960

(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. I thank them for their
semi-annual reports.
Before I specifically address the reports, allow me
to make a general statement in that regard.
The issue that we are concerned with is the scope
of the mandate of the Prosecutor with respect to the
issues addressed in the reports. The issues that are
raised therein relate to the fields of education, history,
politics, culture and social development. In that regard,
while we definitely consider those issues to be worth
discussing and addressing, the concern remains as
to the scope of the mandate provided in the statute
and the relevant resolution concerning the Residual
Mechanism. We note two elements of that concern.
The first pertains to the members of the Security
Council and is for them to deal with. What is the
actual mandate that they have given to the Prosecutor?
However, the other side of the issue, with which we are
concerned as one of the ultimate beneficiaries of the
mandate of the Prosecutor’s Office, is the issue of the
competence of legal professionals to deal with issues
such as education, history and so on. To illustrate the
point concerning the scope of the mandate, I would
respectfully draw the Council’s attention to the reports
of the President and the Prosecutor. If we compare the
two, we may be able to see what I am referring to in
greater detail.
The key principle of the fight against impunity for
the most serious international crimes is the proven,
continuous commitment of the Member States. To prove
their commitment, States need to align their normative
framework with relevant international conventions and
the ICTY statute, cooperate with the ICTY in order
to enable efficient investigation and prosecution; and
organize their domestic judicial systems in a way
that enables independent, impartial and efficient war
crimes proceedings.
If we are assessing today the extent to which
Serbia has fulfilled these requirements, it is clear that
Serbia has unambiguously shown its commitment.
Our criminal legislation is fully aligned with relevant
standards and enables cooperation with the ICTY,
without exception, regarding all acts that the Security
Council recognized in the ICTY statute as serious
international war crimes. Based on this legislation,
Serbia has proven its commitment, as clearly reflected
in the number and rank of defendants — I emphasize

17-1581125/27

S/PV.7960

ICTY and ICTR

the word “rank” — who have been surrendered to
the ICTY.
The Republic of Serbia has handed over 45
defendants to the Tribunal out of the total of 46
defendants whose surrender has been demanded from
Serbia. One defendant committed suicide before he
could be handed over to the Tribunal. Of that number,
14 defendants were arrested in the Republic of Serbia,
four defendants were arrested abroad, in the framework
of cooperation between national security services
with foreign agencies, and 27 defendants voluntarily
surrendered. No other country has surrendered even
close to a number of high-ranking officials as Serbia
has. That is — or should be — clear proof of Serbia’s
commitment to prosecuting war crimes.
In addition, Serbia has granted the ICTY
Prosecutor free access to important evidence located
in Serbia, such as documents, archives and witnesses.
So far, Serbia has positively resolved 2,179 out of 2,180
requests for assistance received from the Offices of
the ICTY Prosecutor and the Mechanism Prosecutor.
Only one request from the Office of the Mechanism’s
Prosecutor, of a newer date, is currently undergoing the
realization procedure.
Serbia has allowed 757 witnesses to testify freely,
despite the right/obligation they had to withhold
testimony due to the State, military or official rules
regarding privileged information. One thousand three
hundred and twenty-nine requests were issued by
various defence teams, and no pending requests for
assistance exist.
Serbia has carried out all 11 requests for witness
protection, efficiently monitored all provisional-release
cases and ensured that all accused were returned to
ICTY detention upon request. Currently, Serbian
authorities are monitoring two cases of provisional
release, in connection with which those persons are in
the process of being surrendered to the ICTY as well.
In parallel with the contribution to the ICTY’s
work, Serbia has shown an indisputable commitment
to continuously fight impunity for core international
crimes through proceedings before national courts.
Serbian authorities have a strategic approach, as
evidenced by the obligations that Serbia undertook
via its action plan under chapter 23 and its national
strategy for the prosecution of war crimes, adopted
by the Government in 2016. Both documents have as
a backbone the idea of zero tolerance for impunity
26/27

07/06/2017

regardless of the ethnicity, religion or rank of victims
or perpetrators. Both documents have been welcomed
by the most senior Serbian officials, as evinced in
numerous public statements. Those facts stand squarely
against the assertions made by the Prosecutor in
his report.
The freedom of speech is highly ranked on the
list of Serbian priorities. Every citizen is free to
express her opinion without consequences, as long as
those statements do not constitute a criminal offence.
However, single statements by some individuals or
civil-society organizations should not be interpreted
as an official position of the State of Serbia. Serbian
commitment should not be judged on anything other
than results achieved so far in cooperation with the
ICTY, prosecutions of war crimes before domestic
courts and regional cooperation. Generalizations based
on impressions, speculation, conjecture or innuendo
cannot contribute to a fair assessment of the situation,
as mandated by the statute.
We are aware that the prolonged procedure for
the election of the new war crimes prosecutor raised
some concerns. However, they did not affect the
performance of the prosecutor; nor has it in any way
halted progress in Serbia on prosecuting war crimes,
or our commitment thereto. On the contrary, Serbia
actively works on strengthening the capacities of the
prosecutor. In addition to the appointment of the new
prosecutor, the election procedure for three more
deputy prosecutors is ongoing. Now that we have a new
prosecutor in place, a new prosecutorial strategy will
be finalized in a few months.
Trial monitoring of war crimes proceedings by
civil society will start again in September, along with
special ongoing training for judges, public prosecutors
and police officers in charge of the investigation and
prosecution of war crimes. Amendments to the criminal
code were adopted few months ago in order to align it
with the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Numerous
activities have been undertaken in order to improve
the status of victims and witnesses, in line with
international standards. Ten indictments for war crimes
against 21 individuals have been confirmed in Serbia
in 2016 and 2017.
We understand the Prosecutor’s concern about
reconciliation and cooperation in the region, but I must
emphasize that regional cooperation remains a priority
17-15811

07/06/2017

ICTY and ICTR

for Serbia. Our singular commitment is reflected in
statistical data on regional cooperation, and the quality
of our efforts can be the subject of assessment when
we are talking about Serbia’s commitment to regional
cooperation. However, reciprocity is needed if we are to
achieve more results in regional cooperation.
According to statistics from the war crimes
prosecutor’s office, as of December 2016 Serbia had
positively resolved 38 of 52 requests coming from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and nine requests were
denied while five are still pending; 50 out of 78 cases
coming from Croatia have been honoured, with 11
requests denied and 17 are pending. In parallel, only
10 out of 22 Serbian requests have been positively
resolved by Bosnia and Herzegovina. The result is even
more worrying with regard to requests for assistance
submitted to Croatia: only 10 out of 27 requests have
been positively resolved.
Serbia should not be judged negatively because
of its respect for its own Constitution, laws and
court decisions, which all accord with the basic legal
principles. After all, the rule of law and separation
of powers are key principles of all traditional and
modern democracies. Bearing that in mind, let me raise
three questions.
First, could we elect the prosecutor or her deputies
without conducting a procedure in accordance with
relevant laws and contrary to the autonomy of the public
prosecution office and the liberty of the members of
Parliament to vote for or against proposed candidates?
Of course, the answer is no.
Secondly, could we surrender the Petar Jojić,
Vjerica Radeta and Jovo Ostojić contrary to an
independent court decision based on the law of Serbia
and the statute of the ICTY? In that regard, let me make

S/PV.7960

three points. First, those individuals are not accused of
war crimes. Secondly, those individuals are not accused
of war crimes. And, thirdly, those individuals are not
accused of war crimes. Those individuals are accused of
contempt of court. The Serbian court applied the clear
language of domestic law and the statute enacted by
the Security Council in deciding not to surrender those
three individuals. Again, they are accused of contempt
of court, not war crimes. I would respectfully request
that members please read the statute, in particular
article 29, which was mentioned here today. That may
help members understand why the Serbian court has
refused to surrender them.
Thirdly, could we finish Djukić case while ignoring
the procedural rights of the accused? If there are any
concerns about the length of trials, I would draw
members’ attention to the varying lengths of various
trials, even at the Tribunal itself. Procedural safeguards
and the rights of the accused, and respect thereof, are
among the basic principles of modern democracies. To
summarize in that regard, we believe that the rule of
law cannot be enforced by violating. That is just not the
way to enforce the rule of law.
In conclusion, Serbia’s commitment to cooperate
with the ICTY and deal efficiently with war crimes
before its own courts is indisputable. The same goes for
the Residual Mechanism. We want to believe that other
Governments in the region are equally willing to work
together on reconciliation, cooperation and stability in
the region while all along supporting the ICTY and the
Residual Mechanism in accomplishing their missions.
We also hope that ICTY and Mechanism officials will
recognize the efforts of our Government to promote
those values.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

17-1581127/27
