S/2020/379

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 8 May 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Ms.
Irena Hasić, Executive Director, Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium,
China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference convened on Wednesday,
6 May 2020. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. The representative of the European Union also
submitted a statement.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of
the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-06552 (E) 110520 150520

*2006552*

S/2020/379

Annex I
Statement by Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Allow me at the beginning to personally wish each member of the Security
Council good health and to express the hope that their respective countries are
successfully overcoming the ongoing pandemic. I am grateful that the Council is
still willing and able to devote its time to a discussion on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which continues to require our attention and commitment.
In the report I have submitted to the Secretary-General for distribution to
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/345, annex), I have set out the issues
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing. These issues deserve the continued focus
and support of the Council and the wider international community. I will now
elaborate further.
As I note in my report, Bosnia and Herzegovina, like all countries represented
in the Security Council today, is currently in the midst of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. While it is still too early to make a thorough assessment, I am pleased
to report that, so far, the country has apparently managed to avoid the widespread
outbreaks and significant loss of life that has befallen some other countries.
While both entities, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika
Srpska, took early measures and initially showed that they were prepared to work
together, including at the state level, the country has ultimately not succeeded in
establishing a functional coordination mechanism to address the health crisis and
appropriately coordinate measures to deal with the economic consequences of the
crisis. As a result of the lack of coordination, there are currently different levels of
measures applied in each entity, and it appears that there is no countrywide plan to
mitigate the economic setbacks.
I encourage the authorities to follow the World Health Organization guidelines
and, most importantly, to diligently enforce any and all measures in place. I sincerely
hope that we do not see a resurgence of the virus.
In this crisis, the international community has done an excellent job of
assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina by providing the country’s authorities at all levels
of authority with financial and material assistance as well as political and technical
expertise. On the other hand, to date the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
failed to reach a political agreement on the distribution of financial assistance from
the International Monetary Fund. Moreover, the greatest challenge for the country is
how to minimize the risks of corruption related to the management of international
financial and material assistance. While the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
must fully investigate corruption allegations, I strongly recommend that my
colleagues in the international community establish their own rigorous mechanisms
to track their financial and material assistance so as to avoid profiteering.
I would now like to acknowledge a significant development that occurred
since I completed my report. On 28 April, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
announced the launch of the process to implement the 14 key priorities set forth
in the European Commission’s May 2019 opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for European Union membership. In so doing, the Presidency reaffirmed
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s commitment to European Union (EU) membership as
a strategic foreign policy goal and a priority. The Presidency also established an
ad hoc political working group. This is the result of the efforts of the EU and its
international partners, and I wish every success for this endeavour in advance of the
Western Balkans summit, which begins in Zagreb today.
2/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

I am concerned that some political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
return to the pre-pandemic status quo, in which decision-making at the state level
was blocked by parties of the governing coalition in Republika Srpska. With the
blockade, these parties have attempted to force a discussion on the removal of the
foreign judges from the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. Should the
foreign judges leave that Court, some political parties would de facto gain political
control over the Court and then instrumentalize it to dismantle existing arrangements
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For this reason, I fully support the recent election of Ms.
Angelika Nussberger, an outstanding lawyer and German national, to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and look forward to the continuation of
the work of international judges on the Court in accordance with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution and the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I would also like to report that, while the Republika Srpska Government
was appointed quickly in 2018, the new Federation Government has not — more
than 18 months since the October 2018 general elections — been appointed yet,
as one political party continues to condition the establishment of the Government
on changes to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s election law. In addition, for more than
10 years the citizens of Mostar have been deprived of their right to vote in local
elections, and the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić and
Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case remains unimplemented after more than 10
years. Other related human rights judgments also remain unimplemented.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is due to hold municipal elections in October of
this year. The Central Election Commission (CEC) has warned that, due the failure
to adopt the State budget for the year 2020, it may be unable to proceed with the
necessary preparations that should begin by the time it announces the elections,
which it is legally obliged to do by tomorrow, 7 May. The authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina must immediately ensure funding for the Central Election Commission
to fulfil its obligations with regard to the elections, ideally by adopting the 2020 State
budget or, alternatively, by allocating surplus funds specifically for this purpose.
The Central Election Commission has also warned that some of the required
preparatory activities for elections, and possibly the elections themselves, may
not be carried out on schedule owing to conditions and restrictions caused by the
pandemic. It has proposed legislation that would give the Commission the possibility
of delaying the elections by a period longer than that currently provided for by law.
It appears that the work of the Central Election Commission has become even
more challenging, as some political parties are opposing the recent election of new
CEC members. As a result, some political entities and institutions controlled by
these parties refuse to cooperate with the CEC, which is unacceptable. There are
court cases pending that challenge the election of CEC members, which will clarify
their legality. Until a court ruling is made, those members shall remain in their
positions, and all institutions and parties should fully cooperate with the CEC and
its members.
This year, we will mark several important anniversaries. In July, we will
commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide. Measures
related to the pandemic may make it necessary to reduce the scale of commemorative
events, but the tragedy nonetheless looms large in our collective memory. International
courts have ruled that what happened at Srebrenica in July 1995 was genocide,
and nothing can change that fact. No one can rewrite history. But in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, there are still some who deny the genocide, reject war crimes verdicts
and glorify convicted war criminals. This must stop. I urge all peoples to recognize

20-065523/38

S/2020/379

each other’s suffering and come together to mourn. There is probably also a need to
legally regulate the issue of genocide denial and holocaust denial.
In October this year, we will mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the landmark resolution affirming the role of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian
response and post-conflict reconstruction. In this regard, I commend the Agency for
Gender Equality, a part of the State-level Ministry for Human Rights and Refugees,
for maintaining the Coordination Body of the country’s national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
I urge the authorities throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina to make greater
investments in the essential services being provided by civil society organizations
and municipalities in support of women survivors of violence. I repeat my call on
the authorities to do more to address gender inequality, in the light of the wage gap
for women and the underrepresentation of women in the political sphere, despite the
legal obligation of 40 per cent representation by women in the country’s domestic
institutions.
Lastly, in November, we will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Dayton, which was reached in Dayton,
and in December we will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the
Agreement in Paris. In the spirit of renewing commitments, the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, together with the international community, should recommit to
preserving the Dayton structure through strengthening the State-level institutions
and the competences they have assumed, in accordance with the State’s prerogatives
under the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We should recall that the first lines of the preamble to the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina stress the importance of respect for human dignity, liberty
and equality, as well as peace, justice, tolerance and reconciliation. The sooner the
parties fully commit to these values, the sooner my mission will be complete.
Above all, Bosnia and Herzegovina must improve the rule of law, starting
with changes to the Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, and the
fight against corruption. The rule of law is a cornerstone of democracy and of the
functionality of any country. The rule of law is not only about adopting legislation,
but about implementing adopted legislation in full. It is an ongoing commitment and
must be the way of life.
The international community must not lose sight of what is at stake in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It must work together to preserve its collective investments in time
and money over the past 25 years, not for their own sake but to honour the lives of
those who were lost during the conflict as well as those who survived and continue
to hope for a better future for themselves and for future generations. We should be
patient with Bosnia and Herzegovina and remain very cautious about changing the
international landscape in the country. We should, as the international community,
work together. This is the only recipe for success in our efforts to ensure the longterm stability and viability of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State.
Finally, allow me to recall that, in many countries of the world, we are these
days commemorating the end of the Second World War and are grateful to the allied
forces that defeated Nazism. This also occurred in my own country, Austria, and our
gratitude is expressed in the many monuments constructed there 75 years ago.
In Austria, the allied forces stayed some 10 years and oversaw the return of
democracy. They prevented a revival of fascism and supported our impoverished
country with the Marshall Plan. On a wider scale, one-time greatest enemies France
4/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

and Germany are now not only pillars of the European Union, but global pillars of
peace and stability.
There can be no better example of reconciliation and forward-looking
agendas. It is against this historical backdrop that I think of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, where ultimately peace, stability and prosperity will also prevail.

20-06552

5/38

S/2020/379

Annex II
Statement by Ms. Irena Hasić, Executive Director of Youth
Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina
It is an honour and a privilege to be invited to participate in today’s debate on
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the Security Council.
My name is Irena Hasić. I am the Executive Director of Youth Initiative for
Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, an organization that was established in
2007 and has since operated at the national and regional levels as a part of Youth
Initiative for Human Rights. The founding idea of the organization was to provide
new generations with an educational alternative on human rights and democratic
values and to promote objective learning about the past wars that took place in
the former Yugoslavia. Our main goal is to contribute to the creation of a peaceful
society where all citizens are equal, regardless of their socioeconomic, national,
ethnic or religious background — a society in which human rights, democracy and
the rule of law are interconnected and mutually reinforcing.
Young people in Bosnia and Herzegovina are at the core of our work, our
vision and our mission, and we strongly believe that young people can contribute
to the realization of the aforementioned type of society. To accomplish this end,
however, young people need to be properly equipped. Filling the gaps in our
educational system is crucial to offering Bosnia and Herzegovina youth the tools
they need to become active and responsible citizens and promoters and drivers
of change.
It is a well-known fact that young people in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
divided in and by the school system. For instance, in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have 56 schools operating under the “two schools under one roof ”
paradigm. This paradigm was established as a temporary solution to overcome
conf lict, but it has since become permanent. Students in these schools are not
only divided by ethnicity, they are also divided by their textbooks. Their histories,
languages and cultures are separate. They even enter the school building through
different doors.
That is why, to advance reconciliation and interethnic dialogue, it is crucial
to promote interethnic socialization among young people. The youth of Bosnia
and Herzegovina consider segregation to be a natural state of living. And how can
we blame them? They grow up isolated from other ethnic groups, surrounded by
convicted war criminals who are celebrated as national heroes, and are, on a daily
basis, subjected to historical revisionism.
That is precisely where Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has a role to play. In the years that we have been in operation, we have
welcomed over 20,000 young people between the ages of 15 and 30 as participants
in our programmes. They come from segregated and homogeneous communities
from both the Federation and Republika Srpska. We organize alternative schools,
open discussions, visits, exchanges and cultural events, in which we present young
people with facts and enable them to connect and join forces beyond their ethnicity.
It takes time for young people to accept facts and each other, as most of
their pre-existing values are based on stereotypes, inherited ethnocentric narratives
and the inability to accept anything that is different from what they have known.
But it is not impossible to change. In a safe and comfortable place, we create an
opportunity for young people with different religious and ethnic backgrounds to
interact, learn and grow.

6/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Last summer we organized a youth forum and invited young people from all
parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate. They held open discussions on three
topics, namely, youth and the political situation, activism in formal education and
reconciliation. The objective was to hear their thoughts about the obstacles they are
facing in their local communities, what they need to overcome those problems and
how we, as an organization, can assist them. Their recommendations were clear:
young people need a proper political education and must be made aware of the
importance of voting and their trust in institutions must be restored. They are aware
of f laws and irregularities in the election process. It is time to modernize it.
Young people need information on how they can contribute to change and the
tools and mechanisms to bring their ideas to life. They need help from us to build
that capacity and to motivate their peers to become more engaged. I must say, in
brief, that young people lack a voice in their communities. They need us to be the
link as they do not feel strong enough themselves.
However, in this battle to foster change and improvement, civil society
organizations continuously face not only financial but also institutional obstacles.
Unfortunately, the Ministry of Education of Republika Srpska deprives us of access
to schools on the territory of Republika Srpska. In the Federation, we must obtain
permission to work from every canton because each one has its own ministry
of education.
Civil society in Bosnia has played a major role in providing a more solid
foundation for democratization, the reconciliation process, freedom of the media,
the fight against hate speech and fund transparency. The current political elite,
the educational system and local communities will never foster cultural and ethnic
diversity; rather, they portray diversity as a weakness, as a weed to be uprooted.
Therefore, it is up to civil society to create programmes to advance human rights
and democratic values so that we can create a better future for and with young
people. It is up to civil society to restore Bosnia and Herzegovina as a country with
a rich and vibrant past and an even brighter future.
It has been 25 years since the Dayton Peace Agreement was signed. The
Agreement ended the war and the ethnic cleansing. It also transferred the conf lict
onto the political stage, leaving all sides unsatisfied, albeit at peace. Today, we
are faced with an administrative machinery that is not only soaking up our gross
domestic product but is also unable to come to joint decisions on economic and
administrative reforms. The current administrative configuration is far from
sustainable; instead of being invested in the country’s development and economy,
education and culture, our wealth is spent on an ineffective administration and
bureaucracy. That directly affects Bosnia and Herzegovina’s ordinary citizens, who
are held hostage by political corruption, a lack of accountability and nationalism.
With the highest percentage of youth unemployment in Europe, an increasing
number of young people are emigrating abroad in search of prosperity and better,
safer living conditions. There is an urgent need for reforms and investment and,
according to us, a definitive need to update the Agreement. For that, we need help
from outside.
It has been demonstrated again and again that the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is getting frustrated. Such an intense atmosphere risks triggering
violence and escalating into conf lict. So, please, I am asking the Council not to
disregard and misinterpret the red f lags that Bosnia and Herzegovina and its people
are sending it.
The pandemic the world is facing right now has taught us one thing — we
cannot survive without help from others. The future of humankind lies in humanity
20-065527/38

S/2020/379

and solidarity. After 25 years of transitional justice, peacebuilding and reconciliation
initiatives, Bosnia and Hercegovina remains a topic to be discussed and assessed, an
issue to be resolved. It remains a question mark. It is time to find answers together.
I thank the Council for its dedication and time.

8/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex III
Statement by Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement to be made by the delegation of
the European Union.
I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and his and his
office’s valuable work and welcome Ms. Irena Hasić’s briefing.
The recent coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has shown us how
interdependent we are. We encourage political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
continue cooperating and coordinating their actions in the fight against the pandemic.
We also call for full respect at all levels of the constitutional and legal framework, as
well as adherence to international human rights law. It is essential that all political
leaders practice good governance at a time when it is most needed, including by
making the prevention of corruption a part of their response to the pandemic.
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not stand alone. The European Union (EU)
has announced over €3.3 billion in financial support to its partners in the Western
Balkans. The Union’s commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina is a display of its firm
belief that the country’s future lies within the EU. The Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina decided on 28 April to start a reform process on key priorities identified
in the EU Commission’s opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU membership
application. That is a welcome step forward. It is crucial, however, for that intention
to translate into policy soon. We underline the need for progress in matters of rule
of law and the fight against corruption. The independence of the judiciary has to be
guaranteed and strengthened, one of the aims being to reform the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council. We welcome the appointment of Ms. Angelika Nussberger as
international judge at the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In order to ensure the full exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
it is important that rulings of the European Court of Human Rights are complied with
fully and in a timely manner. We regret that, so far, the Bosnian authorities have failed
to comply with the ruling in the Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case.
Ms. Hasić’s briefing underlines the need for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
population, and particularly its political elite, to deal with its past in order to come
to a durable peace. We all know that no reconciliation is possible in Bosnia and
Herzegovina without sincere recognition of the crimes committed during the war,
including the Srebrenica genocide almost 25 years ago. Revision or denial of war
crimes and the glorification of war criminals all undermine that process. War
criminals must be held accountable. Impunity is not acceptable.
Last week, Belgian young people pleaded in favour of having a voice in
matters of peace and security. The inclusion of youth in transitional justice processes
enhances the effectiveness of those processes. Ms. Hasić stressed the need to
invest in education to avoid a repetition of the past. A system created in 2002 to
overcome differences in an interim phase has now become symbolic of how Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s transition has not materialized. The “two schools under one roof
policy” is an impediment to reconciliation. It prevents the development of a shared
vision and understanding of the past, instils ethnic prejudice and reinforces mistrust.
We can only add our voice to the calls of various international bodies and urge
the relevant authorities to end discrimination and segregation in education. Schools
are supposed to promote tolerance and mutual understanding as a basis for wellfunctioning democratic societies.

20-065529/38

S/2020/379

Annex IV
Statement by Mr. Yao Shaojun, Acting Deputy Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
China thanks High Representative Inzko and Ms. Hasić for their briefings.
China has maintained a consistent position of respecting Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial integrity.
We respect the choice of its people in charting the way forward for their country
and support its various ethnic communities living in harmony and seeking
common development.
China welcomes recent positive progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
the formation of the State-level Council of Ministers at the end of last year. However,
we are concerned at the current trend of political division. Peace and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interest of the international community
and the countries of the region. In that regard, China would like to make the following
three points.
First, political commitment should be reaffirmed. Political mistrust is an
important factor in many matters in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The relevant parties
should take the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement as an
opportunity to put the interests of the country and the people first by strengthening
dialogue and cooperation, increasing mutual trust and avoiding divisive words or
actions. Political leaders should work together to unify the country, enhance Statelevel institutions and improve the efficiency and capacity of decision-makers.
Secondly, development should be vigorously promoted. The population
drain impedes Bosnia and Herzegovina from fulfilling its development potential.
As pointed out in the High Representative’s report, over 200,000 people have left
Bosnia and Herzegovina since 2013, including some 60,000 in 2019 alone. Youth
are the future of a country. All parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina should increase
investment in education, health care and infrastructure and promote economic and
social development. Only by doing so can an environment conducive to people of all
ethnic groups living in harmony be created.
Thirdly, the international community should play a positive role. The issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is complex and sensitive. China believes that the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have the ability and wisdom to solve their own problems.
The international community should listen with an open mind to the positions and
concerns of all parties and take a balanced and prudent approach. We hope that
the High Representative will work according to his mandate and contribute to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We also hope that the European
Union-led military operation there will continue to strengthen engagement with the
parties concerned and help maintain security and stability in the country.
Fighting coronavirus disease is a significant challenge for the entire
international community. China commends the relevant parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for stepping up coordination and cooperation to combat the pandemic.
We hope that they will take combating the pandemic as an opportunity to stand in
solidarity and enhance coordination and cooperation. The international community
should actively support Bosnia and Herzegovina. On our part, China has provided
masks, medical gowns and testing kits to Bosnia and Herzegovina since the outbreak
there. We have also organized a video conference among our experts to share best
practices. We will continue working with the international community to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the best of our ability and doing our part to help the
country achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
10/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex V
Statement by Mr. José Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic
At the outset, we would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for his report and
his perseverance in fulfilling his mandate and Ms. Irena Hasić for the important
information provided. We recognize that youth and women empowerment initiatives
are a unifying bridge as they ensure their active participation in the democratic and
decision-making processes in their communities.
It is timely to recognize the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina from all
sectors for their solidarity and unity in facing the current pandemic. It is a sign
that unity is strength. However, we concur with the High Representative that for
the achievements resulting from unity to be sustainable, it is crucial to respect the
country’s constitutional and legal framework. That includes strict adherence to
international and European standards on human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We welcome the news that the appointment of the new Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers at the State level was completed at the end of last year. We
take this opportunity to call on the political leadership to appoint the remaining
authorities at the federal and cantonal levels. While we acknowledge that this is
taking place during a global crisis, talks nevertheless need to be resumed to finalize
pending issues, such as the long-awaited elections in the city of Mostar.
We are concerned that in the midst of a pandemic, a State budget has not
been approved to meet the most urgent needs. In that regard, we would like to
acknowledge the international community’s readiness to support the fight against
coronavirus disease in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the same vein, we would like to
stress that, although the fight against the pandemic must be the focus of all efforts
and the current situation may affect the holding of local elections in October, the
approval of the State budget for the organization of those elections is key.
We would like to emphasize the great importance of the progress made so
far in stabilizing peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those achievements as a nation
must not be threatened in any way. In that regard, we reiterate the invitation to
political leaders to refrain from destabilizing rhetoric.
It is necessary to move towards open, transparent and constructive negotiations,
which will allow prioritization of issues such as integration, good governance,
peace and sustainable development. However, in order to move in that direction,
it is necessary to understand the importance of fully implementing the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. We regret that there continue to be setbacks in the
achievement of the 5+2 agenda to close the Office of the High Representative.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates its recognition of the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and calls on all those
responsible for the success of the peace process to offer their support to the Office
of the High Representative and European Union-led Operation Althea. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with its two entities — Republika Srpska and the Federation — needs
the political will to allow it to consolidate its path to sustainable development. This
year we commemorate two important dates: the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide in July and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Let those anniversaries be a reminder to all parties to move towards true
reconciliation.

20-0655211/38

S/2020/379

Annex VI
Statement by Mr. Sven Jürgenson, Permanent Representative of
Estonia to the United Nations
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered by the delegation of the
European Union (EU).
As we hold our discussion here in the Security Council, EU and Western
Balkan leaders are discussing how to strengthen their cooperation, especially to
overcome coronavirus disease (COVID-19). I am glad that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is receiving full attention on both continents today.
It was a pleasure to hear Ms. Irena Hasić’s realistic explanation of young
people’s needs and aspirations in the country. Estonia supports non-governmental
organizations that promote the greater participation of young people in shaping
their societies.
I would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his twenty-third
regular report to the Secretary-General (S/2020/345, annex) since assuming his
post in 2009. It is admirable that, although the size and budget of Mr. Inzko’s team
have decreased by more than 50 per cent since then, the tasks that it tackles remain
closer to 100 per cent. Estonia would like to state its full support for a robust and
effective Office of the High Representative, which is still necessary in order to fulfil
its mandated responsibilities.
Although the appointment of the Council of Ministers in December was a
very positive development, we note with much regret the paralysation of the work of
many State-level institutions, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly, by the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats party. It was also
disappointing to learn that, during the latest reporting period, the authorities of the
Republika Srpska intensified their divisive rhetoric and resorted to frequent actions
targeting the country’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and even its Constitution.
Although leaders in the country showed preparedness to cooperate, especially at the
beginning of the crisis, they should now halt regressing towards the pre-pandemic
status quo. In Mr. Inzko’s opinion, is there any possibility of that happening?
We are glad that doctors throughout the country have shown strong efforts to
cooperate with each other, including in the divided city of Mostar, as lately reported
in the media. As Bosnia and Herzegovina hopes to defeat the pandemic, the continued
pursuit by some State authorities to block decision-making at the State-level and to
restrict revenue to State institutions is very regrettable. It can hinder the ability of
institutions to appropriately function and respond to extraordinary situations, such
as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Estonia stands in strong support of the EU’s solidarity with the Western
Balkans and its mobilization of the substantial financial support package of €3.3
billion to help the region overcome the COVID-19 crisis. We commend the work
and support of all others that provide material and other assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, such as the United Nations Resident Coordinator Office and the
United Nations Development Programme. Also, the European Union-led Operation
Althea is a strong contributor to the country’s work in maintaining a safe and secure
environment. We fully support its continued executive mandate and call on all
parties to refrain from any actions or policies that could destabilize the security
situation in the country.
In July this year, we will commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide. The downplaying of that tragic historical event in any way is
unacceptable. We are concerned over reports about the hailing of war criminals and
12/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

institutions being named after them. Spreading nationalist and provocative rhetoric,
denying war crimes or glorifying convicted war criminals is not in line with the
country’s Euro-Atlantic perspective.
We hope that the municipal elections in October will be free and fair, and we
call on the authorities in the country to start with preparations in a timely manner
and to find a solution that will allow elections to take place in the city of Mostar. We
also call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to strengthen the rule of law and
to implement binding judicial decisions.
Estonia is certain that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future is connected with the
Euro-Atlantic path, in line with the legitimate aspiration of its citizens. We welcome
the recently renewed commitment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency to
fulfilling the 14 key priorities of the European Commission opinion. In order to
move forward, all political leaders of the country should deliver concrete results and
implement fundamental reforms. During this difficult time, and on the occasion of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement, we call on all levels of the
Government to work in solidarity and unity.

20-0655213/38

S/2020/379

Annex VII
Statement by Mr. Wadid Benaabou, Deputy Political Coordinator
of the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Ms. Irena Hasić, the representative of the non-governmental
organization Youth Initiative for Human Rights, for their presentations. I also welcome
the presence at this meeting of the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Serbia and the European Union. France fully aligns with the statement that
the representative of the European Union (EU) delegation will deliver.
The challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina remain significant, as the High
Representative has explained. However, I note several positive developments that
show that cooperation and unity can prevail.
First of all, I would like to welcome the response of the leaders and citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
swift reaction of the authorities at all levels and the good coordination among all
actors made it possible to keep the spread under control despite the political crisis.
The European Union has also demonstrated its solidarity by delivering assistance in
order to respond to the most urgent medical needs and to ensure economic recovery,
supplemented by bilateral aid from its member States.
Secondly, the formation of the Council of Ministers at the level of the central
State last December was a positive development that had long been awaited since
the general elections of 2018. However, we regret the decision to block the normal
functioning of the State-level institutions that was taken in mid-February following
a decision of the Constitutional Court. We call on all stakeholders to respect the
rulings of the Constitutional Court and to enable the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to function normally as soon as possible. The 2020 budget must also be
adopted in order to enable the State to function. In addition, we call for the formation
of the Federation entity Government and the holding of local elections in Mostar.
Thirdly, I wish to reaffirm France’s conviction regarding the European
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkans. The European
Union remains fully committed to this issue, as demonstrated by the organization
today of a leaders’ video-teleconference of the EU and the six Western Balkan
countries. We welcome the agreement reached last week among the three members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the implementation of the European
Commission’s recommendations regarding the rule of law and democratic functioning
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that that agreement will pave the way for the
resumption of the normal functioning of State-level institutions. Reforms in the
economic and social fields, the rule of law, democratic functioning and human rights
are more necessary than ever for the development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
for European rapprochement. I also recall the important contribution to the stability
of the country by the European Union-led military Operation Althea, mandated by
the Security Council.
Finally, France continues to strongly condemn the glorification of war crimes
and criminals, whatever their community of origin. National and international
justice has done a remarkable job in prosecuting and convicting those responsible
for atrocities committed during the conflict. It is unacceptable to challenge
judicial decisions. I am thinking in particular of the genocide in Srebrenica as
we commemorate its twenty-fifth anniversary this summer. Transitional justice
and reconciliation processes remain the only solid foundation for the future of the
country. In that regard, I fully concur with what the German Ambassador said about
the French-German reconciliation, which can be a source of inspiration.
14/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex VIII
Statement by Mr. Muhsin Syihab, Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations
Let me begin by thanking High Representative Valentin Inzko and Ms. Irena
Hasić for their important briefings.
We learned from the report (S/2020/345, annex) that there has been no
significant progress on the ground. On the contrary, we have even seen roll back
rhetoric on one substantive issue. We cannot let the memory of Srebrenica fade away
by glorifying the criminals. Such confusing and divisive rhetoric is unnecessary,
irresponsible and unacceptable. In that context, I would like to highlight three points.
The first issue is support for the State-level institutions. Political divisions
only perpetuate strife. Intensified harsh and divisive rhetoric cannot bring Bosnia
and Herzegovina together. Indonesia calls on the parties to respect the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, existing legislation and the integrity of State-level
institutions. In that regard, we would like to emphasize our view, expressed at every
meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina, that the rule of law should be respected so that
the basic structure of democracy is maintained and can be further strengthened.
We support the High Representative’s view with regard to the necessity for the
authorities at all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina to live up to their commitment to a
peaceful State. In that regard, let us think for a moment about the younger generation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who are still looking for the true meaning of peace. The
younger generation, born after the war, may wonder why the conflict, the division
and the segregation continue and are so important. Can we answer that question
for the younger generation of Bosnia and Herzegovina? While echoing Ms. Hasić’s
concern, I would like to emphasize that investing in young people is tantamount to
investing in the future, which also means investing in peace.
The second issue is the need for innovative solutions. As we are all aware,
and as also emphasized by the latest report, there has been no substantial progress
in implementing the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since it was signed in 1995.
We also share the High Representative’s concerns about political elites who
practise a policy of blocking all decision-making at the State level. That includes
the blockage of the State budget, the appointment of the Chair of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers, before finally being settled, and many other
State-level legislation processes.
Year after year, there is no significant progress on the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. The
approach needs to be changed. The system needs to be evaluated. The strategy needs
to be revised.
Having said that, we urge the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to seek innovative solutions to address the stalled progress in the country. As long
as there is no innovation, progress remains distant. It may be timely to consider
all measures for further advancing the peace process. We also invite the High
Representative to consider imposing the Bonn powers to address local parties that
seem unable, or unwilling, to cooperate.
My third and last point is responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
crisis. We highly appreciate the sincere and swift cooperation and coordination
that have been demonstrated by the political and institutional leaders in Bosnia and

20-0655215/38

S/2020/379

Herzegovina in addressing the global pandemic, especially during the early stage of
COVID-19.
We believe that this pandemic will teach us a very important lesson. It is that
political identity and divisions cannot save humanity. Solidarity is the key. We hope
that this crucial turning point will endure far after the pandemic passes and that no
accommodation will be left for selfishness, ego and hatred.
I would like to conclude by expressing Indonesia’s long-standing support for a
peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country that is strong and united
by putting the interests and voices of the people first, particularly the voice of its
younger generation.

16/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex IX
Statement by Mr. Abdou Abarry, Permanent Representative of the
Niger to the United Nations
At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his clear
and concise briefing.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, as elsewhere in the world, the unprecedented
human tragedy of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) affects individuals, families,
communities and society as a whole.
At this time of crisis, allow me to commend the cooperative and coordinated
efforts of political and institutional leaders to save lives and preserve livelihoods.
Nevertheless, the success of those efforts remains dependent on their adherence to
the country’s legal and constitutional framework, their transparency and their full
respect for international standards of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The constructive role of the international community in providing financial
and material assistance to the political and institutional leaders to address the
COVID-19 pandemic also deserves to be highlighted.
The challenge to sovereignty, territorial integrity, competencies and
institutions at the State level not only poses a serious threat to the overall political
stability, but also represents a setback for key achievements in the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
therefore the responsibility of all parties to work in accordance with the constitutional
and legal framework to ensure the functioning of all institutions and their close
cooperation in the interest of the citizens and all levels of the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The lack of progress in resolving electoral issues is also a major source of
concern. Therefore, all appropriate measures must be taken for the establishment
of the federal Government following the 2018 general elections and the resolution
of problems arising from the decision of the Constitutional Court on the electoral
system of the city of Mostar, where no elections have been held since 2008.
Furthermore, I urge the political parties to accelerate their efforts to support
female candidates, which would better reflect the composition of the population and
move Bosnia and Herzegovina in the right direction towards gender equality.
The realization of the right of refugees and internally displaced persons to
return to their homes of origin remains at the core of the objectives of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, it is
the responsibility of the authorities at all levels to create the political, economic
and social conditions conducive to the voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons, without preference for any particular group.
The European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina plays a vital
role in supporting efforts to maintain a viable and secure environment. To that end, I
urge the authorities to focus their efforts on the professionalism, accountability and
coordination of the police service in order to serve the citizens and provide them
with personal security and protection.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to see the implementation of forwardlooking reforms that support and enhance the security, stability and prosperity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the promotion of local ownership of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace.
20-0655217/38

S/2020/379

Annex X
Statement by Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to thank High Representative Mr. Valentin Inzko
and Ms. Hasić for their briefings. We listened carefully to what Mr. Inzko has just
said, and we carefully studied the written report (S/2020/345, annex). We regret to
observe again that the quality of the High Representative’s reports has not improved.
Unfortunately, we regret to note that criticizing the Bosnian Serbs for everything
that happens in Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a standard pattern of those
reports. Serbs are blamed for all the challenges now facing Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a result, the report does not give a balanced picture of the situation on the ground.
The High Representative ignores the fact that the majority of issues in Bosnia
and Herzegovina arise from the lack of consensus among the three constituent
peoples. Instead of playing the blame game, the Office of the High Representative
should encourage dialogue between the communities and provide good offices in
order to help Bosnians resolve their disputes. The time for external governance is
over. The Bosnian people deserve the right to determine their fate on their own.
We do not share the report’s assumptions on alleged stagnation and even
rollbacks in the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
including the five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative. In our view, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is calm
and stable and does not represent any threat to international peace and security.
Nevertheless, the High Representative is still finding made-up arguments in order
to preserve indefinitely the outdated international protection over this sovereign
and independent State. We call on our colleagues in the Security Council and the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council to take the necessary steps for
the early closure of the Office of the High Representative.
In his report, the High Representative refers to the need for the fulfilment of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s so-called “standing obligations” with regard to NATO
and notes that the authorities at all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina are committed
to a State that is “irreversibly on course for Euro-Atlantic integration” (S/2020/345,
annex, p.4). We have to emphasize that there is no consensus in Bosnian society
on this issue. The High Representative is not entitled in any way to promote the
European or Euro-Atlantic integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina and should not
abuse his mandate by doing so. His responsibility is to uphold the civilian aspects of
the General Framework Agreement. We must recall that decisions of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on foreign policy should be consensus-based.
We call on the High Representative to pay more attention to the numerous
pressing issues in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, among them the
pending appointment of a new Federation Government and the Constitutional Court,
the incomplete collegium of both Houses of the Federation Parliament, the lack of
progress on holding local elections in the city of Mostar, and the absence of the
constitutional equality of Serbs in the Federation cantons.
We are wondering why the High Representative almost demonizes the
activities of the Republika Srpska Government-appointed Independent International
Commission for Inquiry into Suffering of all Peoples in the Srebrenica region in
the Period 1992–1995. As we understand it, these structures have been established
due to the well-known flaws in the activities of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We have expressed our concerns on this matter more than once.
18/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Documents from the United Kingdom archives, declassified and published in
January this year, reveal important details of the events during the armed conflict in
Srebrenica. It has been confirmed, in particular, that the Bosnian Serbs were subject
to attacks from the region under the protection of United Nations Blue Helmets. We
hope that the Independent International Commissions appointed by the Republika
Srpska will help shed light on these tragic events.
We call on all international presences in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
the Office of the High Representative, the Delegation of the European Union and the
Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to align their
activities in compliance with their respective mandates and the policy approved by
the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council to promote local ownership
over international decision-making.
As one of international guarantors of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Russia will
continue to monitor to ensure that Agreement is strictly implemented. We support
the inter-Bosnian dialogue based on mutual respect. We hope that all international
partners who are genuinely interested in long-lasting stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will promote cooperation between the Bosnian parties and refrain from
biased or unilateral assessments, which would only exacerbate the situation.
We urge Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs to use collective approaches to settle
outstanding issues on the solid basis of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which
guarantees the equality of the three constituent peoples.

20-0655219/38

S/2020/379

Annex XI
Statement by Ms. Halimah DeShong, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the
United Nations
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends its gratitude to Mr. Valentin Inzko
for his briefing and his most recent report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2020/345, annex). We recognize his
enduring commitment to his mandate and to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the objectives and conditions established by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council. We also thank Ms. Irena Hasić for her informative
briefing, and welcome all representatives to this meeting.
We begin by expressing our concern over the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which has already had a crippling effect on the world. In this regard, we acknowledge
the preparedness of the political and institutional leaders to cooperate and coordinate
their response to this crisis, as stated in the High Representative’s report. We urge all
parties to refrain from any divisive rhetoric that may hamper the response and have
an adverse impact on the political environment. The novel coronavirus pandemic is
a collective action problem that requires the unity and cohesion of all parties.
As it relates to the Peace Agreement, we continue to encourage collaboration
among the parties in accordance with international law, and emphasize the need
for diplomacy. We further underscore the need for constructive dialogue among
communities within Bosnia and Herzegovina. In order to achieve long-term peace
and reconciliation among all persons of all communities, it is important that there be
inclusive national ownership over the political and peace processes. Regrettably, the
High Representative notes in his report that there has been no serious commitment
to implementing the objectives and conditions of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. We hope that the parties can break that deadlock.
Finally, we call for greater representation of women, whose role in society
can be neither dismissed nor diminished. The women and peace and security agenda
must be brought to the forefront, and to that end we emphasize the need for gender
justice in all spheres.

20/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex XII
Statement by Mr. Xolisa Mabhongo, Deputy Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations
We would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for the latest report of his Office on the political, security and
humanitarian situation in the country (S/2020/345, annex). The work of his Office
remains invaluable for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the region.
At the outset, South Africa lauds the efforts of all sides to respond to the
coronavirus disease pandemic and hopes that this will be seen as an opportunity
to realize unity of purpose even beyond its containment. With respect to measures
taken to address the pandemic, South Africa concurs with the assessment of the
Office of the High Representative that all efforts must be well devised, properly
targeted and closely coordinated in order to improve their success.
The lack of progress in the dialogue process remains an issue of concern. We
therefore call on all parties to remain seized with the objectives of the country’s
dialogue and to refrain from actions that could undermine its prospects, thus stalling
reconciliation and durable peace. The existing agreements and mechanisms remain
relevant to taking the dialogue process forward and we urge all stakeholders to
work within their parameters and in good faith in support of that objective. More
importantly, we wish to emphasize that national ownership of the peace process
resides with all Bosnia and Herzegovina stakeholders.
The ongoing disagreements between the political parties continue to negatively
impact the fulfilment of the agenda of five objectives and two conditions established
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation. In addition, provocative, divisive
and nationalistic rhetoric could undermine stability in the country and threaten the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State.
On a positive note, we welcome the appointment of the Chair of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Council of Ministers. We believe that this will assist in paving
the way for dialogue and cooperation. Nonetheless, other outstanding appointments,
including those of the Constitutional Court judges and other entities, continue to
hamper the effective functioning of the State. Accordingly, we encourage all parties
to expedite the conclusion of these important processes.
In closing, let me reiterate my delegation’s call for constructive dialogue
among all entities, as well as among the various Bosnian structures and the High
Representative. It is only through dialogue and compromise that a political settlement
can be reached that will bring peace and stability not only to Bosnia and Herzegovina
but also to the wider region.

20-0655221/38

S/2020/379

Annex XIII
Statement by Mr. Kais Kabtani, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Tunisia to the United Nations
I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his briefing and his report (S/2020/345, annex) on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Ms. Irena Hasić, Executive Director of
Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for her presentation.
I would also like to welcome the representatives of the European Union, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.
At the outset, I wish to express our support for and solidarity with authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and commend their coordinated efforts to combat the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and mitigate its effects. As
underscored in the report, the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates that acting within the
constitutional and legal framework to ensure the full functionality of all institutions
and their close coordination is in the common interest of all levels of Government
and of all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that such coordination
contributes to reconciliation among all the communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation welcomes the appointment by the end of December 2019 of
the new State-level Council of Ministers, following the 2018 elections. We note,
however, that some cantonal Governments have yet to be appointed.
My delegation supports the efforts of the Office of the High Representative, in
line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions, and
calls on all parties to make concerted efforts to implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to the agenda of five objectives and two conditions for the
closure of the Office High Representative, we encourage all parties to fulfil their
commitments with a view to ensuring Bosnia and Herzegovina’s full autonomy.
While the end of this year will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, the report of the High Representative underlines that
many issues remain unresolved. In this regard, we would like to express our concern
over the continued rhetoric of incitement and divisive statements. We call on all
political leaders to prioritize the national interest of all the citizens in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and pave the way for younger generations to build a better future based
on ethnic and cultural unity. In this context, Tunisia expresses its full support for
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge
all parties to take the necessary steps to strengthen the rule of law and to ensure the
participation of young people and women in various level of the political processes.
The month of July 2020 will mark the anniversary if the Srebrenica genocide,
and we remain deeply concerned by the continued perpetration of genocide denial
and appeal against the glorification and memorialization of war criminals.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its full support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts to stabilize the country and promote reconciliation among its
various ethnic groups, and stands ready to work with partners to support lasting
peace and security and sustainable development.

22/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex XIV
Statement by Mr. David Clay, Political Coordinator of the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations
I thank you very much, Sir, and offer my thanks, too, to both our briefers
this morning.
I would like to begin by thanking the High Representative and his team for
this thorough report (S/2020/345, annex). While we would all prefer to see local
actors taking responsibility to deliver a secure, peaceful and sustainable future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Office of the High Representative continues to play
an essential role. It has the United Kingdom’s full support, including for the use of
executive powers should the situation so require.
As the High Representative makes clear, Bosnia and Herzegovina, like nearly
every other country, is battling the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We
have been impressed with the discipline and solidarity shown by the authorities
in undertaking this immense and ongoing task, and welcome the political and
institutional leaders’ sense of unity in tackling this common problem. We stand
ready to support Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of the High Representative
in this joint challenge.
Over the past six months, we have been pleased to see that the problems
of blockages in Bosnia and Herzegovina can be overcome — first, with the longawaited agreement in December last year to form a stable Government, one that will
continue Bosnia and Herzegovina’s cooperation with NATO; and secondly, with the
groundbreaking agreement on socioeconomic reforms that will directly benefit all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s assistance.
The joint Presidency’s agreement on 28 April on a process that leads to
Bosnia and Herzegovina implementing the European Union (EU) opinions,
recommendations on human rights, democratic values and the rule of law was a
further demonstration of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina can work towards a
positive future.
All of those moves are important for advancing Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
prospects for a Euro-Atlantic future. We urge politicians to engage constructively in
this process, which will achieve far more for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
than the unconstructive threats of a political blockade that we have recently seen
in relation to foreign judges sitting on the Constitutional Court, a core Dayton
institution. It is good to see that despite those threats the Court continues to function.
Those threats merely make the ending of international supervision even harder. The
United Kingdom underlines the importance of the Court and welcomes the arrival of
the new judge, Angelika Nussberger, who will bring significant expertise.
We also urge leaders to use this moment of unity to complete the formation of
the Council of Ministers and to convene the authorities at all other levels following
the October 2018 elections.
Later this year, local elections were scheduled to take place. While we must see
what is possible given the COVID-19 situation, let us not lose sight of the shameful
fact that elections for the city of Mostar have not taken place since 2008 — as the
High Representative has highlighted today — violating citizens’ basic rights, as the
European Court of Human Rights has said. As set out in the 28 April agreements,
it is imperative that Bosnia and Herzegovina urgently take all necessary steps to
ensure that the elections are held in Mostar this year.
20-0655223/38

S/2020/379

By implementing the recommendations in the EU’s opinion, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has said that it would address all outstanding European Court of
Human Rights judgments, most notably the Sejdić-Finci ruling, and ensure that all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens can exercise their fundamental democratic
rights and participate equally in their country’s future.
Rule-of-law reform is at the heart of this agreement, too. As Judge Priebe’s
report flags, it is essential that the problems be tackled and the fight against
corruption continue. It is vital that politicians address this issue without further
delay.
I would like to congratulate the Office of the High Representative on its work
in Brčko District. Through its coordinated work with the international community,
it has promoted good governance, infrastructure developments and private-sector
growth. This is a good model for reform.
This year marks 25 years since the General Framework Agreement for Peace
was signed, bringing to an end the hostilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should
like to take this opportunity to reiterate the United Kingdom’s unwavering support
for the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is important that Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the international community find ways to appropriately mark
this anniversary and promote a safe and secure environment and a positive and
prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also, for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
it is important to find ways to revitalize and increase efforts to achieve the 5
plus 2 agenda.
This year is also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica.
We need to come together to remember the genocide and all victims of the horrific
conflicts that occurred in the Balkans in the 1990s. We must ensure that nothing like
it ever happens again. It is deeply concerning that the glorification of war criminals
continues on all sides, which makes the prospect of lasting reconciliation even
more elusive. It is unacceptable that individuals and sections of society, including
politicians, continue to deny the genocide in Srebrenica despite its qualification as
genocide by two international tribunals as well as domestic judicial bodies.
I should just like to briefly address the point raised by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation regarding United Kingdom archives. As
the Permanent Representative mentioned, the United Kingdom National Archives
recently released papers relating to Bosnia and Herzegovina dating back 25
years as part of the United Kingdom’s ongoing commitment to transparency. The
United Kingdom’s committed position that genocide was committed in Srebrenica
is unequivocal. The authoritative judgment on what happened in Srebrenica
and elsewhere; the place to look is the rulings of the international courts. The
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 had thousands of witnesses, and the transcript extends
to millions of pages.
The United Kingdom continues to support reconciliation efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Western Balkans more widely, including through our projects
and our role in the Berlin process.
In conclusion, the continued pursuit of narrow political interests by those in
power and their reluctance to compromise has cost Bosnia and Herzegovina dearly.
We hope that the recent developments can be a catalyst for a new approach.
The COVID-19 crisis is affecting us all. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s responses
are helping to mitigate the problems. Political leaders are now taking this opportunity
24/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

to move forward on reforms so that Bosnia and Herzegovina comes out of the crisis
stronger, with the support of its partners. We call on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
politicians to demonstrate their commitment to progress, to look forward and not
backwards, and to act in order to provide the positive future that their citizens so
very much deserve.

20-06552

25/38

S/2020/379

Annex XV
Statement by Mrs. Kelly Craft, Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations
It is really refreshing to hear all the comments about the youth, and it was really
great to have this conversation this morning with Valentin, just to be able to discuss,
personally, the youth and the importance of the movement and making certain that
they, too, understand their engagement and their contribution to the future of the
country. It was nice to hear the representatives of Indonesia and Germany talk about
the importance of the youth, and I think that is, in any country, vitally important.
Obviously, as Valentin and I discussed this morning, his representation for the
international community is much appreciated and has made such a huge difference
in the trajectory of the country. I personally offer him our gratitude from the
Trump Administration.
The United States of America envisions a modern, multi-ethnic, stable and
prosperous democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina — one that is responsible for its
own destiny. Valentin’s latest reports demonstrate that while there are encouraging
signs, there is still much work to do — and that is another thing that he was very
honest about this morning — whether it be to move the country forward from the
2018 general elections or prepare for the upcoming municipal elections.
Regardless of when those elections are called, institutional work can be done
right now to ensure the transparent execution of elections. We strongly support his
mandate under the Dayton Accords as the final authority on the civilian aspects of
the Peace Agreement. Further, we commend the continued work of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Operation Althea and its role in
preserving a safe and secure environment.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, much like the rest of the world, has had to take
extraordinary measures to combat and mitigate the effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Political and institutional leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
have cooperated in the response efforts — proof that the Government can function
and govern in a manner that serves the people when there is the will to do so. Efforts
to combat the pandemic and mitigate its effects must continue to be well designed
and precisely targeted, and they must fully adhere to the country’s constitutional and
legal framework.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders must take steps toward political
reconciliation, and they must also implement long-overdue reforms, including
ensuring fiscal sustainability, tackling corruption and addressing organized crime.
We encourage the swift adoption of the State-level budget for 2020, as it remains
a precondition for holding elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, elections that are
currently slated for October. Should these elections be delayed due to the pandemic,
we must not lose sight of the goal of free and fair elections that reflect the will of
the people.
The United States objects in the strongest terms to the efforts undertaken
by malign actors to exploit the political landscape in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
personal, political and financial gain. Nationalist leaders continue to deny war crimes
and glorify convicted war criminals. Senior political figures and certain segments
of society are increasingly challenging the rulings of international tribunals, which
are charged with prosecuting serious violations of international humanitarian
law. External actors continue to target Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and malevolent actors look to undermine State-level institutions.
Those attitudes and actions pose a serious and credible threat to the prospects of
lasting reconciliation in the country.
26/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

The Trump Administration is committed to assisting the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their pursuit of a more free, just and democratic society. Bosnia and
Herzegovina must continue to stay the course towards European integration and transAtlantic cooperation. We look forward to the full satisfaction of previously agreed
objectives and conditions for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
These objectives can most assuredly be achieved, and in the process the security,
the stability and the prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be greatly enhanced.

20-0655227/38

S/2020/379

Annex XVI
Statement by Mr. Dang Dinh Quy, Permanent Representative of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations
I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for his report (S/2020/345, annex)
and briefing. I welcome the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia, as well as Ms. Irena Hasić, to our meeting.
My delegation welcomes the appointment of the new State-level Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are also encouraged to see that the
country has been able to manage the extraordinary circumstances of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and bring it under relative control. Furthermore, the
recent emergency assistance from the International Monetary Fund as well as other
financial and material assistances at various levels from the international community
will, hopefully, help Bosnia and Herzegovina meet the urgent needs that arise from
the pandemic.
However, various dimensions of the country remain in difficulty. Politically,
the picture shown to us by Mr. Inzko is a gloomy one, replete with divisive rhetoric
and actions. Economically, the World Bank’s spring 2020 Western Balkans Regular
Economic Report showed that the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected
to enter a recession in 2020, with a drop of 3.2 per cent. Socially, since 2013 more
than 200,000 people, about 60,000 in 2019 alone, have left Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 14 December 25 years ago, the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina was signed. One day later, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1031 (1995), on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. People at that time must have been very eager to see a comprehensive
settlement to bring the conflict to an end and to build a new society of peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, although a new generation of people
was born, grew up, became adults and have probably begun to have children of their
own, none of the objectives and conditions to build a resilient and united society for
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been fully implemented. Unhealed pain from the past
has divided people in the country and destroyed opportunities to bring peace and
stability to the present.
We cannot afford to delay the implementation of the Peace Agreement for
another generation. My delegation therefore would like to make the following
recommendations.
First, we call on the leaders of the country as well as those of its entities and
communities to give the issue of national harmony their utmost attention. Rather
than divisive rhetoric and action, constructive dialogues must be promoted. The
three ethnic groups should work together in a reconciliatory and forward-looking
spirit to build a strong and united Government. In this process, young people must
be recognized as key partners for positive change and promoters of peace and
reconciliation.
Secondly, it is important for Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus on, among other
things, the establishment of rule of law, public administration reform, economic
development and its process of regional integration.
Thirdly, we encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully live up to
their commitments and obligations under the Peace Agreement, with due respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
well as the long-term interest of all ethnic groups in the country.

28/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex XVII
Statement by Mr. Sven Alkalaj, Permanent Representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May and to wish you and your
delegation every success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period from 16 October 2019 through 15 April
2020 (S/2020/345, annex).
First, let me address the most urgent issue. The first cases of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) in Bosnia and Herzegovina were confirmed at the beginning
of March. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities responded very swiftly. Various
urgent and necessary measures have been put in place to contain the spread of the
virus, including declaring a state of emergency and setting mandatory quarantines.
All resources at our disposal have been mobilized. Our hospitals and medical and
other relevant institutions had to adapt overnight to these new and unforeseen
circumstances. Doctors, nurses, first responders and many others are rising to
the challenge, risking their lives in fighting this ferocious and highly contagious
disease. We take this opportunity to thank all of them for their indispensable efforts
and dedication. We would also like to thank our international partners for the
valuable assistance and support that has been rendered in these difficult times for
all humankind.
In addition to its impact on our health system, the pandemic has hit our
vulnerable economy very hard. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities have introduced
some necessary measures to mitigate those negative effects. Some urgent financial
packages have been created in order to help those suffering the most. These efforts
will take time, and significant resources will be necessary to recover from the
unprecedented situation caused by the virus, which has claimed so many human
lives worldwide.
Lastly, we need the assistance of the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank and other international financial institutions to overcome the negative
economic and social effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that connection, the
role of the United Nations, including through its country team, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Health Organization, and UNICEF, will be
indispensable.
Let me now turn to some points relating to the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina prior to the COVID-19 outbreak. The new Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was appointed by the Parliamentary Assembly in December.
The Council of Ministers has continued to cooperate with the entity Governments
on issues related to European integration and on reform processes to stabilize the
economy, increase the effectiveness of public administration and attract domestic and
foreign investments in order to enable job creation. In November, the Government
adopted a national reform plan that defines the country’s future relations with the
Atlantic alliance, a document that was subsequently submitted to NATO in order to
implement the 2016 review.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are fully committed to overcoming
the remaining challenges and implementing the necessary reforms for full-fledged
integration into the European Union (EU). In that regard, we are grateful to the EU
for actively supporting my country’s European path. We urge the EU and its member
States to maintain and intensify that support. For our part, we have redoubled our
efforts in a number of relevant areas, including the implementation of the reform
20-0655229/38

S/2020/379

agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a matter of priority. We affirm our unflagging
determination to strengthen the rule of law and good governance in order to fulfil
the EU requirements for obtaining candidacy status.
Most importantly, on 28 April the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
took a decisive step towards obtaining candidacy status and beginning membership
negotiations with the European Union by adopting a plan for implementing the
European Commission’s 2019 recommendations.
The fostering of friendly and constructive cooperation among the countries
of the region on issues of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s foreign policy. The cooperation of Western Balkan States within the
framework of the Berlin process remains a key driver of their integration into the
European Union and of regional stability.
Bosnia and Herzegovina plays an active role in regional initiatives through
the South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western Balkans Fund and the
Central European Initiative, to name a few. The construction of the Sarajevo-Belgrade
highway is a good example of cooperation among three partner countries — Serbia,
Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to fulfil its
international obligations with regard to countering terrorism and violent extremism.
With the extensive support of the EU, Bosnia and Herzegovina took significant steps
to strengthen the rule of law and fight against organized crime. EU experts have
been working together with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to implement the
Action Plan on Combating Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the period 2018-2022.
The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to prosecute
individuals who fight for terrorist organizations, as well as those who facilitate the
recruitment of terrorist fighters. With regard to prosecuting war crimes in domestic
courts, we would like to reiterate that, as a complex and multinational State, Bosnia
and Herzegovina believes that fighting impunity is vital.
With regard to socioeconomic development, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
continuing to develop a critical planning, monitoring and evaluation process that is
fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that connection,
let me express our gratitude to the United Nations country team in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its outstanding contributions and tireless efforts to assist our
institutions in the implementation of a development agenda.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to one of the main concerns of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities — the issue of illegal migrants. The international
migrant crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge to the States of the region and
their economies. In the past year, my country has registered a significant increase
of refugees and migrants on its territory, most of whom crossed the border illegally.
Our institutions do not have the capacity to implement the necessary measures to
curb the migrant crisis in accordance with the highest European and international
standards.
Bearing in mind that lack of capacity and the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not a final destination for migrants, our Government is in need of
stronger international support, especially from the European Union, which is often
the migrants’ final destination. We are grateful to the European Commission for
its financial support to bolster our authorities’ migration and border-management
capabilities, but for an effective response, our institutions need much more support
from the European Union and United Nations agencies.
30/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

In these trying times, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute actively
to international peace and security by deploying its military and police personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We currently have approximately 45 people
serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has endorsed the Secretary-General’s call for an
immediate global ceasefire of all conflicts worldwide in order to silence the guns,
stop violence and raise voices for peace. At this very challenging time, there is
nothing more important than an immediate ceasefire in all corners of the globe to
reinforce diplomatic action, help create conditions for the delivery of life-saving
aid and bring hope to some of the places that are most vulnerable to the COVID-19
pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina stands ready to cooperate with United Nations
Member States and the broader United Nations family on this most critical and
pressing issue that the world is facing today.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities to continue their work to secure a better and more prosperous future
for its citizens, as well as my country’s gratitude to its international partners for
supporting us on that path.

20-06552

31/38

S/2020/379

Annex XVIII
Statement by Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Croatia to the United Nations
At the outset, allow me to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko.
I thank him for his comprehensive briefing today on his Office’s latest report
(S/2020/345, annex).
Croatia fully aligns itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union (EU), and I would like to take this opportunity to make some
remarks in my national capacity.
Croatia has consistently participated in these semi-annual Council debates on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and we welcome — even more so in these unprecedented
circumstances — this opportunity to discuss the situation in the country.
The unprecedented circumstances brought on by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) global pandemic is forcing the world of diplomacy and international
politics to find new ways of doing things — some never tested — and to adjust its
working methods in order not to lose sight of important strategic issues.
For us, the topic on the Council’s agenda today is critical. We have stressed
on many occasions the importance that Croatia attaches to the territorial integrity,
stability, functionality and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And, on many
occasions and even in the worst of times, we have demonstrated that in word
and deed.
Today, as we debate this issue in the Chamber, thanks to modern technology,
another important debate for the future of the Western Balkans is taking place via
video-teleconference — a summit of 27 EU and 6 Western Balkans leaders. Under
the helm of the Croatian presidency of the Council of the EU, the EU-Western
Balkans summit was to be held in Zagreb in May. As an in-person summit could not
be organized due to restrictions introduced to fight the coronavirus pandemic, at the
initiative of Croatian Prime Minister Andrej Plenković, EU leaders agreed that the
EU-Western Balkans Zagreb summit would be held via video-teleconference, with
the participation of all EU member States and the six Western Balkan countries.
Even in these extremely challenging times we are doing our best to support
the Western Balkans. We are not losing focus or allowing important issues to be
left unaddressed. Croatia, for its part, has provided its partners from the Western
Balkans with an extraordinary opportunity. The holding of the EU-Western Balkans
summit and the decision to open membership negotiations with Albania and North
Macedonia speak volumes of Croatian engagement with the Western Balkans.
We hope that the Zagreb summit will be a catalyst for encouraging Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s internal work on its EU agenda and related reforms.
A stable, peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina, progressing
steadily along its path to EU membership in a country where constitutional equality
among its three constituent peoples and the rights of all the citizens are guaranteed,
can play a pivotal role in the stability of the Western Balkans, Europe and the world
as a whole.
The political impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the standstill in the
formation of institutions after the October 2018 elections were finally resolved in
December when the new Council of Ministers was formed. As the biggest supporter
of the country’s path to EU membership, Croatia welcomed that step in the hopes that
it would untangle political knots and allow for much-needed reforms to be delivered.

32/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Mr. Gordan Grlić Radman, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, was the
first foreign minister to travel to Sarajevo after the confirmation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s new Council of Ministers in December. In doing so, he expressed
the support of Croatia and the European Union for the reform processes ahead.
The Council of the EU also expressed its support for those reforms at the end of
last year. In that connection, it is evident that Bosnia and Herzegovina will need
to invest enormous efforts and undertake significant political, institutional and
economic reforms.
Those complex reform processes must be homegrown and can be achieved only
through a rational and inclusive internal consensus-based process in an environment
of compromise and reconciliation. It must arise from agreement reached among
the legitimate political representatives of all three constituent peoples, as set out
in the Dayton-Paris Accords, and must be predicated on the principle of equality
among them.
Bosnia and Herzegovina today needs far less divisive and inflammatory
rhetoric and actions that trigger a spiral of distrust. Instead, it needs many more
reforms aimed at strengthening institutions and their functionality, in general, and
the rule of law and the judiciary, in particular.
Too often, policies towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the country itself
have been limited to the two extremes of centralism or divisionism. The growing
tendencies of unitary domination, on the one hand, and separatism, on the other, are
both destructive for Bosnia and Herzegovina, its integrity, functionality and, as a
result, its future.
In that regard, Croatia would like to echo the European Parliament’s resolutions
on the country’s progress in 2015, 2016 and 2017. They note that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be a successful candidate for EU membership until appropriate
institutional conditions have been established on the basis of the principles of
federalism, decentralization and legitimate representation.
In the long-term, citizens are fleeing to European countries due to political
apathy, as they cannot adequately participate in political and social processes. That
problem is exacerbated by the poor economic situation and overall lack of perspective.
People today — especially young and educated people — are voting with their feet.
The last general elections, in autumn 2018, were held without prior changes to
the provisions of the Election Law, which Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitutional
Court declared unconstitutional. For the third time, the flawed Election Law allowed
for majority constituent peoples to both elect their own candidate and to impose on
the Croats a candidate of their choice to the country’s collective Head of State, the
three-member Presidency.
The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina confirmed that legitimate
and proportional representation of the three constituent peoples at all levels of
Government is the basic principle enshrined in the country’s Constitution, thus
tasking the State Parliament to harmonize the Election Law with the Constitution.
That was in 2016.
It is therefore of key importance to embark urgently, without further delay,
on the reform of the election law, pursuant to the decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Ljubić case and on the city of Mostar. Such
a reform is needed in order to implement the decisions of the Constitutional Court,
strengthen the rule of law and prevent future electoral engineering. That should
enable the full implementation of the principle of equality of the three constituent

20-06552

33/38

S/2020/379

peoples — Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs — and their right to legitimate representation,
which remains a key element of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s internal political stability.
This is becoming an even more pressing issue with local elections taking
place in the autumn, and it remains the basic precondition for accelerating progress
towards a fully functional country focused on its future rather than its past.
Alongside these structural issues, Bosnia and Herzegovina also faces new
challenges. The migration wave along the Western Balkan route and in the territory
of Bosnia and Herzegovina increased significantly in 2019, and the EU’s longest
external land border is under significant pressure from illegal migration. On top
of that, the COVID-19 pandemic represents an additional burden on the country’s
already scarce resources and limited capacities as it increases pressure on local
communities and institutions and heightens political frictions and instabilities.
In the meanwhile, the Republic of Croatia has been providing ongoing
technical, expert and financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Recently, the
Croatian Government took two decisive measures to support Bosnia and Herzegovina
in fighting COVID-19 and mitigating its consequences. In these challenging times
for my country, as it is stricken with the pandemic and a devastating earthquake that
caused severe damage to its capital, Zagreb, Croatia is contributing more than €5
million to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s health-care system and is sending the country
protective equipment to help prevent the spread of the virus.
Let me conclude by stressing that Croatia has always been ready to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains its biggest supporter. We support it and help
it on its path to EU integration, and help it fulfil all the requirements in that regard.
Reforms usually breed adversaries since they tackle narrow, specific interests.
Fighting for a better past is useless and irrational. The one thing worth fighting for
is a better future for all and the broader common good. We encourage our friend and
neighbour to find the internal strength and wisdom to proceed, without delay, with a
comprehensive set of reforms as a path towards a better tomorrow.

34/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex XIX
Statement by Mr. Milan Milanović, Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Serbia to the United Nations
I thank the High Representative for his briefing and the members of the
Security Council and others for their statements.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina takes place at a very challenging time as the international community
is making enormous efforts to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
This difficult time provides an opportunity for us to demonstrate that by acting
together, in solidarity and with cooperation, we can overcome the difficulties the
world is facing at present. Before I proceed with my statement, however, I would first
like to express my condolences and deep regret to the families that have lost their
loved ones to this dangerous virus.
Our common fight against the pandemic has confirmed the importance of
global and regional cooperation and of addressing the challenges that threaten
development and stability, not only of our region, but also of the entire world.
At these difficult times, we have witnessed remarkable friendship and solidarity
between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and their citizens. In that context, let
me mention the “green corridor” at the border crossing at Sremska Rača, opened in
line with a decision of the Central European Free Trade Agreement Joint Committee
to set up a faster system for the flow of goods among the countries of the region,
including in particular humanitarian products.
Serbia has made every effort to send necessary assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including medicine and protection equipment. Let me point out once
again that my country intends to continue to provide necessary assistance and to
express its solidarity with Bosnia and Herzegovina and other countries in the region.
Serbia continues to be firmly committed to promoting good-neighbourly relations,
with the ultimate goal of overcoming the negative legacy of the past and of building
a shared future based on the principles of mutual respect. By its constructive and
active engagement within the regional framework and through regional initiatives
and mechanisms, it is striving to make a positive contribution towards achieving
common interests. In this way, my country has proven that sharing common values
leads to the achievement of shared goals, particularly those that bring us closer to
European Union membership. Serbia therefore strongly supports each and every step
made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in that direction.
Serbia has invested much effort in stabilizing the situation in the region
and will continue to do so in future. In that regard, respect for the principles of
territorial integrity and sovereignty, which form the basis of the international order,
is of paramount importance. Serbia’s position with regard to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is well known, often reiterated and
absolutely indisputable. Serbia supports Bosnia and Herzegovina as one State with
two entities — Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina —
just as it supports all the decisions that the State makes in accordance with the
competencies and agreements of its three constituent peoples: the Serbs, the Croats
and the Bosniaks. Serbia will continue to develop good and active cooperation with
both the central and entity authorities. We welcome the formation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s new institutions at the end of 2019 and the start of the work of the new
Council of Ministers headed by Mr. Zoran Tegeltija.
As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia wishes to point out that,
25 years after its signing, it is important to reaffirm the validity of the Agreement,
which put an end to a civil war and provided the basis for stability in both Bosnia and
20-06552

35/38

S/2020/379

Herzegovina and the region as a whole. Accordingly, I would like to recall that the
mechanism for a possible amendment of the Dayton Agreement is well known and
implies consent by the two entities and the three constituent peoples. Insistence on
or imposition of a solution either from within or outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is unacceptable. We are convinced that a functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina is
just as viable without changing the fundamental principles of the Constitution of
the country, if attention is focused on a package of reforms needed to proceed with
European integration that is backed by the consensus that already exists in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Serbia unequivocally supports active dialogue to solve all outstanding issues
within Bosnia and Herzegovina. It believes that all key decisions relevant for the
country’s future are to be taken following such dialogue and pursuant to agreements
reached between the entities and among the three constituent peoples. We call on
all actors to demonstrate the required level of responsibility and to refrain from
inflammatory rhetoric, mutual accusations and unilateral acts that are contrary to
the letter and spirit of the Dayton Agreement. The Agreement came as a compromise
and reflects a delicate balance, achieved the hard way, between opposing conceptions
of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Subsequent attempts to favour any of
the models proffered 25 years ago are not at all conducive to full and lasting stability
in the country.
We also call on all actors involved in political processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as on the representatives of the international community, to
demonstrate greater responsibility and forgo the rhetoric aimed at disqualifying
other political actors, especially those elected legitimately in democratic elections.
We believe that dialogue within the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
only way forward in order to raise the level of trust and confidence and achieve a
compromise solution for the future development of the country. As in the past, Serbia
will continue to strive to make a maximally constructive contribution in that regard.
Strengthening regional cooperation by engaging in numerous activities
and taking responsible positions in order to fulfil the justifiable expectations of
all citizens continues to be the lasting commitment of my country. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is one of Serbia’s key regional partners. We welcome the economic
progress being achieved in the region, which brings social development and wellbeing to all our citizens. As we did in the past, we shall continue to work with utmost
dedication towards promoting regional cooperation.
Let me point out once again that Serbia is firmly committed to peace, stability
and reconciliation. As I said at the beginning of my statement, the solidarity that is
our reality in this time of the COVID-19 crisis should extend beyond the crisis. We
believe that the policy of dialogue, good-neighbourliness and cooperation is second
to none. Sadly, 25 long years after the end of the conflict, the devastation of the war
has not been entirely overcome, as those who perished in it cannot be brought back to
life. What we can and should to do to restore confidence in our future, however, is to
condemn all crimes and bring their perpetrators to justice, while paying our respects
to and empathizing with all victims of the conflict, irrespective of their ethnicity or
religion. Only in that way shall we make progress on the road towards economic and
political stability, lasting reconciliation and shared prosperity.

36/38

20-06552

S/2020/379

Annex XX
Statement by Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 27 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, and the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, which is a member of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.
Let me first join others in thanking High Representative Valentin Inzko and
reiterate the EU’s continued support for his mission. I also thank Ms. Irena Hasić,
Executive Director of Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for her briefing.
Like the rest of Europe, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been severely affected
by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In these difficult times,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been able to count on EU solidarity in practical
terms, including through the Union’s immediate response — in the amount of €7
million — to the most urgent medical needs, through €73.5 million in mid- and longterm support for economic recovery and €250 million to support macrofinancialassistance prospects, as well as through unprecedented access to EU civil-protection
and health mechanisms and consular cooperation around the world. As we mourn all
the victims, we also reflect on this concrete demonstration of the shared interests
and common challenges that exist between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the EU.
Extraordinary measures taken to protect citizens and overcome the current
COVID-19 crisis should be proportionate and temporary in nature and subject to
regular scrutiny. They should also respect the principles of the rule of law, democracy
and fundamental rights.
In December 2019, the Council of the European Union reiterated its unequivocal
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU perspective as a single, united and
sovereign country and welcomed the appointment of the Chair of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The EU urged executive and legislative
bodies at all levels of Government to start addressing the key priorities identified
in the European Commission opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for
membership of the European Union, in line with the legitimate aspirations of the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance towards union with Europe.
We acknowledge that, in the current emergency situation, authorities in the
country have stepped up their efforts to cooperate with each other, and we hope
that this cooperation will continue once the present pandemic has been brought
under control. We call on all political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to enable
the State-level institutions to resume their work, particularly with regard to the
implementation of the Commission opinion, following the recent decision by the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today more than ever, we need counterparts
with whom to engage concretely on the difficult reforms that are needed to
advance towards EU membership. Beyond words, we now need tangible proof that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is willing to do what it takes to become a member of the
European Union.
We also reiterate our call on all political leaders to refrain from nationalist,
divisive or provocative rhetoric. They should instead take concrete steps to promote
an environment conducive to reconciliation in order to overcome the legacies of the
war. Revisionism, in particular the minimization or denial of the Srebrenica genocide,
especially this year, as we commemorate its twenty-fifth anniversary, as well as the
20-06552

37/38

S/2020/379

glorification of war criminals, contradicts the values of the European Union and
is incompatible with the prospect of integration into the EU. The European project
was built on reconciliation; Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutions and leaders must
therefore honour their commitment to sustainable reconciliation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been clear about its willingness to become a
member of the European Union. The publication of the Commission opinion last
May, with its key priorities covering the Copenhagen political criteria, demonstrates
our strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina, provided it addresses the scope
of reforms with determination.
The European Union strongly underlines the need for the country’s authorities
to work towards strengthening the rule of law, in particular the independence and
impartiality of the judiciary, fighting corruption and organized crime, countering
radicalization and tackling migration challenges while preserving access to asylum,
guaranteeing the independence of the media and the safety of journalists, promoting
youth employment and education and gender equality, and ensuring the full and
effective implementation of socioeconomic reforms.
The European Union also reiterates that election-related issues, including
provisions for holding local elections in Mostar and for the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, should be addressed as a matter of urgency, taking into account the
situation in the country and in line with European standards and decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union underlines that
no legislative or political steps should be taken that would make the implementation
of the European Court for Human Rights ruling in the Sejdić-Finci case, as well as
related rulings, more challenging.
Lastly, with regard to the political and security situation on the ground and
the importance of maintaining a safe and secure environment, the European Union
reiterates its firm support for the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and for the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.

38/38

20-06552
