UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FIFTEENTH YEAR

892

nd MEETING: 24 AU~UST 1960
~me SEANCE: 24 AOUT 1960

QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/892). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members to the United Nations:
Telegram dated 16 August 1960 from the President of the Republic
of Cyprus addressed to the Secretary-General (S/4435). . . . . .

1

Tribute to Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge, representative of the United
States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/892). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption de I' ordre du jour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission de nouveauxMembresa l'Organisation des Nations Unies:
T~l~gramme, en date du 16 aoiit 1960, adress~ au Secr~taire g~n~ral par le Pr~sident de la R~publique de Chypre (S/4435) . . . .

1

Hommage a. M. Henry Cabot Lodge, repr~sentant des Etats-Unis
d'Am~rique.
..
..
..

17

( 24 p. )

S/PV.892

EIGHT HUNDRED AND NINETY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York, on Wednesday, 24 August 1960, at 10.30 a.m.
HUIT CENT QUATRE-VINGT-DOUZIEME SEANCE
Tenue New York, le mercredi 24 aoUt 1960, 10 h 30.

a

a

President: Mr. Armand BERARD (France).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

President: M. Armand BERARD (France).
Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan,Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis d'Am€lrique, France, Italie, Pologne,Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie, Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Provisional agenda (SI Agenda/892)

Ordre du jour provisoire (SI Agenda/892)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de I 'ordre du jour.

2. Admission

2. Admission de nouveaux Membres A1'Organisation
des Nations Unies:
Telegramme, en date du 16 aoilt 1960, adresse
au Secretaire general par le President de la Republique de Chypre (S/4435).

of new Members to the United
Nations:
Telegram dated 16 August 1960 from the President of the Republic of Cyprus addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/4435).
Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

4.'ordre du jour est adoptee

Ad"mission of new Members to the
United Nations

Admission de nouveaux Membres
Cl l'Organisation des Nations Unies

Telegram dated 16 August 1960 from the President of the
Republic of Cyp,us addressed to the Secretary-General

Toelegramme; en date du 16 aout 1960, adresse au Secretaire
general par le President de la Republique de Chypre

(S/4435)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): At the
request of the United Kingdom representative, before
I call on him to speak I suggest that the Council examine this application for membership directly, without
referring it to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members, in accordance with rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
2. Mr. BEELEY (United Kingdom): The people of
Cyprus have close connex:ions with· ooth Greece and
Turkey. The Greek and Turkish Governments played
in important part in the negotiations which have led
to the independence of the Republic of Cyprus. I am
sure the Council would consider it appropriate, and it
Would certainly give great pleasure to the United Kingdom delegation, if the representatives of Greece and
Turkey were invited to the table to participate in the
discussion of this item. I suggest, Mr. President, that
they should be so invited.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
Council has heard the United Kingdom representative's
suggestion. If there are no objections, I shall invite
the representatives of Greece and Turkey to take seats
at the CouncU table.
It was so decided.

(5/4435)
1. Le PRESIDENT: A la requete du representant du
Royaume-Uni, avant de 1uidonnerlaparole, jesuggtlre
que le Conseil examine directement cette demande
d'admission sans la renvoyer au Comite d'admission
de nouveaux Membres, en application de 1'article 59
de son rtlg1ement interieur provisoire.
n-en est sinsi decide.
2. M. BEELEY (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de l'anglais):

La population de Chypre a des liens trtls etroits tant
avec la Grtlce qu 'avec la Turquie. Le Gouvernement
grec et le Gouvernement turc ont joue un grand ra1e
dans 1es negociations qui ont abouti A l'independance
de la Republique de Chypre. Le Conseil jugera certainement Apropos d'inviter le representant de la
Gr~ce et celui de la Turquie A participer Ala discussion de ce point de notre ordre dUjour, et la delegation
britannique en sera trtls heureuse. Je propose, Monsieur le President, de leur adresser cette invitation.
3. Le PRESIDENT: LeConseilaentendulasuggestion
formulee par le representant du Royaume-Uni. Sauf
objection du Conseil, je me propose d'inviter AIa table
du Conseil 1es representants de la Gr~ce et de la
Turquie.
n en est ainsi decicM.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. EconomouGouras (Greece) and Mr. Esin (Turkey) took places
at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Economou-Gouras
(Grece) et M. Esin (Turquie) prennent place ala table
du Conseil.

4. Mr. BEELEY (United Kingdom): There are few
countries in the world with a longer historical record

4. M. BEELEY (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de 1'anglais):
Peu de pays au monde ont une histoire aussi longue
1

que 1tile de Chypre. On y trouve les restes de civilisations comparables, h toutes les periodes, h celles
de la Mediterranee orientale et qui s 'etendent sur plus
de 5.000 ans sans interruption. Colonisee par les
Grecs et les Pheniciens, conquise successivement par
1'Egypte, par la Perse et par Alexandre le Grand,
integree h 1'Empire romain puis h 1'Empire byzantin,
convertie au christianisme d~s le ler si~cle de notre
~re, defendue contre 1'Islam, au Moyen Age, tout
d'abord par la dynastie fran9aise des Lusignan, puis
par la Republique de Venise, conquise au XVI~me
si~cle par l'Empire ottoman et cedee, 300 ans plus
tard, h 1'administration britannique, Chypre a acquis,
sous le poids de ces influences diverses, une personnalite unique'. Cette personnalite a finalement trouve
sa 'pleine expression politique quand Chypre est devenue independante, le 16 de ce mois.
5. It is fitting that a country which has been influenced
5. n sied qu'un pays qui a subi 1'influence de tant de
by, and in its turn has influenced, so many cultures
cultures et les a influencees h son tour, et qui a joue
and which has played an honourable part in so many
si souvent dans 1'histoire de l'humanite un role qui lui
phases of human history, should now take its future
fait honneur, devienne maintenant le mal't.re de ses
into its own hands and should seek, through memberdestinees et cherche, en devenant Membre de notre
ship of this Organization, to play an active part in the
Organisation, h prendre une part active aux affaires
affairs of the world community.
de la collectivite mondiale.
6. Les relations de Chypre avec mon pays ont ete
6. The connexion of Cyprus with my country, despite
g€meralement bonnes, malgre des periodes troublees.
periods of trouble, has been in the main a happy one.
I have myself had the pleasure of spending some time
J'ai moi-mame eu le plaisir de passer quelque temps
h Chypre et, comme tous ceux de mes compatriotes qui
on the island of Cyprus, and,- like others from my
country who have done the same, I can speak not only ont fait de meme, je peux temoigner non seulement
de sa grande beaute et du charme de la vie qu'on y
of its great visual beauty and the charm of its lUd,
but also of the deep satisfaction which the British m~ne, mais aussi de ia profonde satisfaction que les
personnel in the Administration derived from their cofonctionnaires britanniques ont retiree de leur collaoperation with the Cypriot people. This co-operation boration avec le peuple chypriote. Cette cooperation
has brought about remarkable economic and social
s'est traduite, au cours des 82 derni~res annees, par
changes during the past eighty-two years. The popuun remarquable progr~s economique et social. La
lation, no more than 186,000 in 1881, had grown to. population, qui n'etait en 1881 que de 186.000 habi549,000 by the end of 1958. In 1958 there were sixty
tants, avait atteint le chiffre de 549.000 h la fin de
secondary schools, with a roll of over 25,000 pupils,
1958. En 1958, il y avait h Chypre 60 ecoles seconas compared with one such school in 1878. T1lese
daires, frequentees par plus de 25.000 el~ves, contre
educational facilities have been supplemented by the
une seule en 1878. Les services scolaires ont eu pour
admission of large numbers of Cypriot students to, complement 1'admission d'un grand nombre d'etudiants .
universities outside the island-169 Cypriot students
chypriotes dans des universites exterieures h 1tile:
graduated from United Kingdom universities alone in
169 etudiants chypriotes ont re9u leur diplome au cours
the academic year 1958-1959. It was therefore possible
de 1'annee scolaire 1958-1959 dans les seules univerbefore independence for Cypriot officials to take over
sites du Royaume-Uni. n a done ete possible, avant
responsibility for all but a few posts in the public
meme 1'independance, de confier h des fonctionnaires
service, and for others to be designated to fill the
chypriotes la responsabilite de presque tous les postes
remaining posts on the attainment of independence.
administratifs et d'en designer d'autres pour remplir
le reste de ces postes au moment de l'accession h
1'independance.
7. Chypre peut done, au seuil de sa vie independante,
7. Cyprus will therefore face her independent life
se fier h la competence de son propre peuple pour
confident in the ability of its own people to maintain
assurer le fonctionnement de l'appaI'eil administratif
the administrative apparatus of a modern state.
d'un Etat moderne.
8. Je n'ai pas besoin de rappeler au Conseil qu'un
8. I need not remind .the Council that the consticonflit a complique 1'evolution constitutionnelle de
tutional d~velopment of Cyprus has been complicated
by the conflicting aspirations of the two principal com- . Chypre: le conflit qui opposait les aspirations des
deux communautes les plus importa,ntes, la majorite
munities, the Greek-Cypriot majority andthe Turkishchypriote grecque et la minorite chypriote turque.
Cypriot minority. My colleagues will remember the
Mes col1~gues n'auront pas oublie les debats animes
animated debates which took place on this subject in
qui se sont deroules h ce sUjet hI 'Assemblee g€methe General Assembly. The last of these discussions,
rale. La derni~re de ces discussions, qui a eu lieu
at the thirteenth session in 1958, concluded with the
en 1958, h la treizi~me session, s'est conclue par la
unanimous adoption of resolution 1287 (xm) expressresolution 1287 (xm) oh l'Assemblee unanime expriing the Assembly's confidence that continued efforts
mait la confiance que les parties poursuivraientleurs
would be made by the parties to reach a peaceful,
efforts en vue de parvenir h une solution pacifique,
democratic and just solution in accordance with the
democratique et juste, conformement h la Charte des
Charter of the United Nations.
Nations Unies.
than the island of Cyprus. The remains of civilizations,
comparable in 0;·':1ry period with those of the eastern
Mediterranean ) ,. 6ion as a whole, stretch back continuously for five thousand years. Colonized by the
Greeks and the Phoenicians; conquered by Egypt, by
Persia, by Alexander the Great; absorbed into the
Roman and later the Byzantine Empire; converted in
the first century A.D. to Christianity; defended against
Islam in the Middle Ages first by the French dynasty of
Lusignan and subsequently by the city-state of Venice;
conquered by the Ottoman Empire in the sixteenth
century and transferred to British administration
300 years later, the island has developed, under the
pressure of these diverse influences, a unique identity.
This identity attained its full political expression when
Cyprus became independent on the 16th of this month.

2

9. This confidence was not misplaced. On 11 February
1959, the Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey
reached agreement on the main issues whichhadhitherto divided their two peoples and the two related
communities in Cyprus. This was a notable act of
statesmanship. It removed the obstacle to progress,
and only eight days later the following statement was
signed in London:

9. Cette confiance etait bien placee. Le 11 fevrier
1959, le Premier Ministre de Gr~ce et celui de Turquie
se sont mis d'accord sur les principales questions qui
avaient jusque l~ divise leurs deux peuples etles deux
communautes chypriotes correspondantes. C 'etait l~
un remarquable exploit politique; gdce ~ cet accord,
rien ne s 'opposait plus au progr~s des negociations,
et, huit jours plus tard, la declaration suivante etait
signee ~ Londres:

"The. Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Greece and the Prime Minister
of the Turkish Republic,

"Le Premier Ministre duRoyaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, le Premier Ministre
du Royaume-Uni de Gr~ce et le Premier Ministre
de la Republique turque,

"Taking note of the Declaration by the Representative of the Greek-Cypriot Community and the
Representative of the Turkish-Cypriot Community that they accept the documents annexed to this
Memorandum as the agreed foundation for the final
settlement of the problem of Cyprus,

"Prenant acte de la declaration du representant
de la communaute chypriote-grecque et du representant de la communaute chypriote-turque, par
laquelle ils acceptent comme base du r~glement
final du probl~me de Chypre les documents annexes
au present memorandum,

"Hereby adopt, on behalf of their respective Governments, the documents annexed to this Memorandum and listed below, as the agreeed foundation for
the final settlement of the problem of Cyprus."

"Adoptent par les presentes, au nom de leurs
gouvernements respectifs, les documents annl:'xes il
ce memorandum, dont la liste est donnee ci-dessous,
comme base du r~glement final du probHmle de
Chypre."

10. I think this Council will wish me to describe
briefly the principal features of the final settlement
which has now been concluded on this agreed foundation.

10. Le Conseilest desireux, je suppose, que je lui
expose bri~vement les principaux points de 1'accord
final maintenant conclu sur cette base.

11. This settlement is embodied in a series of documents which were signed in Nicosia on Independence
Day. The first is a treaty concerning the establishment
of the Republic of Cyprus. This provides that the territory of the Republic shall comprise the island of
Cyprus, together with the islands lying off its coast,
with the exception of two enclaves on the southern
shore of the island which will remain under the sovereignty of the United Kingdom as base areas. Paragraph 1 of this treaty reads as follows:

11. Cet accord se compose d'une serie de documents
signes il Nicosie le jour de 1'independance. Le premier
d'entre eux est un traite relatif ~ l'institution de la
Republique de Chypre. n dispose que le territoire de
la Republique se composera de l'ne de Chypre et des
nes situees au large de ses cotes, ~ l'exception de
deux enclaves, situees sur la cote sud de 1'ne, sur
lesquelles le Royaume-Uni maintiendra sa pleine
souverainete pour les utiliser comme bases militaires.
Le paragraphe 1 de l'article 8 de ce traite est ainsi
conQu:

"All international obligations and responsibilities
of the Government of the United Kingdom shall
henceforth, so far as they may be held to have application to the Republic of Cyprus, be assumed by
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus."

"Toutes les obligations et les responsabilites du
Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni sur le plan international, dans la mesure Oll elles peuvent etre considerees comme relatives ilIa Republique de Chypre,
seront dorenavant assumees par le Gouvernement
de la Republique de Chypre."

12. The parties to this treaty are the United Kingdom,
the Kingdom of. Greece, the Republic of Turkey and the
Republic of Cyprus. There is also a treaty of guarantee
concluded between the same four p:n·ties. Under this
instrument the Republic of Cyprus undertakes to ensure
the maintenance of its indep~ndence,territorial integrity and security, as well as' respect for its Constitution. Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, for
their part, take note of the undertakings given by the
Republic of Cyprus and guarantee its independence,
territorial integrity and security, as well as the state
of affairs established by the basic articles of its Constitution. These basic articles, which are listed in an
annex to the Constitution, are not subject to amendment, whether by way of variation, addition or repeal.~
Their principal purpose is to ensure that the rights
and interests of the two major communities in the island shall be fully respected and kept in balance. The
Constitution also provides guarantees for the protec-

12. Le Royaume-Uni, le Royaume de Gr~ce, la Republique de Turquie et la Republique de Chypre sont
parties ~ ce traite. Elles ont egalement conclu ensemble un traite de garantie. La Republique de Chypre
s'engage, par cet instrument, il assurer le maintien
de son independance, de son integrite territoriale et
de sa securite, ainsi que le respect de sa Constitution.
La Gr~ce, la Turquie et le Royaume-Uni, de leur
cote, prennent acte des engagements de la Republique
de Chypre et garantissent son independance, son integrite territoriale et sa securite, ainsi que le maintien
de 1'etat de choses etabli par les articles fondamentaux
de sa Constitution. Ces articles fondamentaux, qui
figurent en annexe ilIa Constitution, ne sont pas sujets
~ amendement, que ce soit par modification, par
addition ou par abrogation. Leur objet essentiel est
d'assurer que les droits et les interets des deux
principales communautes de 1'ile soient pleinement
respectes et maintenus dans un juste equilibre. La
3

tion of fundamental human rights and for the interests
of the smaller religious groups.

Constitution garantit egalement la protection des droits
fondamentaux de 1'homme et des interijts des groupes
religieux minoritaires.

13. The Council will be aware that, in accordance
with the relevant articles of the Constitution, Archbishop Makarios was elected as the first President
of the Republic and Dr. Kutchuk as its first VicePresident. Elections have also been held for the House
of Representatives and for the two communal chambers
provided for in the Constitution. There is thus in full
operation in Cyprus a democratic system of government and the necesssary machinery for safeguarding
human rights and the interests of all sections of the
population.

13. Le Conseil n'est pas sans savoir que, conformll-o
ment aux ~trticles pertinents de la Constitution, Mgr
Makarios a ete elu president de la Republique et
M. Kutchuk vice-president. La population a egalement
elu la Chambre des representants etles deux chambres
communall~s prevues dans la Constitution. Un regime
democrati.que fonctionne donc normalement ~ Chypre,
ainsi que ies organes necessaires ~ la sauvegarde des
droits de 1'homme ~t des· interets de tous les secteurs
de la population.

14. In addition to the two quadripartite treaties there

14. Outre les deux trait€ls quadripartites que je viens
de citer, la Republique de Chypre a signe avec la
Gr~ce et la Turquie un traite d'alliance en vertu
duquel les parties s'engagent ~ repousser toute
attaque ou agression, directe ou indirecte, dirigee
contre 1'independance ou 1'integrite territoriale de la
Republique de Chypre et decident, pour atteindre ee
but, d'etablir sur le territoire de la Republique un
quartier general tripartite.

is a treaty of alliance between the Republic of Cyprus,
Greece and Turkey, under which the partiel:, undertake
to resist any attack or aggression, direct or indirect,
against the independence or the territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus, and as a means of achieving
this object they agree to establish a tripartite headquarters on the territory of the Republic.
15. The other documents include an exchange of notes
under which the Government of the United Kingdom
undertakes to make financial grants to Cyprus amounting to upwards of £ 14 million during the next five
years. The' United Kingdom will therefore, in the future
as in the past, make a substantial contribution to the
economic development of Cyprus. The exchange of
notes also provides for the continuation of financial
aid after 1965.

15. Parmi les autres documents,

on peut eiter
l'eehange de notes par lequelleGouvernementbritannique s 'engage ~ accorder ~ Chypre, au cours des
cinq annees ~ venir, des subventions financi~res d'au
moins 14 millions de livres. Le Royaume-Uni contribuera donc substantiellement dans I 'avenir, comme il
1'a fait dans le passe, au developpement economique
de Chypre. L'echange de notes prevoit egalement que
l'aide financi~re continuera apr~s 19_65.•
16. Chypre a dej~ eu l'occasion d'apprecierlavaleur
de 1'assistance technique que peuvent fournir 1'Organisation des Nations Unies et leE> institutions specialisees. Je suis heureux que lIon ait dej~ projete de
remorcer cette assistance dans 1'avenir, et je sais que
le Gouvernement chypriote s'apprete avec plaisir ~
accueillir le mois prochain une mission d'etude eeonomique des Nations Unies.

16. Cyprus has already had good reason to know of

the valuable technical assistance which the United
Nations and the specialized agencies can render. I am
glad to know that there are already plans for augmenting this assistance in the future and I know that the
Government of Cyprus looks forward to welcoming a
United Nations economic survey mission next month.

17. A la lumi~re de 1'expose que je viens de faire,

17. In the light of those explanations, I will now ask
the Security Council to recommend to the General
Assembly the admission to United Nations membership
of yet another in the long line of former British dependencies which have acquired their independence.
The draft resolution to this effect has been submitted
to the Council by the delegations of Ceylon and of the
United Kingdom. It gives me great pleasure to be associated in this way with the representativeofCeylon,
whose sponsorship symbolizes the interest of the
whole Commonwealth in the achievement of independent
nationhood by a former British dependency.

j'ai l'honneur de demander au Conseil de securite de
recommander ~ 1'Assemblee generale d'admettre
comme Membre de I 'Organisation des Nations Unies
un pays de plus qui vient s'ajouter ~ la longue liste
des anciennes dependances britanniques maintenant
arrivees ~ 1'independance. Ceylan et le RoyaumeUni ont depose un projet de resolution ~ cet effete
C'est pour moi un grand plaisir d'etre ainsi assoei(~
au representant de Ceylan, qui, en participant ~ la
rMaction du projet, a temoigne 1'interet que le
Commonwealth tout entier porte ~ 1'accession ~ 1'ind~
pendance d'une ancienne dependance britannique.

18. I have referred already to the difficulties which
were encountered in bringing about an agreement
satisfactory to all the parties concerned in this political evolution. That these difficulties have been overcome is due in large measure to the statesmanship
of the political leaders in Cyprus itself, and also in
Greece and Turkey, all of whom, like the Government
of the United Kingdom, were ready to make sacrifices
in order to arrive at a mutually acceptable settlement.
The course of the negotiations has been an encouraging
example of the way in which apparently intractable
international differences can be settled by patient
discussion. I am confident that the continuing interest

18. J'ai dej~ mentionne'les difficultes qu'il y a eues
~ elaborer un accord qui satisfasse toutes les parties

en cause dans cette evolution politique. Si ces difficultes ont pu etre surmontees, c 'est en grande partie
gdce aux qualites d'homme d'Etat dontontfaitpreuve
les chefs politiques de Chypre elle-meme, ainsi que
ceux de la Gr~ce et de la Turquie; tous, comme le
Gouvernement britannique lUi-meme, etaient prets ~
faire des sacrifices pour atteindre ~ un r~glement
capable d'avoir I 'agrement de tous. Le deroulement
des negociations a 6t6 un exemple encourageant de la
mani~re dont des discussions patientes peuvent dgler
des diff6rends internationaux apparemment insolubles.
4

Je suis bien persuad€l que l'interet que porterontsans
cesse li. l'independance et li. la prosperite de Chypre
les trois Etats qui s'en sont porte garants sera une
nouvelle occasion, pour la Gr~ce, la Turquie et le
Royaume-Uni, de manifester leur amitie reciproque
et leur sinc~re esprit de cooperation.
19. Je recommande au Conseil de securite d'adopter
le projet de resolution dont il est saisi [S/4458]. Le
Gouvernement et le peuple de Chypre sont capables mon gouvernement a la plus enti~re confiance en eux
~ cet egard - de s'acquitter des responsabilitel'l d'un
Etat independant, et nous leur adressons tous nos
vooux au moment ou ils pen~trent dans la communaute
des nations. Je suis sur que le Conseilles accueillera
unanimement et sans reserve.
20. Sir ·Claude' COREA (Ceylan) [traduitdel'anglais]:
C'est pour ma del€lgation et pour mon gouvernement
un honneur et un plaisir li.la fois que de s'associer au
Royaume-Uni pour deposer le projet de resolutionaux
termes duquelle Conseil recommanderait li.1'Assemblee generale d'admettre la Republique de Chypre
comme Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

of the three guarantors in the independence and prosperity of Cyprus will provide an additional means of
expression for the mutual friendship and loyal cooperation of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom.

19. I commend the draft resolution [S/4458] to the
Security Council. My Government has the fullest confidence in the capacity of the Government and people
of Cyprus to discharge the responsibilities of an indep,mdent State, and we wish them well as they enter
the society of nations. I am sure they will be unreservedly and unanimously welcomed by this Council.

20. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): It is a privilege and
a pleasure for my delegation and for my Government
to be associated with the United Kingdom in sponsoring
the draft resolution requesting this Council to recommend to the General Assembly the admission of the
Republic of Cyprus as a member of the United Nations.

21. Dans son remarquable expose, le representant

21. The representative of the United Kingdom has in
his masterly exposition given us, with his usual clarity, a detailed analysis of the constitutional documents
which have made Cyprus an independent State. He has
also given us details of the democratic system of government which exists in the new Republic. It is unnecessary for me, therefore, to elaborate further on
these aspects. Permit me, however, to make a few
observations.
22. The island of Cyprus, which is a small one haVing
an area of 3,572 square miles, is, however, the third
largest island in the Mediterranean. The climate of
Cyprus is considered to be one of the most beneficial
in the world. I mention this as Ithink it is an important
factor in the creation of a healthy and vigorous, patriotic and charming people.

du Royaume-Uni a .fait pour nous, avec sa clarte

habituelle, l'analyse detaill€le des documents constitutionnels qui ont fait de Chypre un Etat independant.
n nous a egalement donne des details sur le r€lgime
democratique de la nouvelle Republique. Je n'ai done
pas besoin de m'etendre davantage sur ces aspects
de la question. Permettez-moi cependant quelques
mots.
22. L'ile de Chypre, dont la superficie ne depasse
gu~re 9.000 kilom~tres carres, est cependant, par sa
taille, la troisi~me de la Mediterranee. Le climat de

Chypre est considere comme 1'un des plus salubres au
monde. Si je le mentionne, c'est que je crois que le
climat est un des grands facteurs qui ont fait du peuple
chypriote un peuple sain et vigoureux, patriote et
charmant.

23. As has been observed by my colleague, it is an
ancient country, and modern research has established
the beginnings of its history at least as far back as
about 3700 B.C. This history is a record of the merging within its confines of different waves of civilization
which have enriched the country.

23. Comme l'a fait observer mon coll~gue, c'est un
pays tr~s ancien et les recherches modemes font
remonter le debut de son histoire jusqu'h pr~s de
3.700 ans avant l'~re chretienne. Cette histoire est
celle de la fusion, sur le territoire de l'ile, de differentes vagues de civilisation, qui ont rendu ce pays
d'autant plus riche.

24. Settlers and traders from the Mycenaean Empire,
and, on the latter's collapse, Greek colonists estab"lished themselves in settlements founded, according
to legend, by warriors returning from the Trojan War.
In the eighth centuryB.C. it felt the impact of the Assyrian Empire, then of Egypt and Persia. Alexander
the Great took the island back from Persia, and later
it became a Roman province in 58 B.C., that is, three
years before Julius Caesar arrived in Britain. When
the Roman Empire collapsed, the island becam~ part
of the Byzantine Emperor's domain.

24. Des colons et des commer9ants de I 'Empire
mycenien, puis, apr~s I 'ecroulement de cet empire,
des colons grecs, se sont installes dans des colonies
de peuplement, fondees, dit la legende, par des gnerriers revenus de la guerre de Troie. Au vm~me
si~cle avant I '~re chretienne, Chypre est pass€le sous
la domination de I'Empire assyrien, puis de I 'Egypte
et de la Perse. Alexandre le Grand a repris l'ile li. la
Perse; ene est plus tard devenue province romaine,
en 58 avant J .-C., c 'est-li.-dire trois ans avantl 'arrivee de Jules C€lsar en Grande-Bretagne. Quand
l'Empire romain s'est effondre, l'ile a ete le lot de
I 'Empereur de Byzance.

25. In 1489, the island of Cyprus passed into the hands
of the Republic of Venice until Sultan Selim IT took it
in 1591. This phase continued till in 1878 British influence became evident, although the island still remained Ottoman territory and the islanders Ottoman
subjects. On the outbreak of war in 1914, Cyprus became a possession of the British Crown, and this

25. En 1489, l'ile de Chypre est pass€le auxmains de
la Republique de Venise, jusqu'en 1591, annee ou le
sultan Selim IT I'a conquise. Telle a ete la situation
jusqu'en 1878, moment ou l'influence britannique est
devenue €lvidente, bien que l'ile rot toujours territoire .
ottoman et ses habitants sUjets ottomans. Quand la
guerre" de 1914 a eclate, Chypre est devenue possession
5

was recognized in the Treaty of Lausanne. In 1925 it
became a Crown Colony.

de la Couronne britannique; elle est reconnue comme
telle par le Traite de Lausanne. En 1925, elle est
devenue colonie de la Couronne.

26. The people of Cyprus are thus the inheritors of
a tradition of culture and civilization which has been
particularly enriched by their close association for
long periods with the highly developed and cultured
peoples of England, Greece and Turkey, and we may
therefore well assume that they possess those qualities which will enable them not only to fulfil the obligations of the Charter of the United Nations but will
also enable them to contribute richly to its work.

26. Les Chypriotes sont donc les heritiers d'une
tradition de culture et de civilisation, particuli~rement
riche du fait des liens etroits qui les ont rattaches,
pendant de longues periodes, ~ des peuples hautement
civi.lises comme ceux de 1'Angleterre, de la Grace et
de la Turquie; nous sommes donc fondes ~ estimer
qu'ils possadent les qualites qui leur permettront non
seulement de s 'acquitter des obligations inscrites dans
la Charte des Nations Unies, mais aussi d'apporter aux
travaux de 1'Organisation une contribution de valeur.

27. The struggle of the Cypriot people in recent times
for their independence is well known to all of us. It
was only last year that the United Nations was called
upon to consider the question of Cyprus. The United
Nations on that occasion had a full and at times, I am
sorry to say, bitter debate, and although no immediate
settlement of the problem was achieved, it is clear
that the confidence felt by the United Nations in the
three parties most immediately concerned was justified when it called upon them to endeavour to reach a
settlement by amicable negotiation. The result of the
efforts which have ended in t..'le independence of Cyprus
shows that the United Nations acted realistically and
that its confidence was fully justified.

27. La lutte que le peuple chypriote a recemment
menee pour son independance nous est bien connue.
L'an dernier encore,l'Assembleegeneraleetaitsaisie
de la question de Chypre; les debats ont ete, ~ cette
occasion, tr~s approfondis et, parfois, je regrette de
le dire, assez amers; mais, bien qu'ils n'aient pas
abouti ~ un r~glement immediat, il est evident que
1'Assemblee generale avait raison de faire confiance
aux trois parties las plus directement en cause quand
elle leur a instamment demande d'unir leurs efforts
pour regler la question par voie de negociations
amiables. Le resultat de ces efforts, qui ont abouti ~
1'independance de Chypre, montre que les Nations
Unies ont fait preuve de realisme et que leur confiance
etait pleinement fondee.

28. We have here a heart-warming example of international co-operative action which has borne fruitful
results. For this, we have to rememberwithgratitude
the efforts made by the United Kingdom, Greece and
Turkey, to whom we would like on this occasion to
offer our hearty congratulations and to tender our
sincere thanks. We are particularly gratified by the
promise of the United Kingdom Government to continue to give the new Republic financial assistance.
We are sure that the United Nations itself will give
all the help it can. With such help, and in the atmosphere of domestic harmony which now prevails, and
the goodwill of the world community, we have no doubt
that Cyprus will once more play a great and useful
role as a member of the international community of
nations.

28. Voil~ un reconfortant exemple de cooperation
internationale aboutissant ~ des resultats fructueux.
Nous en sommes redevables aux efforts du RoyaumeUni, de la Grace et de la Turquie, ~ qui nous sommes
heureux d'adresser aujourd'hui nos vivesfelicitations
et nos remerciements les plus sinc~res.Nous sommes
particulierement satisfaits de savoir que le Gouvernement britannique a promis de continuer ~ preter ~
la nouvelle republique son assistance financiare. Nous
sommes certains que 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
elle-meme lui apportera toute 1'aide possible. Nous
ne doutons pas qu'avec cette assistance, dans l'atmasphere harmonieuse dont elle jouit maintenant, et
gr~ce ~ la bienveillance de la collectivite mondiale,
Chypre jouera une fois de plus, dans la communaute
des nations, un role important et utile.

29. I hope this Council will unanimously adopt the
draft resolution recommending to the General Assembly the admission of the Republic of Cyprus to
membership in the United Nations.

29. J'espere que le Conseil adoptera ~ 1'unanimite
le projet de resolution aux termes duquel i1 recommanderait ~ 1'Assemblee g(merale d'admettre la
Republique de Chypre comme Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

30. Mr. ECONOMOU-GOURAS (Greece) (translated
from French): Mr. President, I Should first like to
thank you and the other members of i~le Security Council for giving me the privilege of a hearing when the
question of admitting the Republic of Cy, '3 to the
United Nations is being considered.

30. M. ECONOMOU-GOURAS (Grece): Monsieur le
President, je desire tout d'abord vous exprimer, ainsi
qu'aux autres membres du Conseil de securite, mes
vifs remerciements de m 'avoir accorde le privil~ge
d'etre entendu lors de l'examen de la question de
1'admission de la Republique de Chypre ~ l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

31. The Greek Government warmly supports the application of the Republic of Cyprus for membership in
the United Nations. It believes that Cyprus, which became independent on 16 August 1960, is a peace-loving.
State, that it accepts the obligations of the United
Nations Charter and that it is able and willing to carry
them out.

31. Le Gouvernement hellenique appuie tr~s chaleureusement la demande de la Republique de Chypre en
vue de devenir Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies. n est en effet persuade que Chypre, qui a
accede ~ 1'independance le 16 aotlt 1960, est un Etat
pacifique qui accepte les obligations de la Charte des
Nations Unies, qui est capable de les remplir et
dispose ~ le faire.

32. The Greek Government is firmly convinced that

32. Le Gouvernement hellenique a la profonde conviction que la Republique de Chypre sera, dans la mesure

th~ Republic of Cyprus will do all in its power to con-

6

tribute to political stability and progress in the eastern
Mediterranean.
33. My Government is quite sure that the Cypriot
people, who have already given ample proof of their
political maturity, fully understand their responsibilities towards the international community of free and
independent countries to which they ask to be admitted,
and realize that these responsibilities are based on
justice, freedom and mutual respect.

de ses possibilites, un facteur de stabilite politique et
de progr~s dans le bassin oriental de la Mediterranee.
33. Mon gouvernement est absolument certain que le
peuple chypriote, qui a dej~ donne tant de preuves de
sa maturite politique, a pleine conscience de ses
responsabilites ~ 1'egard de la communaute internationale des pays libres et independants ~ laquelle
il demande d'etre admis, et aussi qu'il entend ses
responsabilites comme fondees sur la justice, la
liberte et le respect mutuel.

34. In the circumstances my Government ventures to
hope that the application by the Republic of Cyprus for
membership will be favourably received by the members of the Security Council, in virtue of the principle
that the United Nations should keep its door open to
all States, great or small, without any distinction, as
long as they fulfil the conditions set forth in Article 4
of the Charter.
35. The first steps of an infant State are bound to be
difficult. We are sure that the United Nations and the
specialized agencies will not neglect the Republic of
Cyprus, and that they will generously give technical
assistance and economic aid in order to develop the
island's resources and economy.

34. Dans ces conditions, mon gouvernement ose esperer que la demande d'admission de la Republique de
Chypre fera l'objet d'un accueil favorable de la part
des membres du Conseil de securite, en vertu du
principe qui vise ~ tenir les portes de notre organisation ouvertes ~ tous les Etats, grands ou petits, sans
distinction, qui remplissent les conditions de 1'Article 4 de la Charte.
35. Les premiers pas d'un Etat naissant sont necessairement difficiles. L 'Organisation des Nations Unies
et les institutions sp€mialisees ne manqueront pas de
se pencher sur la Republique de Chypre et apPorteront
genereusement, nous en sommes sars, leur assistance
technique et leur aide economique pour la mise en
valeur des ressources de 1tile et pour le developpement de son economie.
36. Telles sont les considerations qui ontamenemon
gouvernement ~ recommander an bienveillant accueil
du Conseil de securite la demaade d'admission de la
Republique de Chypre ~ l'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

36. These are the reasons why my Government
recommends that the Security Council should welcome
the application for membership of the Republic of
Cyprus.
37. Mr. ESIN (Turkey): Mr. President, I should like
to thank you and the members of the Security Council
for the opportunity given to my delegation to state the
views of my Government on the question of the admission of the Republic of Cyprus to the United Nations,
the question now being considered in the Council, in
accordance with the application made to this effect by
the Republic of Cyprus.

37. M. ESIN (Turquie) [traduit de l'anglais]: Monsieur le President, je tiens ~ vous remercier, ainsi
que les membres du Conseil de' securite, d'avoir
donne ~ ma delegation 1'occasion d'exprimer les wes
du Gouvernement turc sur l'admission de la Republique
de Chypre comme Membre de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies, question que le Conseil examine en ce
moment pour donner suite h la demande de la Republique de Chypre.

38. The Turkish delegation feels particularly happy
to support the request of the Republic of Cyprus for
admission to membership in m:t:: Organization, because
my country, together with other interested friendly
and allied countries, takes a justified pride in the success of the efforts which have led to the establishment
of the Republic of Cyprus, based on an agreement
.which is in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

38. La delegation turque est particulierement heureuse d'appuyer la demande d'admission de la Republique de Chypre, car mon pays, comme d'autres pays
amis et allies egalement interesses h la question, est
fier h juste titre du succ~s des efforts qui ont abouti
~ l'institution de la Republique de Chypre, sur la base
d'un accord conforme aux buts et principes de la
Charte des Nations Unies.

39. We most sincerely welcome the young Republic
to the community of free and peace-loving nations and
expect it to become an element of peace, stability and
progress in the important area of the eastern Mediterranean and contribute to the development of friendly
relations among nations.

39. C 'est avec une joie sinc~re que nous accueillons
la jeune Republique au sein des nations libres et pacifiques, et nous esperons qu'elle constituera, dans
1'importante region de la Mediterranee orientale, un
element de paix, de stabilite et de progr~s, et qu'elle
contribuera aux relations arnicales entre les nations.
40. Le Gouvernement turc est persuade que la
Republique de Chypre est pleinement consciente de ses
devoirs et responsabilites h l'egard delacommunaute
des nations, devoirs et responsabilites que definit la
Charte et qui incombenthtouslesMembresde l'Organisation.

40. The Turkish Government is convinced that the
Republic of Cyprus is fully conscious of its duties
and responsibilities towards the community of nations,
duties and responsibilities outlined in the Charter and
devolving upon all Members of our Organization.

41. Nous tenons aussi h exprimer notre conviction
sinc~re que 1'Organisation des Nations Unies, par 1'intermediaire des institutions specialisees et d'autres

41. We also wish to express our sincere belief that
the United Nations, through the specialized agencies
and other means, will continue to extend its valuable
7

assistance in economic and technical matters to the
Republic of Cyprus which, like other young countries,
will need some help, especially in the difficult initial
period of its existence.

moyens, continuera ll. pdter UaRepubliquede Chypre
une precieuse assistance economique et technique,
assistance dont, comme d'autres pays jeunes, elle aura
particuli~rementbesoin pendant la difficile periode du
debut de son existence.

42. In concluding, may I, on behalf of my Government,
express the hope that the Council will favourably consider the request of the Republic of Cyprus and recommend its admission into the United Nations by adopting
the draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom
and Ceylon.
43. Mr. AMADEO (Argentina) (translated from Spanish): The youngest petitioner for admission to the
United Nations is, paradoxically enough, a country
with one of the most brilliant records in the history
of civilization. The chosen island of Aphrodite, the
inspiration of painters and poets and the scene of historic combats between the Cross and the Crescent,
Cyprus is closely bound up with the most venerable
traditions of the West. In actual fact, however, it has
never altogether belonged to the West.

42. Je voudrais, pour conclure, exprimer au nom de
mon gouvernement 1'/'Ispoir que le Conseil accueillera
favorablement la demande de la Republique deChypre
et, en adoptant le projet de resolution depose par le
Royaume-Uni et Ceylan, recommandera de 1'admettre
comme Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.
43. M. AMADEO (Argentine) [tradui't de 1'espagnol]:
nest paradoxal que le plus jeune des candidats au
titre de Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
soit une des terres auxquelles s 'attachent les plus
illustres souvenirs de 1'histoire de la civilisation. ne
preferee d'Aphrodite, inspiratrice des peintres etdes
po~tes, sc~ne des duels legendaires entre la Croix et le
Croissant, Chypre est intimement unie a laplusvenerable tradition de 1'Occident, de cet Occident auquel
elle n'est jamais pourtant parvenue ll. appartenir tout
enti~re.

44. It is now a long time since the ancient Kingdom
of the Lusignan stood on the list ofindependent States.
Today, many centuries after the Most Serene Republic
of Venice inherited it and it passed under a long foreign domination, it reappears as one of the free peoples. It is' fitting that we should celebrate its return
with special rejoicing.

44. n y avait longtemps dejll. que 1'ancien royaume
des Lusignan ne figurait plus au nombre des Etats
independants. n y avait plusieurs si~cles que la
Serenissime Republique de Venise l'avait reQu en
heritage. AUjourd'hui, apr~s une longue periode de
domination etrang~re, it fait sa rentree parmi les
peuples libres. n est juste que nous celebrions ce
retour avec une allegresse particuli~re.

45. The entry of Cyprus into the community of independent nations is a triumph for the spirit of tolerance
and the principle of coexistence over rigid fanaticism.
At several sessions of the General Assembly the famous IlQuestion of Cyprus 11 was discussed in heated
debates which did not seem to lead to any hopeful
solution. Three seemingly irreconcilable interests
faced one another, with no desire to compromise, as
far as could be seen: the Greek majority, conscious
of its large numbers and justly pround of its ancient
place in the island's traditions; the Turkish minority,
jealous of its righi: to keep the distinctive features of
its culture; and Great Britain, occupying the Territory
by virtue of titles with which it would be hard to find
fault in law. Both Greece and Turkey supported those
who belonged to the same faith and race as themselves.

45. L 'entree de Chypre dans la collectivite des nations
independantes est le triomphe de 1'esprit de tolerance
et de la bonne entente sur la rigueur et le fanatisme.
Au coul's de plusieurs sessions de l'Assemblee generale, la ceH~bre llquestion de Chypre' a fait 1'objet
d'~pres debats qui nesemblaientgu~repouvoiraboutir
II una solution favorable. Trois groupes dont les interijts etaient apparemmentinconciliables s'affrontaient
Ill-bas et ne semblaient pas souhaiter un compromis:
la majorite grecque, consciente de son importance
numerique et legitimement orgueilleuse de sa priorit€l
dans les traditions de 1file; laminoriteturque, jalouse
de son droit de conserver ses caracteristiques culturelles propres, et le Royaume-Uni, qui occupait le
territoire en vertu de titres dont la validite jUridique
etait difficilement contestable. La TurquieetlaGr~ce,
de leur cot€l, appuyaient leurs fr~res de religion et de
race.

46. Suddenly and unexpectedly good sense prevailed
and an agreement was reached. The Zurich texts,
confirmed and rounded off by the London and Nicosia
agreements with the co-operation of the conflicting
parties, laid the foundations of a'settlementwithwhich
we are already quite familiar. Although it did not completely satisfy any one of the parties, it accorded with
their essential wishes. Inevitably there were some
difficulties in carrying it out, but these were finally
overcome. That is why we say that the solution of the
Cyprus case is a triumph for reasoning intelligence
over blinding passion, and we warmly congratulate all
those who brought about this happy outcome. May this
settlement serve as an example for the solution of
similar but yet unsolved problems.

46. Presque subitement, alors que riennepermettait
de le prevoir, le bon sens s 'est impose et l'accord s'est
fait. Les textes €llaborlls ll. ZUrich, confirm€ls et completes par les accords de Londres et de Nicosie, que
les parties au conflit ont etabUs conjointement, ont
jete les bases d'un statut dont les termes sont bien
connus du Conseil et qui, sans donner pleinement
raison h l'une des parties, r€lpondent aux principales
aspirations de chacune d'elles. L'application dustatut
a soulev6 quelques difficult€ls; comment aurait-il pu en
i3tre autrement? Ces difficultes ont cependant ete
surmontees. C'est pourquoi nous disons que la solution
du probl~me de Chypre est le triomphe de l'intelligence qui raisonne sur la passion aveugle et crest
pourquoi nous devons chaleureusement feliciter tous
ceux qui ont contribue II cetheureux denouement. Nous
souhaitons que ce statut puisse servir d'exemple pour
le r~glement de probl~mes analogues non encore
resolus.
8

47. On this solemn occasion, we should like to pay
tribute to Archbishop Makarios, President of the
Republic of Cyprus, who is now a world-famous figure.
He has been as moderatlB in negotiating peace as he
was indomitable in the struggle for freedom.

47. En cette occasion solennelle, nous voulons rendre
hommage h Mgr Makarios, president de laRepublique
de Chypre, personnage desormais cel~bre dans le
monde entier, aussi modere dans 1'edification de la
paix qu'll avait ete indomptable dans sa lutte pour la
liberte.

48. Cyprus is now a sovereign nation with traditions
which go back thousands of years. It is assured of the
active friendship of the three countries most closely
involved in its history and now bound to it by pacts of
friendship, as it enters the United Nations with the
heartfelt sympathy of all Members. God grant that the
domestic peace which has been achieved at the cost of
such a struggle may continue to prevail in this blessed
corner of the earth. We are convinced that now, as in
the past, the Cypriot nation will contribute its inestimable spiritual wealth to the strengthening of peaceful
coexistence between peoples.

48. Chypre est dejh une nation souveraine. Riche
d'une tradition millenaire, sllre de l'amitie activeet consacree par des pactes - des trois pays les plus
m~les h son histoire, eIle entre dans notre organisation entour€le de la cordiale sympathie de tous ses
membres. Plaise h Dieu que la paix interieure, si
a.prement acquise, se consolide en ce lieu privilegie
de la terre. Nous sommes persuades qu'aujourd'hui
comme par le passe, la nation chypriote nous fera
partager so~ inestimable patrimoine spirituel pour
contribuer h renforcer entre les peuples la coexistence
pacifique.

49. In view of the foregoing, the Argentine delegation
will vote for the draft resolution submitted by Ceylon
and the United Kingdom, in which we are asked to
recommend that the Republic of Cyprus be admitted
to membership of the United Nations.

49. Pour les motifs que je viens d'exposer, la delegation argentine votera pour le projet de resolution
depose par Ceylan et le Royaume-Uni et aux termes
duquel le Consell recommanderait d'admettre la
Republique de Chypre comme Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

50. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): Wemeet
today to add a new page to the history of a place
steeped in history and famous to men everywhere. The
legendary home of Aphrodite has now become the
Republic of Cyprus, and its Government has applied
for membership in the United Nations. It is a privilege which can be described as stirring for me, on
behalf of the United States of America, to bid the people and the Government of Cyprus welcome and to
assure them of our support.

50. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Nous sommes aUjourd'huireunispourajouter une nouvelle page h 1'histoire d'un pays dejh
impregne d'histoire et cel~bre dans le monde entier.
La terre legendaire d'A:phrodite est maintenant devenue la Republique de Chypre et son gouvernement
a demande h devenir Membre de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies. C'est pour moi un honneur que je
qualifierai d'emouvant, de souhaitel'. au nom des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, la bienvenue
peuple et au
gouvernement de Chypre et de leur donner1'assurance
de notre appui.

51. This lovely island in the eastern Mediterranean
and its people have known greatness and tragedy, and
the things that have happened there have stirred men's
imagination from Homer's day to the present. Indeed,
if all the records of western civilization were to be
destroyed save for a single history of Cyprus, scholars
could reconstruct almost the entire story from that one
volume. Such has been the intimacy of this island with
the epic events of the Mediterranean basin and with
the dominant land and sea powers of Europe, Asia and
Africa. Greeks returning from the Trojan War, Phoenicians, Assyrians, Egyptians, Persians, Macedonians
and Romans all "'eme to Cyprus. When the Roman
Empire was di +1«>c.... Cyprus went with the Eastern
Empire and thus became one of the heirs to the great
religious heritage of Byzantium.

51. Cette charmante !'le delaMediterraneeorientale,
et son peuple avec elle, ont connu la grandeur et la
tragedie; les evenements qui sly sont deroules ont de
tout temps stimule 1'imagination humaine, depuis
Hom~re jusqu'h nos jours. Si tvutes les archives de la
civilisation occidentale etaient detruites, mais qu'll
reste 1'histoire de Chypre, les historiens et les
savants pourraient en verite reconstituer presque
enti~rement 1'histoire de cette civilisation h partir de
ce seul volume. Telle a ete 1'intimite des liens de
cette !'le avec les evenements epiques qui se sont
deroules dans le bassin mediterraneen et avec les
puissances terrestres et maritimes qui dominaient
l'Europe, l'Asie et l'Mrique. Les Grecs, hleurretour
de la guerl'e de Troie, les Pheniciens, les Assyriens,
les Egyptiens, les Perses, les Macedoniens, sont tous
venus h Chypre. Au moment de la division de 1'Empire
romain, Chypre est echue en partage h 1'Empire
d'Orient et est ainsi devenue h€lriti~re de la grande
tradition religieuse de Byzance.

52. The vitality of this heritage is attested by the
transcendent role of the Orthodox Church in Cypriot
history. The present Archbishop Primate of the
Church, Archbishop Makarios, is now also the first
President of the Republic of Cyprus, and we extend to
him our respect and our sincere congratulations.

52. Le r61e capital joue dans 1'histoire de Chypre par.
1'Eglise orthodoxe prouve h quel point cette tradition
est rest€le vivante. L' archeveque-primat actuel de
cette Eglise, Mgr Makarios, est maintenant President
de la R6publique de Chypre; nous lui adressons nos
sinc~res et respectueuses felicitations.

53. Sharing the fate of the Byzantine world, Cyprus
knew the role of the Crusaders under Richard the Lionhaarted, and for .three centuries the Frankish dynasty
of Hugues de Lusignan. Coming under the rule of

53. Partageant le destin du monde byzantin, Chypre
a connu la domination des Crois6s sous Richard
Coour-de-Lion, puis, pendant trois si~cles, sous la
dynastie franque de Hugues de Lusignan. Tomban~

au

9

Venice, a period during which, so Shakespeare tells
us, Othello ruled for a time, Cyprus fell in 1573 to
the armies of the Sultan. Turkish rule lasted almost
300 years, and during this time Frankish feudalism
was abolished and the Orthodox Church was restored
to its former place. For' the -past eighty-two years
Cyprus was administered by the United Kingdom.

ensuite au pouvoir de Venise, elle a €:lte, hen croire
Shakespeare, gouvernlle quelque temps par Othello;
puis les armees du Sultan 1font conquise en 1573. La
domination turque a dur€:l pr~s de 300 ans: au cours de
cette periode, le regime f€lodal des Francs a disparu
et l'Eglise orthodoxe a repris son ancienne place. Au
cours des 82 derni~res annees, c'est le Royaume-Uni
qui a administre Chypre.

54. History and geography have thus left to Cyprus
the monuments of many cultures and a talented and
varie'd population. Hard work and enlightened British
administration have given the island today a high standard of living for which the United Kingdom deserves
a full measure of credit. Roads, schools and other
public works are numerous. The highly efficient and
modern public health service has practically eliminated contagious diseases. Scientific agriculture has
increased the yields of the island's citrus groves and
vineyards. Indeed, the primary challenge facing Cyprus
is not economic under-development, although there are
things which remain to be done in this field, but the
creation of a national identity out of diverse elements.

54. Chypre est done redevable i\ son histoire et i\ sa
geographie des monuments de nombreuses cultures et
d'une population diverse et comblee de dons. Grl:ice ~
un travail assidu et i\ la direction eclair€le de 1'administration britannique, l'ne jouit aujourd'hui d'unhaut
niveau de vie dont le merite revient en grande partie
au Royaume-Uni. Les routes, les ecoles et autres
constructions d'inter~t Pl" lic y sont nombreuses. Des
services sanitaires modE;.L·nes et parfaitement organises ont pratiquement €:llimine les maladies contagieuses. Une exploitation agricole scientifique a
augmente la production des agrumes et des vignobles
de l'ne. En fait, ce n'est pas A son developpement
economique que Chypre doit tout d'abord s'attaquer,
bien qu'il y ait encore A faire dans ce domaine, mais
plutot A la cr€:lation d'une identit€:l nationale A partir
d'el€:lments tr~s divers.

55. It is a matter of history well known here that
independence was not the first choice of many, or
perhaps even of the majority of Cypriots. For years
the world was saddened by the violence and fratricidal
strife on the island resulting from the clashing demands of "enosis" and partition. Therefore, when the
Governments of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, together with Cypriot representatives, agreed
that Cyprus should be independent, the decision was
greeted with special joy in the United States.

55. C'est un fait historique bien connu que beaucoup
de Chypriotes, peut-~tre m~me la majorite d'entre
eux, n 'etaient pas favorable i\ l'independance. Pendant
des annees, le monde a assiste avec tristesse i\ la
lutte violente et fratricide provoquee dans l'ne par le
conflit entre les partisans de l' "h€mosis" et ceux du
partage. Aussi, quand la Gr~ce, la Turquie, le
Royaume-Uni et les repl'esentants de Chypre sont
convenus que 1'ne deviendrait independante, les EtatsUnis ont-ils salue cette decision avec une grande joie.

56. The United States is certain that the people of
Cyprus will come to value its independence no l,ess
than we in the United States value our independence.
We also feel sure in the United States that a truly
united country can be built from diverse elements.
Cyprus is fortunate in having leaders of the stature
of Archbishop Makarios and the Vice-President, Mr.
Kutchuk. The high statesmanship which led to the
establishment of Cyprus will in the days and years
ahead assist the leaders of the two major communities in their efforts to build a vigorous and prosperous
new nation. The United States is confident that in the
future the fortunate residents of this land will look
around at their handiwork and look back at their history and take justifiable pride that they are, first and
foremost, Cypriots.

56. Nous ne doutons pas aux Etats-Unis que le peuple
de Chypre n'en vienne i\ tenir i\ son independance tout
autant que nous tenons i\ la notre. Nous savons egalement aux Etats-Unis qu'il est possible, avec des elements divers, de bl:itir un pays veritablement uni.
Chypre a la chance d'avoir des chefs de la stature de
Mgr Makarios et du Vice-President, M. Kutchuk. Les
grandes qualites politiques qui ont permis d'instituer
la Republique de Chypre aideront, dans les jours et
les annees i\ venir, les chefs des deux communautes
principales ';&ans les efforts qu'ils vont faire pour
eriger une nouvelle nation, vigoureuse et prosp~re.
Nous sommes certains que, dans l'avenir, ceux qui
auront la chance d'habiter cette ne pourront, en
voyant ce qu'ils ont accompli et en se souvenant de
leur histoire, etre fiers i\ juste titre d'~tre, d'abord
et avant tout, Chypriotes.

57. The United States will vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom and Ceylon.

57. Les Etats-Unis voteront le projet de resolution
depose par le Royaume-Uni et Ceylan.

58. Mr. PLAJA (Italy): We meet again for the indeed
pleasant duty of deciding upon the request for admission to our Organization of a new State, the Republic
of Cyprus. The accession to independence of every
new country is a happy occasion. Only yesterday we
rejoiced in the newly-acquired independence of eight
new African States; we rejoice today in the independence of a country to which geography has assigneet the
role of a link between Europe and Asia since the beginning of history. This, of course, is an event of
particular significance to Italy. The members of the
Council who have preceded me have described with

58. M. PLAJA (Italie) [traduit de 1'anglais]: C'est un
, agreable devoir en verite qui nous r€mnit aUjourd'hui
pour examiner une fois de plus la demande d'admission
d'un nOl1vel Etat: il s'agit cette fois de la Republique
de Chypre. L'accession d'un nouveau pays A l'inde.,
pendance est une circonstance heureuse. Hier encore,
nous nous rejouissions de l'independance, nouvellement acquise, de huit nouveaux Etats africains;
aUjourd'hui, nous nous f€:llicitons de 1'independance
d'un pays auquel la geographie, d~s les debuts de
1'histoire, a assign€lle role de lien entre l'Europe et
I'Asie. Cet €:lvenement revet, pour l'Italie, on le com-

10

their usual eloquence the part which Cyprus has played
in the history of the eastern Mediterranean.

prendra, une importance particuli~re.Les membres du
Conseil qui ont prislaparoleavantmoiont decrit avec
leur ~loquencehabituelle le rale que Chypre a joue dans
1'histoire de la M~diterranee orientale.

59. Cyprus was not, before its independence, a country that the wave of modern democracy had to awaken
to the life of our time. Cyprus, as a matter of fact,
has behind it a long and magnificent history; it has
been for centuries-I should say for millennia-a
cross-roads of the commercial, ideological and cultural currents which have enriched the Mediterranean.
As far as Italy is concerned, our relationship with the
island goes back to the beginning of history and civilization in the Mediterranean area. These ties were
very close under the Roman Empire. During the Middle
Ages they became particularly intense, and as has been
recalled here, Genoa and Venice played in this respect
an extremely important role. We feel that through all
those centuries of intercourse and of common history,
Italy has shared with the people of Cyprus a common
heritage of civilization_

59. Chypre n 'etait pas, avant son ind~pendance, un
pays qui eilt besoin d'etre initie Ua vie de notre temps
par la vague de la d~mocratie moderne. En fait, eUe
a derri~re elle une longue et magnifique histoire; pendant des si~cles - je devrais dire des mil1€maires elle a ~te le confluent des courants commerciaux,
ideologiques et culturels qui ont enrichi la Mediterranee. Pour ce qui est de 1'Italie, nos relations avec
1'ne remontent aux debuts de I 'histoire et de la
civilisation dans cette region. Ces liens etaient tr~s
~troits sous I 'Empire romain. Au Moyen Age, ils se
sont encore renforces, et comme on I 'a rappele ici,
Genes et Venise ont joue ~ cet egard un rale extremement important. Nous estimons qu'~ travers tous ces
si~cles d'echanges et d'histoire commune, l'Italie a ,
partage avec le peuple chypriote un commun heritage
de civilisation.

60. This is what makes so significant to Italy the
celebration of the independence of the people of Cyprus.

60. C 'est pourquoi la celebration de 1'independance du
peuple chypriote a tant d'importance pour l'Italie.

61. It therefore gives my delegation the gr,eatest
pleasure to felicitate the people and Government of
Cyprus on this event in their history. And here I wish
also to congratulate the countries and Governments
which have made such an event possible. Not long ago
Cyprus constituted for all of us in the United Nations
a preoccupation and a problem. It has required a great
deal of statesmanship on the part of all those concerned
to arrive at the happy solution witnessed by us on
16 August: the peaceful, democratic and just solution
which the General Assembly at its thirteenth session
had recommended.

61. Ma delegation €lprouve donc le plus grand plaisir
~ feliciter le peuple et le Gouvernement chypriotes de
cet evenement de leur histoire. Je' voudrais aussi
feliciter ici les pays et les gouvernements qui ont
rendu possible cet ev€mement. n n'y a pas longtemps
Chypre etait pour nous tous ici une preoccupation et
un probl~me. n a fallu ~ tous les interesses un grand
sens politique pour aboutir h 1'heureuse solution dont
nous avons ete t€lmoins le 16 aoilt: la solution pacifique, democratique et juste que l'Assemblee generale
avait recommandee h sa treizi~me session.

62. The United Kingdom, in the first place, has given
a new demonstration of those high qualities which have
permitted it not only to bring so many countries to
independence, but to give them something which cannot
be considered second in value to independence: Imean
the love of freedom and of a democratic way of life.

62. En premier lieu, le Royaume-Uni a manifeste
une fois de plus les grandes qualites quilui ont permis
non seulement d'amener tant de pays hI 'independance,
mais de leur donner quelque chose qui ne le cMe en
rien h l'independance: l' amour de la liberte et d 'un
mode democratique de vie.

63. Greece and Turkey have shown, on their part, a
great deal of wisdom and foresight and have offered
a not less valuable contribution to the attainment of
this aim.

63. De leur cate, la Gr~ce et la Turquie ont montre
beaucoup de sagesse et de pr€lvoyance et leur contribution au resultat acquis n'a pas €lt€l moinsprecieuse.

64. All of these countries, I repeat, deserve tribute
together with the people of Cyprus and their Government and political leaders, first and foremost the
President of the new Republic, Archbishop Makarios,
and its Vice-PreSident, Mr. Kutchuk. They have set
an example in the field of international co..:.operation
proving what can be accomplished, even in a most
complicated and serious situation, by moderation,
restraint and negotiation when the parties concerned
pursue solely the freedom of peoples, with the peace
of the world in mind.

64. Tous ces pays, je le repMe, m€lritent nos hommages, ainsi que le peuple de Cllypre, son gouvernement et ses dirigeants politiques, en particulier le
President de la nouvelle Republique, Mgr Makarios,
et le Vice-President, M. Kutchuk. ns ont donne un
bel exemple de cooperation internationale, en demontrant ce que peuvent accomplir la moderation, la
mesure et la negociation, mame dans une situation des
plus compliquees et des plus graves, quandles parties
interessees recherchent uniquement la liberte des
peuples, sans perdre de vue la paix du monde.

65. It seems to me, therefore, that no country is
better suited for membership in the United Nations
than Cyprus. This is so not only because ~f its civilization and history, but indeed because its people, so
proudly aware of their past and their future, so deterinined in defending their national character through
the centuries, were in a position to assess and evaluate
all the elements of the present international situation
and, indeed, proved it. I am sure that with this background the new State of Cyprus not only will be fully

65. n me semble donc que nul pays n'estplus qualifie
que Chypre pour etre Membre de 1'Organisation des
NationsUnies. Cela non seulement ~ cause de sa civilisation et de son histoire, mais aussi parce que son
'peuple, si fier de son passe et si conscient de" sonavenir,si d€ltermin€l h d€lfendre son caract~renational
h travers les si~cles, etait hien' place pour apprecier
tous les elements de la situation internationale act"uelle, et qu'lll 'a prouv€l. Je suis persuade que, dans
ces circonstances, le nouvel Etat non seulement sera
11

able to fulfil its obligations under· the Charter of our
Organization, but much more, will be a great asset to
our Organization and will offer a most valuable contribution.

pleinement capable de remplir ses obligations aux
termes de la Charte, mais, bien plus, serapour notre
Organisation un grand atout et lui apportera une contribution des plus pdcieuses.

66. Yesterday we saw France and Tunisia sponsoring
the draft resolutions relating to the admission of eight
new African States; today we see the United Kingdom
and Ceylon sponsoring the draft resolution relating
to the admission of Cyprus-an old and a newlyindependent State in both cases. Now it occurs to me
that this might have a meaning which transcends the
aspects of the cases in question. I dare say that it is
a symbol-and the hope-of an old and a new world
which are eager to proceed hand in hand, in a spirit
of harmony and co-operation, towards the common
goal of freedom and peace.

66. Hier, nous avons vu la France et la Tunisie
dllposer des projets de rllsolution pour 1tadmission
de huit nouveaux Etats africains; aUjourd'hui, le
Royaume-Uni et Ceylan d6posent un projet de rllsolution pour 1tadmission de Chypre: dans chaque cas,les
coauteurs des projets 6taient 1'un un Etat ancien et
1'autre un Etat nouvellementind6pendant. n me semble
que ce geste a un sens qui depasse peut-etre les
candidatures en question. Je diraiquee'estlesymbole
- riche dtespoir - d'un monde ancien et d'un monde
nouveau qui dllsirent avancer la main dans la main,
clans un esprit d'harmonie et de cooperation, vers la
libert6 et la paix, leur objectif commun.

67. I should like to conclude these brief remarks by
tendering to the people and Government of Cyprus, in
the name of the people and Government of Italy, our
brotherly feelings of warm and deep friendship as
well as our earnest wishes ·'for happiness, success and
prosperity in their independent life•.

67. Je voudrais terminer ces quelques mots en
adressant au peuple et au gouvernement chypriotes,
au nom du peuple et du gouvernement italiens, 1'expression de nos sentiments fraternels d'amiti6 profonde
et chaleureuse, ainsi que nos vreux: les plus sinc~res
de bonheur, de succ~s et de prosp6ritll dans leur vie
ind6penda.nte.
68. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit del'anglais): L'apel"'"
QU de 1'histoire de Chypre par lequel le representant
du Royaume-Uni a commenc6 son intervention est
impressionnant dans sa bri~vet6. Vollh un candidatau
titre de Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
qui possMe une histoire, vivante et pittoresque, de
5.000 ans. Le peuple chinois respecte beaucoup 1'tge,
celui des etres humains comme celui des nations. En
ma qualite de representant d'un vieux pays, je suis
particuli~rementheureux: d'appuyer la candidature de
la Rllpublique de Chypre.

68. Mr. TSIANG (China): The historical sketch of the
island of Cyprus with which the representative of the
United Kingdom began his speech, though very brief,
was very impressive. Here we have an applicant for
membership in the United Nations with a history-a
vital and colourful history-of five thousand years.
The Chinese people has great respect for age-personal
age as well as national age. As the representative of
an old country I have particular pleasure in supporting
the application of the Republic of Cyprusformembership in the United Nations.
69. It was only a short time ago when delegations to
the General Assembly friendly to both Greece and
Turkey were deeply distressed by the heated debates
on the so-called question of Cyprus. I participated in
all those debates, and I can say truly that my heart
was deeply distressed by the claims and counterclaims advanced before the Committee. In that dispute,
in fact, five parties were involved, the Greek-Cypriot
community, the Turkish-Cypriot community, the Greek
Government, the Turkish Government and the Government of the United Kingdom. The peaceful settlement
of the problem is the joint work of all the five parties
involved. It is, may I say, a monument to the wisdom
of them all.

69. Recemment encore, h l'Assemblee g6nerale, les
del6gations amies UafoisdelaGr~ceetde la Turquie
etaient profond6ment chagrinees des discussions passionn6es dont la "question de Chypre· etait1'occasion.
Jtai participe h tous ces debats, et, bien sinc~rement,
j'etais profond6ment chagrine des revendications et
contre-revendications dont la Commission competente
etait le thMtre. En fait, cinq parties etaient represent€les h ce differend: la communaute chypriote
grecque, la communaut6 chypriote turque, le Gouvernement grec, le Gouvernement turc et le Gouvernement
britannique. Le r~glement pacifique du probl~me est
le resultat du commun effort de ces cinq parties. Je
puis dire qu'll temoigne de leur sens politique.
.

70. In voting for the draft resolution submitted by
Ceylon and the United Kingdom I wish to express the
good wishes of my people and Government for the
prosperity and progress of the new Republic ofCyprus
and for the success of its President, Archbishop
Makarios, and Vice-President, Dr. Kutchuk.

70. En votant pour le projet commun de r6so1ution
depos6 par Ceylan et le Royaume-Uni, je tiens h
exprimer, au nom du gouvernement et du peuple
chinois, mes meilleurs vamx de prosp6rit6 et de
progr~s h la nouvelle R6publique de Chypre et mes
meilleurs vreux: de succ~s h sonpr6sident, Mgr Makarios, et h son vice-president, M. Kutchuk.

71. Mr. MACHOWSKI (Poland): It is our great privilege and pleasure to support the application of the
Republic of Cyprus for membership in the United
Nations. Neither the applying country nor its people
is unfamiliar to any of us. Long and often violent de-·
bates in the General Assembly on the so-called question of Cyprus preceded today's happy meeting. In the
course of these debates, which have to be considered
as one of the many sides of Cyprus' bitter struggle
for' independence, the Polish representatives always

71. M. MACHOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de 1'anglais):
Nous avons 1'honneur et le grand plaisir dtappuyer
la demande d'admission de la Rllpublique de Chypre h
1'Organisation des Nations Unles. Ce pays et son
peuple nous sont famlliers. Avant l'heureuse sllance
dtaujourd'hui, 1tAssembl€le glln6rale a consacre h la
"question de Chypre" des debats prolonges et souvent
violents. Au cours de ces debats, qu'll faut consid6rer
comme un des nombreux aspects de la lutte acharn6e
de Chypre pour son ind6pendance, les repr6sentants'

12

strongly supported its people's right to self-determination. The Polish people followed with profound
sympathy the heroic struggle of the people of Cyprus
for its independence, and we therefore share today
their joy on this occasion.

de la Pologne ont toujours appuye fermement le droit
du peuple chypriote h. disposer de lui-meme. Le peuple
polonais a suisi avec une profonde sympathie la lutte
heroique du peuple chypriote pour son independance,
aussi partageons-nous aujourd'hui sa joie en cette
circonstance.

72. I should like to extend on behalf of the Government
and people of Poland to the Government of Cyprus and
its people our best wishes for success in their efforts
to achieve a truly independent national, political and
economic life and democratic form of government.

72. Au nom du gouvernement et du peuple polonais,
j'adresse au gouvernement et aupeuplechypriotes nos
meilleurs vceux de succ~s dans les efforts qu'ils font
pour aboutir h une vie nationale, politique et economique vraiment independante et h un regime democratique.

73. Over a century ago, the famous English poet Lord
Byron described Cyprus as a martyr island. Later
history confirmed his words in the most cruel way.
Today, in extending our best wishes to the people of
Cyprus, we wish above all that their charming island
should cease to be a martyr island and should become
for all its residents a truly sweet home.
74. In expressing our satisfaction at the attainment
of freedom by Cyprus and in extending to its people
our warmest congratulations and best wishes, we cannot refrain from expressing at the same time our
regrets and concern about the restrictions which have
been imposed upon the Republic of Cyprus by the
agreement on foreign military bases. According to
the provisions of this agreement, these bases will
remain on the island territory.

73. n y a plus d'un si~cle, Byron appelait Chypre
lIne martyre. Plus tard, 1'histoire a confirme ce nom
de la fagon la plus cruelle. Aujourd'hui, en exprimant
nos meilleurs vceux au peuple chypriote, nous souhaitons surtout que son ne charmante ne soit plus une
ne martyre et devienne pour tous ses habitants un
foyer vraiment heureux.

75. Consistently adhering to the principle of selfdetermination of peoples and supporting the national
aspirations of the people of Cyprus, the Polish People's Republic solemnly extended its recognition of
the Republic of Cyprus as an independent State. I
should like to avail myself of this opportunity in order
to express our sincere wishes and hopes that the
friendly relations between the Republic of Cyprus and
my country will grow and develop steadily, based on
the principles of peaceful coexistence, and that they
will contribute to the universal cause of peace.

75. Toujours fid~le au principe du droit des peuples
h disposer d'eux-memes et en appuyant constamment
les aspirations nationales de la population chypriote,
la Republique populaire de Pologne a reconnu solennellement 1'independance de la Republique de Chypre. Je
veux profiter de l'occasionpourexprimernos souhaits
et notre espoir sinc~re de voir grandir et se renforcer
constamment, selon les principes de la coexistence
pacifique, les relations amicales qui unissentlaRepublique de Chypre et mon pays et de les voir contribuer
h la cause universelle de la paix.

76. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from Spanish): The delegation of Ecuador has great pleasure in
taking part in the Security Council's examination of the
application of the Republic of Cyprus for membership
in the United Nations and in supporting the draft resolution submitted by Ceylon and the United Kingdom,
which asks the Council to make a recommendation to
the General Assembly in favour of the admission of
Cyprus.

76. M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de I'espagnol]:
La delegation equatorienne est tr~s heureuse de participer h l'examen de la demande d'admission de la
Republique de Chypre et d'appuyer le projet de resolution d€lpose par Ceylan et le Royaume-Uni aux
termes duquel le Conseil de s€lcurite recommanderait
h l'Assemblee g€lnerale de I'admettre commeMembre
de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

77. As I have had occasion to say several times during the current year, the arrival of a new independent
State as a member of the international community is
a reason for rejoicing among those of us who are deeply convinced that the principle of self-determination
of peoples is an expression of the essential justice
which must be the foundation of an international commUnity based on law and order.

77. Comme j'ai eu 1'occasion de le d€lclarerplusieurs
fois au cours de l'annee, l'entree d'un nouvel Etat
independant dans la communaute internationale est un
motif de grande joie pour nous tous, profondemeni:
convaincus que nous sommes que le principe de la libre
.determination est 1'expression delajusticefondamentale qui doit servir de base h un monde international
fonde sur l'ordre et sur le droit.

78. The General Assembly of the United Nations, and
some of the individual delegations within the Assembly, took part in the process which led to the independence. of Cyprus. I should like to emphasize this as
another reason why the delegation of Ecuador is very
glad to be present at this moment, one of historic significance for the Cypriot people, not only as being the
culmination of a legitimate popular movement for independence, but also because an international problem

78. L'Assemblee gen€lrale des Nations Unies et, dans
le cadre de I 'Assembl€le, certaines d€llegations en particulier, ont joue leur role dans le processus qui a
abouti h l'independance de Chypre. Je tienshle souligner, car c'est pour ma delegation une raison de plus
d'etre tr~s heureuse de se trouver presente ici en un
moment qui revet pour le peuple chyprioteune signification historique parce qu'il marque non seulement
l'aboutissement d'un legitime mouvement populaire

74. Tout en -9Xprimant notre satisfaction de voir
Chypre arrivee a l'independance et en adressant h sa
population nos felicitations les plus chaleureuses et
nos meilleurs vceux, nous ne pouvons· nous empecher
de manifester nos regrets et notre inquietude devant
les restrictions imposees h la Republique de Chypre
par 1'accord relatif aux bases militaires etraiJ.g~res.
Selon les clauses de cet accord, ces bases demeureront
sur le territoire de 1'ilea

13

vers 1'ind~pendance, mais aussi la solution d'un probl~me international qui avait gdt~ les bonnes relations
d'Etats amis.
79. Par sa position g~ographique, par la diversite de
ses habitants, par son histoire dynamique et mouvement~e, par la varit€lt~ des influences culturelles
qu'elle a subies, Chypre est appelee ~ apporter une
importante contribution ~ la vie internationale, tout
particuli~rement dans le cadre des Nations Unies.
Crest pour moi un honneur que de feliciter son peuple
et son gouvernement pour leur accession ~ 1'independance et de leur souhaiter, au nom du gouvernement
et du peuple de 1'Equateur, une amicale bienvenue dans
1'Organisation des Nations Unies•.

which had impaired good relations between friendly
States has at last been solved.
79. Because of its geographical position, its heterogeneous population, its turbulent and eventful history
and the many cultural influences which have affected
it, Cyprus can make a great contribution to international life, especially within the United Nations. It
is an honour for me to cOl;gratulate its people and
Government on their independence and to welcome
them to the United Nations on behalf of the Government
and people of Ecuador.

80. I should also like the Government of the United
Kingdom to know how gratified we are thatthe Cyprus
problem has been solved. In this process we feel that
the United Kingdom has once again showed its admirable spirit of conciliation, its political realism
and its foresightedness.

80. QU'il me soit egalement permis de dire au Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni combien nous sommes
satisfaits de voir r~solu le probl~me de Chypre et
heureux de 1'admirable esprit de conciliation, du realisme politiqueet dEl la pr~voyance dont le RoyaumeUni a fait preuve une fois de plus ~ cette occasion.

81. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
My delegation notes with great pleasure today the application for membership by the Republic of Cyprus.
The Cypriots and Tunisians are both Mediterranean
peoples and they have always maintained friendly relations. The Tunisian Government and people were
therefore delighted at the proclamation of the independence 'of the Republic of Cyprus as a fully sovereign
State on 16 August 1960 andwe have been happy to note
that goodwill has been restored between the different
communities, essentially religious communities, in
the young Republic.

81. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Crest un reel plaisir pourma
del~gation que

d'enregistrer aUjourd'hui la demande
par la R~publique de Chypre pour etre
admise comme Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Egalement peuples mediterraneens, les deux
peuples chypriote et tunisien ont eu, de tout temps, des
contacts continus et amicaux. Crest dire avec quelle
joie le gouvernement et le peuple tunisiens ont accueilli
la proclamation, le 16 aout 1960, de 1'independance de
la Republique de Chypre comme Etat pleinement
souverain. Nous avons ete heureux de constater
l'etablissement d'une saine harmonie entre les differentes communautes ~ caract~re essentiellement
religieux qui existent dans la jeune republique.
present~e

82. The arrangements and guarantees which the parties concerned have agreed on constitute a satisfactory
basis for keeping the Cypriot people united in justice
and equity, and heralding an age of brotherhood between citizens haVing the same rights and duties and
the same patriotic feelings towards their country.

82. Les arrangements et garanties dont les differentes
parties en cause sont convenues constituent unheureux
ensemble de nature ~ maintenir 1'union du peuple
chypriote sur la base de la justice et de 1requite,
assurant ainsi une ~re de fraternite entre les citoyens
ayant les memes droits et les memes devoirs, ainsi
que les memes sentiments patriotiques ~ 1regard de
leur pr.ys.

83. This sense of fellow-feeling has been possible
only because the various groups which make up the
Cypriot people consider themselves exclusively as
Cypriot citizens, and are not linked by any ties of
citizenship to another country, even though they may
have normal links with them of a purely moral and
sentimental kind.

83. Une telle harmonie n'a ete possible qu'~ une
condition essentielle, celle que les diff~rents elements
chypriotes se consid~rent exclusivement" comme citoyens chypriotes n 'ayant aucune attache de citoyennete
avec un autre pays auquel ils pourraient se sentir
lies par des liens normaux de caract~re moral ou
sentimental.

84. With this background, the young Republic can
embark on international life as a healthy and stable
COlintry which conforms to the principles of international law. I have pleasure, therefore, in expressing
to the Governments of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Greece and Turkey our
gratitude for the efforts they have made to bring this
about and thus help the Cypriot people to enjoy full
sovereignty and independence.

84. C'est cette condition qui a permis ~ la jeune
Republique de se presenter ~ la vie internationale
sous une forme saine et stable, conforme aux principes essentiels du droit international. n m'est done
agreable d'exprimer aux Gouvernements duRoyaumeUni de Grande-Bretagne etd'IrlandeduNord, deGr~ee
et de Turquie 1'expression de notre gratitude pour les
efforts qu'ils ont deployes en vue d'un tel aboutissement et d'avoir ainsi aide le peuple chypriote ~ jouir
pleinement de sa souverainete et de son independance.

85. I should like to offer my sincerest congratulations
to the Cypriot people and their gallant leaders-in
particular Archbishop Makarios, the first President
of the Republic of Cyprus-and to wish them all happiness and prosperity.

85. Je ne saurais oublier d'adresser au peuple
chypriote et ~ ses chefs valeureux - et specialement
~ l'archeveque Makarios, le premier President de la
Republique de Chypre - nos felicitations les plus
sinc~res et nos vreux les plus ardents de bonheur et
de prosp~rite.

14

86. When it joins the international community, I am
certain that the young Mediterranean republic will
make its contribution to co-operation and friendship
between nations and international peace and security.

86. Ell se joignant li la communaut€linternationale, la
jeune r~publique mediterraneell."'1e contribuera, j'enai
la conviction, li la consolidation de la cooperation et
de 1'amiti~ entre nations, autant qu'i'lla consolidation
de la paix et de la s~curit~ internationales.

87. For these reasons my delegation will voteforthe
draft resolution submitted by Ceylon and the United
Kingdom, recommending that the Republic of Cyprus
be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

87. C 'est pour ces raisons que ma d~l~gationapprouvera le projet de r~solution pr~sent~ par Ceylan et
le Royaume-Uni qui recommande 1'admission de la
R~publique de Chypre i'l 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

88. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Today the Security
Council must consider the statement of Archbishop
Makarios, Head of the Republic of Cyprus, in which
the Republic of Cyprus, expressing the desire to assume the responsibilities devolvingupop.it at the international level and to co-operate in the activities of the
United Nations, applies for admission to membership
in the United Nations.

88. M. MOROZOV (Union desR~publiquessocialistes
sovi~tiques) [traduit du russe]: Le Conseil de s~curite
doit se prononcer aUjourd'hui sur la d~claration pr~
sent~e par le President de la Republique de Chypre,
Mgr Makarios, et dans laquelle son pays, desireux
d'assumer les obligations qui lui incombent sur le
plan' international et de participer aux travaux de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies, demande i'l etre
admis comme Membre de notre organisation.

89. The proclamation of the independence of Cyprus,
on 16 August of this year, as a result of which the
United Kingdom Government, having ruled the island
since 1878, turned over its authority to the republican
government headed by President Makarios, was made
possible by the valiant struggle of the Cypriots for
freedom and independence-a struggle which became
sharply intensified after the Second World War.

89. Le 16 aoftt 1960, 1'independance de Chypre a ete
proclamee et le Gouvernement britannique, qui exer~ait sa domination sur 1'ile depuis 1878, a remis le
pouvoir au gouvernement republicain preside par
Mgr Ma}:arios. S'il a pu en etreainsi, c'est gr~ce i'lla
lutte courageuse menee par le peuple chypriote pour
la liberte et 1'~ndependance, avec une intensite particuli~re depuis la seconde guerre mondiale.

90. For the Cypriots the formation of the Republic

90. La formatiqn de la Republique de Chypre repr~
sente pour les Chypriotes une etape importante dans
la lutte pour 1'independance. On sait que 1'Union sovi~
tique a toujours ete aux cotes du peuple de Chypre dans
ses efforts contre la domination coloniale et qu'elle
a constamment defendu ici, i'lla tribune de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies, le droit des Chypriotes li la
libre d~termination.

of Cyprus is an important stage in the struggle for
independence. It is well known that the Soviet Union
has always sided with the people of Cyprus in their
struggle against colonial domination and has consistently upheld in the United Nations the Cypriots'
right to self-determination.
91. Hence it was only natural that on the day when
the flag of the new Republic was raised over Cyprus
the Soviet Union should have solemnly proclaimed its
recognition of the Republic of Cyprus as a sovereign
state and expressed its readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it.

91. C'est pourquoi il est naturel que, le jour oil le
drapeau de la nouvelle republique s'est deploye sur
Chypre, 1'URSS ait solennellement declare reconnaitre
la Republique comme un Etat souverain et etre prate
li ~tablir avec elle des relations diplomatiques.

92. At the solemn moment when we consider the admission of a new Member to the United NationS it is
customary not to refer to matters that might in any
way dampen the spirit of the occasion. For my own
part I should have liked to folloW that rule had it not
been for that part of the statement made by the United
K::~gdom representative, in which he saw fit to emphasize certain matters that might better have been
~~ft unmentioned on this particular day.

92. An moment solennel oilnous discutons del'admission d'un nouveauMembre i'll 'Organisation, il n 'est pas
d'usage de parIer de choses qui risquent d'assombrir
tant soit peu l'atmosph~re. Je me serais, i'l vrai dire,
conforme i'l cette r~gle, n' etaitl 'intervention du representant du Royaume-Uni, qui a cru devoir souligner
plilsieurs points qu'il n'y avait peut-etre pas lieu
d'aborder precisement aujourd'hui.

93. In that conneJC.ion I must say that in the light of
certain statements made here concerning the circumstances in which the Republic of Cyprus was formed
and certain special features which are contrary to the
principle of sovereignty, a few brief remarks are
called for. I have in mind the prOVisions which relate
to the retention by a foreign Power of certain exclusive
rights and privileges in the island of Cyprus-I repeat,
exclusive rights and privileges-in connexion with its
military bases.

93. A cet ~gard, on est force d'observer que certaines allusions faites tout i'l 1'heure i'l des circonstances entourant la creation de la Republique de Chypre
et i'l diverses actions contraires au principe de la
souverainet~ appellent quelql1es br~ves remarques.
Nous voulons parler des dispositions relatives au
maintien des droits exc1usifs et des privi1~ges d'une
puissance ~trang~re sur 1'ile de Chypre - je souligne:
droits exclusifs et privi1~ges - en ce qui concerne les
bases militaires.

94. It is hardly necessary to demonstrate in detail
that foreign military bases in the island of Cyprus do
not in any way serve to ensure the security of the

94. Point n 'est besoin de prouver par a
b que
1'existence de bases militaires ~trang~res sur 1'lle de
Chypre ne peut de toute ~vidence avoir le moindre

+

15

Republic of Cyprus, which, incidentally, is not threatened with attack from any quarter.

rapport avec le maintien de la sllcuritll de la Republique
de Chypre sur laquelle, cela va de soi, ne ~se aucune
menace d'agression, d'ot que ce soit.

95. Having said this, I wish to express the hope
that the people of Cyprus, now that they have asserted
their right to independent statehood and are joining
the United Nations family, wilfbe able, with the support of peace-loving nations, to do away with all the
vestiges of colonialism.

95. Cela dit, je voudrais exprimer 1'espoir que le
peuple de Chypre, qui a fait valoir son droit ~ 1'independance, saura, en entrant dans lafamille des Nations
Unies, mettre fin, avec 1'appui des peuples pacifiques,
~ toutes les sequelles du colonialisme.

96.ln that connexion the USSR delegation expresses
confidence that the Government of Cyprus in its policies will consistently abide by the assurance it has
given that it will in every way fulfil the obligations
stipulated in the United Nations Charter.
97. The USSR delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution recommending the admission of the
Republic of Cyprus to membership in the United
Nations.

96. A ce propos, la delegation sovietique est convaincue que le Gouvernement chypriote ne faillira jamais
~ 1'engagement qu'il a pris de respecter pleinement
les obligations qu'impose la Charte des NationsUnies.

98. At the same time we wish to make it clear that
our vote for the draft resolution should not be interpreted as signifying any recognition whatsoever by the
Soviet Union of the provisions relating to the retention
of foreign military bases in the island of Cyprus to
which reference was made during the discussion.
99. In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to state
that the peoples of the Soviet Union whole-heartedly
wish the' citizens of the new Republic success in consolidating their State sovereignty and building a flourishing and peace-loving Republic of Cyprus.

98. Elle tient en meme temps ~ preciser que ce vote
ne saurait nullement s'interpreter comme une reconnaissance quelconque par 1'URSS des dispositions
relatives au ma.intien sur 1file de Chypre de bases
militaires etrang~res, dont on a fait mention au cours
de 1'examen de la question.
99. Pour conclure, permettez-moi de declarer que les
peuples de 1'URSS forment des vooux pour le succ~s
des efforts deployes par les citoyens de la nouvelle
republique en vue de consGlider leur independance
nationale et d'Mifier une Republique de Chypre
prosp~re et pacifique.

100. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): Since
the list of speakers is exhausted, I should now like to
say a few words as the representative of FRANCE.

100. Le PRESIDENT: La liste des orateurs etant
epuisee, je vais main16nant prononcer quelques paroles en ma qualite de representant de la FRANCE.

101. For many years, whenever the United Nations
turned its attention to Cyprus, it did so in order to
deplore the conflict which was hampering the development of the island. Today the Security Council is called
upon to note that a satisfactory settlement has been
made and that the Republic of Cyprus fulfils all the
conditions laid down for membership in the United
Nations. My delegation is most gratified that this is
so. We are particularly happy that three countries
which are friends and allies of France have ended
their dispute and, together with the qualified representatives of local communities, have found a solution
favourable to the interests of the Cypriot people.

101. Au cours de nombreuses annees ecoulees,
lorsque 1'attention de 1'Organisation des Nations UDies
se portait sur Chypre, c 'etait pour deplorer le conflit
qlli entravait la vie de la grande fie. Le Conseil de
securitll est appele aujourd'hui ~ constater qu'un
r~glement satisfaisant est intervenu et que la Republique de Chypre remplit toutes les conditions requises pour etre admise ~ 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Ma delegation en €lprouve la plus vive satisfaction. Elle se rejouit tout particuli~rement que trois
pays amis et allies de la France aient su mettre fin
~ la querelle qui les divisait, pour trouver, avec les
representants qualifies des communautes locales, une
solution favorable aux interets de la population
chypriote.

102. For over four years this question was raised in
the General Assembly. It gave rise to speech after
speech, passionate debate and a host of suggestions.
However, we should note that it was solved outside the
United Nations. After a first meeting between the Greek
and Turkish Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Paris,
delegations of both countries met at Zurich; later; the
details of the tripartite agreement were worked out in
London, and it was signed on 19 February 1959.

102. Pendant plus de quatre ans, cette question a ete
evoquee ~ l'Assemblee generale. Elle y a donne lieu
~ des interventions repetees, ~ des debats passionnes
et ~ des suggestions multiples. Nous devons pourtant
constater que c'est en dehors de l'Organisation quela
solution a ete trouvee. Apr~s une premi~re rencontre
a Paris des ministres grec et turc des affairea
etrang~res, c'est a ZUrich que se sont reunies lea
delegations des deux pays, puis c'est ~ Londres qu'ont
ete mis au point les details de 1'Accord tripartite qui
a ete signe le 19 fevrier 1959.

103. This solution was certainly made easier by the
fact that the neighbouring countries, even if they regarded the fate of these comlllunitiesas a matter of
concern to them, had the good sense to abstain from
any kind of interference.

103. Cet16 solution a, sans aucun doute, ete facilitee
par le fait que les pays voisins, meme s'ils se consideraient comme intllress€ls par le sort de ces communautes, ont eu la sagesse de respecter une stricte
attitude de non-ingllrence.

97. La delegation sovi~tique votera pour le projet de
resolution recomm.andant d'admettre la Republique de
Chypre ~ notre Organisation.

16

104. I should like to tell the representatives of Greece
and Turkey here how much the moderate and conciliatory spirit shown by their countries has been admired.
Greece and Turkey deserve the thanks of the international community. The solution which has been
reached respects the rights of all communities and
takes care not to allow anyone of them to dominate
the others, which means that the settlement reached
bids fair to be a lasting one and makes for peace.

104. Je voudrais dire aux representants de la Gr~ce
et de la Turquie ici pl>esents combien ont ete apprecies
la moderation etl'esprit de conciliation dont leurs pays
ont fait preuve. Que la Gr~(.,~ et la Turquie en soient
remerciees par la communaute internationale. La
solution qui a ete trouvee respecte les droits des
differentes communautes et prend soin de ne pas
imposer sur 1'ensemble de celles-ci la domination de
l'une d'entre elles. Ainsi, le r~glement intervenu
pourra-t-il etre durable et assurer la paix.

105. My delegation would like to congratulate the
United Kingdom sincerely on the success achieved.
During these difficult years, the United Kingdom has
never lost its imperturbability and political wisdom.
The British Government has refused to be swayed by
any pressure or violence, and has patiently sought a
solution which it felt deep down to be reasonable and
just.

105. Ma delegation voudrait adr,,:,sser au RoyaumeUni ses plus sinc~res felicitations pour le succ~s
obtenu. Tout au long de ces annees difficiles, le
Royaume-Uni ne s'est jamais departi de son sangfroid et de sa sagesse politique. Refusant de s'en
laisser imposer par aucune pression ni aucune viO'"'
lence, le Gouvernement britannique a patiemment
poursuivi la recherche de la solution qu 'en son ame
et conscience il jugeait raisonnable et juste.

106. In the long history of Cyprus, aFrenchmancannot help but recall the three centuries during which
the Kingdom of the Lusignan endeavoured to keep the
Christian peace there. But the most remarkable thing
in its history, to my mind, is the way in which several
continents hJ.ve rubbed shoulders in this great island.
These contacts were sometimes violent, but more often
very fruitful. In antiquity there were the Persians and
Greeks; then came Rome and Byzantium; later there
were Genoese and Venetians on the one side and Turks
on the other. The tide of history has ebbed and flowed
many times over Cyprus. It has frequently been found
that civilization develops best where two worlds meet.
It was so in Cyprus. Since ancient times, the island
has boasted a magnificent culture and" has produced
art of the highest order. Today we may hope that the
conflicts of the past will not be repeated. Indeed, since
Cyprus is still a"t the cross-roadsof several continents
~nd several civilizations, there is every reason to beneve that it will keep up the traditions of its brilliant
l?ast.

106. De la longue histoire de Chypre, un Fr:in~ais
ne peut manquer de rappeler ces trois si~cle8 durant
lesquels le royaume des Lusignan s'attacha ~ y faire
regner la paix chretienne. Mais ce qui me frappe
surtout dans cette histoire, ce sont les contactsparfois brutaux, mais plus souvent feconds - qui se
sont etablis dans la grande ne entre plusieurs continents. Perses et Grecs dans 1'Antiquite; Rome et
Byzance ensuite; plus tard, Genois et Venitiens, d'une
part, et Turcs de 1'autre: Chypre a ete recouverte ~
maintes reprises par le flux et le reflux de 1'histoire.
C'est un fait maintes fois constate que la civilisation
se developpe de preference au point de contact de deux
mondes. AinSi en a-t-il {,t~ de Chypre. Depuis les
temps les plus anciens, l'n£:1 a connula.eulture la plus
brillante et des manifestations artistiques de premier
ordre. Nous pouvons aujourd'hui avoirlefermeespoir
que les heurts dupasseneserenouvellerontpas. n y a
tout lieu de penser, au contraire, que, demeurant ce
point de contact entre plusieurs continents et plusieurs
civilisations, Chypre continuera d'apporter au monde
cet eclat qui 1'a paree au cours des sillcles.

107. The Cypriot people have always shown intelligence and endurance, and we welcome them heartily
to the United Nations. In particular, they will have the
good wishes of all Mediterranean Powers, of which my
country is one. This is yet another reason why my
delegation hopes that the draft resolution recommending the admission of the Republic of Cyprus to our
community of nations will be adopted unanimously.

107. Au peuple chypriote, qui s 'est toujours caracterise par ses qualites d'intelligence et d'endurance,
soUhaitons la bienvenue la plus amicale dans notre
organisation. Tel est le voou que forment, avec une
chaleur particuli~re, toutes les puissances mediterraneennes, parmilesquelles monpays se compte. C'est
une raison de plus pour laquelle ma delegation soUhaite
que soit adopte ~ 1'unanimite le projet de resolution
recommandant l'admission de laRepubliquedeChypre
dans no~re communaute des nations.

108. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): If
no one wishes to speak, I should like to put to the vote
the draft resolution submitted by Ceylon and the United "
Kingdom [8/4458J.

108. Le PRESIDENT: Si personne ne demande maintenant la parole, j'aimerais mettre aux voixleprojet de
resolution presente par Ceylan et le Royaume-Uni
[S/4458J.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.

Al'unanimite, le projet de resolution est adoptl.

Tribute to M.r. Henry Cabot Lodge,
representative of the United States of America

HQmmage Cl M.. Henry Cabot Lodge,
representant des Etats·Unis d' Amerique

109. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Before I adjourn this meeting, I should like, on my own
behalf and, I think, on behalf of everyone here, to say
a few words to our colleague, Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge,
since this is, I think, the last time he will be present
at a meeting of the Security Council.

109. Le PRESIDENT: Avant de lever la seance, je
voudrais, en mon nom personnel et, je pense, en votre
nom ~ tous, dire un mot ~ notre coll~gu£J, M. Henry
Cabot Lodge, qui; je crois, assiste pour la derni~re
fois aujourd'hui ~ une reunion du Conseil de sllcurite.
17

110. Ever Bince I have been with the United Nations,
I have watched how Mr. Lodge has given the Council
the benefit of his long and unrivalled experience, his
great intelligence, his parliamentary gifts andhis fair
and straightforward debating manner. Many of us occasionally, and I myself frequently, have disagreed
with him on particular points, but none of us has found
fault with the way in which he defended his views.

110. Depuis que je suis aux Nations Unies, j'aiconstate que M. Lodge apportait ~ ce conseil 1'experience
unique qu'il avait recueillie au cours de longues annees,
et, en mame temps que la vaste intelligence qui le
caracterise, un grand sens des debats et une faQon
toujours loyale de les conduire. Parfois, I 'un ou
i'autre d'entre nous, moi-mame souvent, n'a pas ete
d'accord avec lui sur tel ou telpoint, mais la mani~re
dont il defendait ses wes ne pouvait donner lieu de la
part d'aucun d'entre nous ~ aucune critique.

111. I think every member of the Council regrets
losing him, and I should like to say what a pleasure
it has been to work with him.
112. Mr. BEELEY (United Kingdom): I am very happy, in the name of my delegation, to associate myself
with the tribute that you, Mr. President, have just
paid to the representative of the United States. He has
played so large a part in our work, not only here in
the Security Council but in the General Assembly as
well, that I think we can truly say that the United
Nations will not be the same without him.

111. Je crois que ce sont des regrets unanimes qu'il
emporte de la part de notr~ conseil et je voudrais lui
exprimer encore toute la satisfaction qu'en ce qui me
concerne j'ai eue ~ travailler avec lui.
112. M. BEELEY (Royaume-Uni) [traduitde l'anglais]:
:Au nom de ma del€lgation, je suis tr~s heureux de
m 'associer ~ 1'hommage que notre president vient de
rendre au representant des Etats-Unis. M. Lodge a
tant contribue ~ nos travaux, non seulement au Conseil
de securite, mais aussi ~ 1'Assemblee g€merale, que
nous pouvons dire en toute verite que notre Organisation ne sera plus la mame apr~s son depart.

113. My delegation has, I think, been exceptionally
fortunate in the opportunities it has had to work with
Mr. Lodge and to appreciate the tireless vigour with
which he has served the interests not only of his own
country but of the Organization of the United Nations
and of the world as a whole.

113. C'est une bonne fortune exceptionnelle qUi est
echue ~ ma delegation que de pouvoir collaborer avec
M. Lodge et apprecier 1'infatigable €mergie avec
laquelle il a servi non seulement les interats de son
propre pays, mais aussi ceux de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies et de 1'ensemble du monde.

114. It would perhaps be scarcely proper for a foreigner to express any thoughts about Mr. Lodge's
immediate future, but I can assure him that whatever
that future may be he will carry with him our warmest
wishes for his success and happiness.

114. n ne sied peut-atre gu~re ~ un etranger de
parier de 1'avenir immediat de M. Lodge, mais je puis
lui assurer que, quel que soit cet avenir, il emportera
avec lui nos vreux les plus chaleureux de succes et
de bonheur.

115. Mr. PLAJA (Italy): Mr. President, I am very
happy to associate myself with the tribute you have
just paid to Ambassador Lodge. We certainly shall
miss him very much in this Council. Over a period of
many years his contributions to;he activities of our
Council, as well as those of the General Assembly and
other bodies of the Organization, have been outstanding
and, as a matter of fact, invaluable. All through these
past fateful years he has placed his ability, his prestige and faith at the service of the lofty ideals of our
Organization, and I think we can rightly say that it is
just because men like Ambassador Lodge have given
their best to those ideals and to the work of the United
Nations, that our Organization has been able to grow
and to assert its prestige and authority all over the
world.

115. M. PLAJA (Italie) [tra~.,U de 1'anglais]: Monsieur le Presidt.nt, je suis tr~s heureux de m'associer
~ 1'hommage que vous venez de rendrb ~ M. Lodge,
ambassadeur des Etats-Unis. n nous manquera assur€lment beaucoup. Pendant bien des annees, il a
apporte A nos travaux et A ceux de l'Assemblee
generale et d'autres organes des Nations Unies une
contribution remarquable,je dirai mame inappreciable.
Pendant toutes ces am::.ees decisives, il a mis sa
competence, son prestige et sa foi au service des
nobles ideaux de notre organisation, et nous pourrions
dire ~ juste titre que c'est justement parce que des
hommes comme M. Lodge ontdonnelemeilleurd'euxmames ~ ces ideaux et ~ la cause des Nations Unies
que notre organisation a pu se developper et affirmer
son prestige et son autorite dans le monde entier.

116. I wish also to acknowledge on this occasion the
understanding which Ambassador Lodge has always
shown for my country, and I have been asked particularly by AmbassadorOrtona, who has spent many years
in Washington and who unfortunately has not been able
to be here with us today, to recall particularly ·the time
during which Ambassador Lodge participated' in the
Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs. I myself have
not forgotten how firmly Ambassador Lodge strove
in this same Council for the admission of Italy to the
United Nations during the long years in which my
COlL"1try was unjustly kept outside the O::'~anization.

116. Je tiens aussi, en cette occasion, ~ remercier
M. Lodge de 1'esprit de comprehension qu'il a toujours man::'feste pour mon pays; notre ambassadeur,
M. Ortona, qui a passe de nombreuses annees h
Washington, ne peut malheureusement pas atre present
ici aUjourd'hui; mais il m'a demande de rappeler
particuli~rement le temps oh M. Lodge siegeaf,t ~ la
Commission des affaires etrangeres du S€mat. Pour
ma part, je n'ai pas oublie la fermete avec laquelle
M. Lodge a appuye au Conseil la candidature de
1'Italie au cours des longues ann€les pendant lesqueUes mon pays a et€l injustement tenu ~ 1'€lcart de
1'Organisation.

117. On behalf of Ambassador Ortona and all members
of our· delegation, I wish .to express to Ambassador
Lodge our appreciation and thanks as well as our best
wishes for his future.

117. Au nom de M. Ortona et de tous les membres de
ma del€lgation, je tiens h exprimer h M. Lodge notre
gratitude, ainsi que nos meilleurs vreux.

18

118. Mr. TSIANG (China): If I were to say all that is
in my heart at this moment, people would say that I
am campaigning for Ambassador Lodge. Therefore
I will not do that. I think the American people can
judge how brilliantly he has served the interests of
the United States at the United Nations. I can say that
he has been a loyal friend and colleague, and that by
serving his country he has also promoted the ideals
and principles of the United Nations.

118. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais]: Si
j 'exprimais tous les sentiments que je ressens en ce
moment, on m 'accuserait de faire campagne pour
M. Lodge. Je ne le ferai donc pas. Je crois que le
peuple americain est capable de juger de quelle fac;on
brillante M. Lodge a servi les interets des Nations
Unies dans notre organisation. Je puis dire qu'ila ete
un ami et coll~gue fid~le, et qu 'en servant son pays,
il a egalement travaille pour les ideaux et les principes des Nations Unies.

119. A long historic friendship has existed between
the Chinese and the American peoples. In all that
AmbassRdor Lodge has said and done at the United
Nations he has strengthened that friendship. For that
reason I am particularly grateful to Ambassador Lodge
and I shall miss him after his resignation.

119. Le peuple chinois et le peuple americain sont
unis par une longue tradition d'amitie. M. Lodge 1'a
encore renforcee par tout ce qu'il a dit et fait ici.
C'est pourquoi je lui suis particuli~rement reconnaissant; crest pourquoi je sais que je le regretterai.

120. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
Mr. President, you have eloquently expressed our regret that Ambassador Lodge is soon to leave us to
seek another career. I shall not try to express as fully
as I would wish my personal friendship for him, but
I should like to associate the Tunisian delegation with
what you have said.

120. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Vous avez, Monsieur le

President, exprime clairement nos sentiments de
regret ll. 1'annonce du depart prochain, pour une autre
destinee, de 1'ambassadeur des Etats-Unis, M. Lodge.
Mettant une sourdine aux sentiments personnels
d'amitie qui m'animent,je voudrais toutefois m'associer, au nom de la delegation tunisienne, aux sentiments de regret que vous venez d'exprimer.

121. In the course of our work in the Security Council
and elsewhere, as well as in the General Assembly,
we have appreciated the wide experience of Ambassador Lodge and his devotion to the principles of the
Charter, to the cause of the United Nations, to sincere
international peace and co-operation and to the principles of freedom and brotherhood between nations.

121. Au cours de nos travaux au sein de ce conseil
ou ailleurs, comme au cours des seancesdel'Assemblee g(merale, ma delegation a pu apprecier la grande
experience de M. Lodge, son attachement aux principes de notre charte, son devouement ll. la cause des
Nations Unies, ll.la cause d'une paix et d'une collaboration internationale sinc~res et aux principes de
liberte et de fraternite entre les nations.

122. His untiring energy and the sincerity and con-

122. Son (mergie infatigable, la sincerite et la con-

viction with which he defended his views have always
won our admiration and respect.

viction avec lesquelles il a toujours loyalement defendu
ses points de vue ont force notre admiration et notre
respect.

123. Without Wishing to interfere in any way in the

123. Sans vouloir intervenir en aucune fac;on dans les
affaires interieures de son pays, je me permets de lui
exprimer nos vooux les plus sinc~res.

internal affairs of his country, I should like to offer
him our sincerest good wishes.
124. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from Spanish): Mr. President, you have spoken for all of us, and
it remains only for me to say, as the representative
of Ecuador, that I entirely endorse your words of farewell to Ambassador Lodge.

124. M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de l'espagnol]:

Vous avez, Monsieur le President, parle ennotrenom
ll. tous et, en ma qualite de representant de l'Equateur,
je ne puis que me declarer enti~rement d'accordavec
les paroles d'adieu que vous avez adressees a
M. Lodge, ambassadeur des Etats-Unis.

125. My short association with Ambassador Lodge

125. N'ayant connu M. Lodge que pendant peu de
temps, je conserve pourtant, au moment de son depart,
un souvenir agreable de notre association et un profond
respect pour sa personne. M. Lodge sait etre un ami
tout en sachant qu'il peut yavoirdesdesaccords entre
amis; et, quand pareils desaccords se produisent, il
sait comment parvenir ll. la conciliation; il connalt
aussi les voies difficiles de ia cooperation internationale, ot!. il faut donner autant que recevoir, et qui
est faite de concessions reciproques. Je garderai un
tr~s agreable souvenir des rapports que j 'ai eus avec
M. Lodge.

l~aves me, at this moment when he is leaVing us, with

a very pleasant memory and a deep respect for him.
Ambassador Lodge is a good friend who knows that
friends fall out, and when this happens he knows how
to reconcile them. He also understands the difficult
art of international co-operation, in which there must
be both give and take. It has been an enjoyable experience to work with Ambassador Lodge.

126. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): Mr. President, I
;.-ish to associate myself whole heartedly with everything you have said about Mr. Lodge, but I should like
to add just a few words personally ~ I think that we all
agree on one thing, and that is that we shall miss Mr.
Lodge when he leaves the scene of the United Nations
-a scene on which he has acted a very valuable part.

126. Sir ClaudeCOREA(Ceylan)[traduitde l'anglais]:

Je tiens ll. m'associer de tout creur, Monsieur le
President, ll. tout ce que vous avez dit au sujet de
M. Lodge, mais je voudrais ajouter quelques remarques personnelles. J e crois que nous sommes tous
d'accord sur un point: M. Lodge nous manqueraquand
il aura quitte 1'Organisation, ot!. il a joue un tr~s grand

19

He will without doubt leave a void which it will be difficult indeed to fill.

r81e. Son depart va creer un vide qui sera vraiment
difficile ~ combler.

127. Those of us particularly who found in him a good
personal friend were greatly attracted by his charming
and magnetic personality. He made himself well known
as a tenacious and redoubtable debater; he couldforcefully present the point of view of his country, but he
could also, at the same time, fight courageously for
principles which he believed in and which he held to
be sacred. In such cases he has always shown the
courage of his convictions. We can all recall the many
instances when, perhaps incurring the displeasure for
the moment of some of his ownfriends, he upheld with
dignity the application to certain situations of the principles of fair play, justice and freedom.

127. Ceux d'entre nous, en particulier, quionttrouve

en lui un ami personnel etaient pris par le charme et
le magnetisme de sa personnalite. On a eu vite fait de
le connartre pour un "debater" tenace et redoutable;
il etait capable de soutenir avec force la th~se de son
pays, mais il pouvait aussi lutter courageusement pour
les principes auxquels il croyait et qu'il estimait
sacres. En pareil cas, il a toujours eu le courage de
ses convictions. Nous pouvons tous nous rappeler les
nombreuses circonstances oh, au risque de deplaire
temporairement ~ quelques-uns de ses amis, il a
defendu avec dignit€ll 'application ~ certaines situations
des principes du franc jeu, de la justice et de la
libert€l.
128. Une qualit€l de M. Lodge afaitsurmoi, au cours

128. One particular quality which has impressed itself
on me in recent months is Mr. Lodge's readiness to
understand the other man's point of view and to try
to approach a problem in the spirit of tolerance so
that, by adopting the spirit of give and take, he was
able to contribute to the reaching of compromises-not
compromises on matters of fundamental principle, but
compromises which are essential for the settlement
of problems which arise in the United Nations.

des derniers mois, une impression particuli~re: la
bonne volonte qu'il met ~ comprendre le point de vue
des autres et ~ essayer d'aborder un probl~me avec
tol€lrance, de sorte qu'il a pu, anim€l d'Ull esprit de
conciliation, contribuer ~ faire adopter des compromis, non pas sur les principes fondamentaux, mais
sur des points indispensables au r~glement des probl~mes qui se posent ici.

129. For all these things we certainly shall miss Mr.

129. Pour toutes ces raisons, M. Lodge nous man-

Lodge f:r:om our midst, and all that we can say at this
time is that, as he has accepted the call of his country
to serve in another sphere, we wish him every success
in Whatever field of actiVity his lot may be cast. We
wish him Godspeed and every happiness.

quera certainement, et tout ce que nous pouvons dire
en ce moment, c'est que, puisque son pays 1'appelle
~ servir dans un autre domaine et qu'il repond ~ cet
appel, nous lui souhaitons plein succ~s dans toute
sph~re d'activitequi pourra lui echoir. Nous lui
souhaitons bonne chance et tout le bonheur possible.
130. M. MOROZOV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Je voudrais
joindre la voix de la delegation sovietique ~ celle de
mes coll~gues qui ont exprime leur regret de voir
1'ambassadeur des Etats-Unis, M. Lodge, quitter le
poste qu'il occupe au Conseil de securite.

130. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Re-

publics) (translated from Russian): I Should like to
associate the voice of my de16gation with those of my
colleagues who have expressed their regret at the
departure of Ambassador Lodge, the United States
representative, from his post on the Security Council.

131. Cela dit, je me rends parfaitement compte que
ma declaration ne peut avoir le mame poids que celles
de mes coll~gues, pour la bonne raison que ce n'est
que la troisi~me fois que je participe ~ une s€lance du
Consen de securit€l. Je voudrais cependant souligner
qu 'au cours de ces trois s€lances, le Conseil a pris
neuf importantes d€lcisions sur 1'admission de nouveaux Etats ~ 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Ces
decisions ont €lte adopt€les ~ 1'unanimite: les Eta-tsUnis et l'Union sovietiqueontdonctousdeuxvote pour.

131. In saying this I am aware that I cannot do so

with the same authority as my colleagues, for the simple reason that this is only the third time I have had
the honour of taking part in a meeting of the Security
Council. Nevertheless, I should like to stress the fact
that it has been precisely during these three meetings
that nine important resolutions have been adopted
concerning the admission of new States to the United
Nations family. The resolutions in question were
adopted unanimously. Both the Soviet Union and
the United States vote whole-heartedly in favour of
them.

132. Comme mes coll~gues me 1'ont dit et comme il

132. According to what I have heard from my col-

m'est arrive de le lire dans la presse, en d'autres
occasions il y a eu de "leg~res" divergences de vues
entre nos d€ll€lgations au Conseil, mais aUjourd'hui je
voudrais oublier ce qui nous s€lpare pour ne penser
qu'~ ce qui nous unit. Et, si vous permettez que j'en
revienne au vote qui a eu lieu avec ma modeste participation au cours des trois derni~res s€lances du
Consen, je voudrais souligner qu'n s 'agissait d'agrandir la famille des Nations Unies pour y accueillir de
nouveaux Etats et donner ~ notre organisation un
caract~re plus representatif, plus universel. Ce vote
a ete, daus un sens large, un vote pour 1'idee de la
coexistence pacifique et de 1'emulation pacifique entre
les Etats aux regimes politiques, economiques et sociaux differents. Je voudrais y voir un presage du

leagues and what I have sometimes read in the newspapers, on other occasions there have been some
"slight" differences of opinion between our delegations
in this Council; I should like at this time, however,
to recall not what separates us but rather what unites
us. If I may be permitted to refer once again to the
voting which took place with my modest participation in
these three most recent meetings of the Council, I
should like to stress that the votes taken were votes
to expand the United Nations family, to admit new
States, to give our Organization a more representative
and universal character. They were in a broad sense
votes for the idea of peaceful co-existence and peaceful
competition between countries with differing poHtical,
economic and social systems. I should like to rl~gard
20

that as a happy augury at this moment when the members of the Council are addressing their good wishes
to Mr. Lodge.

meilleur augure au moment Oll les membres du Conseil
adressent AM. Lodge leurs vooux amicaux.

133. Mr. AMADEO (Argentina) (translated from Spanish): Mr. President, T believe you have very good
reasons for wanting us to be brief. In any case it would
be hard to add much to what has already been said in
tribute to Ambassador Lodge. In this Council he represents a great nation; however, he is respected not only
for this reason but also because of his outstanding
personal qualities.

133. M. AMADEO (Argentine) [traduit del'espagnol]:

134. As 'an Argentine and a Latin-American, I should
like to mention the cordial relations which exist and
have existed between representatives from our part of
the world and Ambassador Lodge. I must emphasize
that he has been a mighty champion of understanding
between the United States and Latin America, based
on mutual respect and equality.

134. En tant qu'Argentin et en tant que citoyen de
1'Amerique latine, j'ai le devoir de rappeler les relations cordiales qui existent - et ont toujours existe entre les representants de notre region et M. Lodge,
qui a et€J - je tiens A le souligner - le valeureux
champion d'une entente entre les Etats-Unis et les
pays d'Am€Jrique latine, entente fondee sur le respect
reciproque et l'egalit€J de traitement.

135. I should also like to say that we are moved, at
the moment, by two conflicting feelings. We are sad
that Ambassador Lodge is soon to leave us, but at the
same time we are delighted that a large group of his
fellow-citizens has chosen him for the responsible
task he now faces. Finally, on my own behalf, I want
to add that we have had the good fortune to be near
neighbours of Ambassador Lodge at the Council table,
and thus we have perhaps had a better chance than
some of our colleagues to get to know him.

135. Je dois egalement declarer que nous sommes
actuellement partag€ls entre deux sentiments contradictoires: la tristesse de voir tr~s prochainement
partir M. Lodge et la satisfaction de savoir qu'une
importante fraction de ses compatriotes lui a confie
les responsabilit~squ'il va maintenant assumer. Enfin,
A titre personnel, je voudrais ajouter que j 'ai ete
particuli~rementheureux d'etre le voisin deMo Lodge
~ la table du Conseil, ce qui m'a perrois d'avoir avec
lui plus de rapports que n'en ont peut-etre eus certains
de nos coll~gues.

136. Mr. MACHOWSKI (Poland): I should like to associate myself with the preceding speakers who have
extended their best wishes to Ambassador Lodge, who
will soon leave us, and to express in my personal
capacity, as well as on behalf of Ambassador Lewandowski, who was unable to participate in this meeting,
the most friendly wishes' of the Polish delegation.

136. M. MACHOWSKI (Pologne) [traduitdel'anglais]:

Vous avez, je crois, Monsieur le President, des raisons toutes speciales pour desirer que nous soyons
brefs. En outre, il serait difficile d'ajouter beaucoup
Ace qui a dejA etedit~>.~eloge de M. Lodge. M. Lodge,
represente une grande nation au sein de notre conseil,
mais l'estime dont il jouit tient moins Acette haute
dignite qu 'A ses eminentes qualites personnelles.

Je voudrais m 'associer aux orateurs qui m'ont preced€!
et qui ont adress€! leurs meilleurs vooux AM. Lodge
A 1'oocasion de son depart prochain, et exprimer en
mon nom et au nom de notreambassadeur,M. Lewandowski, qui ne peutmalheureusement pas ~tre present,
les vooux les plus amicaux de la delegation polonaise.

137. Mr. LODGE (United states of America) (translated
from French): M!'. President, I am deeply moved that
you should have been conscious of the fact that today is
my last day in the Security Council. I think it is a good
omen that, at the time when my work in the United
Nations comes to an end, the President of the Security
Council should be my friend Amb8.ssador Armand
Berard, the representative of France, a country to
which I ::tm attached by many ties going back to my
«;1hildhood and including my service with the French
Army during the war, a country where I now have many
good and devoted friends.

137. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique): MonSieur
le President, je suis profondement touche que vous
ayez €!te conscient qu'aujourd'hui marquemaderni~re
journ€!e au Conseil de securite. Je puis dire que je
crois qu'il est de bon augure qu'au moment Oll se
termine ma ~che aux Nations Unies le President du
Conseil de securite soit mon ami 1'ambassadeur
Armand Berard, representant de la France, pays
auquel je suis attache par de nombreux liens qui
remontent A mon enfance, qui comprennent mon service avec 1'arrolle franQaise pendantla guerre, pays Oll
je compte aujourd'hui de bons amis A qui je suis
enti~rement devoue.

{The speaker continued in English.!

[L'orateur poursuit en anglais.!

138. I should also like to thank the other members of

138. Je tiens aussi Aremercier les autres membres
du Conseil: M. Beeley, M. Plaja, M. Tsiang, M. Slim,

the Council, Mr. Beeley, Mr. Plaja, Mr. Tsiang, Mr.
Slim, Mr. Correa, Sir Claude Corea, Mr. Morozov,
Mr. Amadeo and Mr. Machowski. I am really quite
bowled over that you should all speak in such friendly
terms. Frankly, I am very conscious of my own limitations, and I have prided myself in the past on being
able to advise people on what I thought the Security
Council was likely to do. I certainly would never have
thought that the Security Council members would he
likely to make these speeches about me. I have certainly been taken very much by surprise.

M. Correa, sir Claude Corea, M. Morozov, M. Amadeo
et M. Machowski. J'ai lite vraiment stupefait de vous
entendre parler tous si amicalement. Franchement,
voilA qUi me rappelle A la modestie: je me flattais
nagu~re de pouvoir predire les dllcisions probables
du Conseil de sllcurite; mais je n'aurais jamaisprevu
que les membres du Conseil de sllcuritll parleraient
ainsi A mon sUjet. Cela m 'a compl~tement pris au
depourvu.

21

139. I am very sad to leave because, if you count the
three months I had here in 1950 as a member of the
delegation, I have been here almost eight years, and in
that period of time a man puts out many roots and he
makes many friendships, friendships that go across
national boundaries. If one makes friends in the United
Nations, one makes friends across national boundaries,
which I think is a wonderful thing. One of the good
things about the fact that the world is shrinking is that
it should be easier to maintain international friendships
in the future, which, of course, I shall try to do.
140. It has been a marvellous experience to be associated with you gentlemen on the Security Council.
I do not believe there is a group of men in the world
who are as sophisticated about the complex business
of international relations, who are as wise and mature
in their judgements and who constitute such a true
"€llite" as this group does, so it is a wonderful association. I have seen the United Nations grow. I have
Seen it grow in size, in sheer numbers, and I have
also seen it grow in influence. A very impressive
list could be made of the achievements of the United
Nations. We have seen a great growth in the Security
Council, and particularly this year the Security Council
has entered into a period of tremendous activity.

139. Je suis tr~s pein€l de vous quitter: en comptant
les trois mois de 1950 ob j'~tais membre de notre
del€lgation, von~ prl!ls de huit ans que je suis iel;
pendant un tellaps de temps, on s 'enracine profondement et 1'on se fait beaucoup d'amis, des amis pardel~ les fronti~res. lci, quand on se lie d'amiti€l, les
fronti~res nationales ne comptent pas, ce qui, ~ mon
sens, est excellent. Un des avantages du retrecissement du monde est qu'il va etreplusfacile de cultiver
des amities internationales, ce ~ quoi, bien entendu,
je m'efforcerai.
140. Quelle admirable experience pour moi que
d'avoir et~ associe ~ vous, Messieurs, au Conseil de
securit~! Je ne crois pas qu'il existe au monde un
groupe d'hommes qui soit aussi aufait des complexites
des relations internationales, aussi avises et murs
dans leurs jugements, et qui constituent une elite aussi
authentique; c'est pourquoi jemefelicited'avoirbeneficie de cette association. J'ai ete temoin du developpement de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies. Je l'ai vue
croitre et grandir, non seulement en effectifs, mais
aussi en influence. On pourrait dresser une liste
impressionnante de ses realisations. Nous avons ete
temoins d'une grande expansion au Conseil de securite,
particuli~rementcette annee, ob il est entre dans une
p€lriode d'extraordinaire activite.

141. It is normal for the attention of the public to be
attracted to the clashes and to the debates which take
place here, and, indeed, the world is full of tension,
it is full of danger, and it is full of mystery. All of us
have the obligation to defend the viewpoints of our
own Governments, and that is as it should be, but, of
course, there is another side to its work, it is the
side which is expressed in the Holy Bible by the words
"Blessed are the peacemakers", which I am sure finds
its counterpart in the other great religions. It is the
work that perhaps can be exemplified by what has been
done recently on the Congo, by what was done in the
Disarmament Commission by the unanimous vote to
resume negotiations, and by what was done here today and yesterday on the admission of new Members.
Therefore, the job of getting common action and of
getting consent is of course the type of work that epitomizes the best hopes of mankind, anli those are the
things by which I think posterity will judge us all.

141. n est normal que le public ait son attention
attir€le sur les conflits d'opinion et les discussions
qui ont lieu ici; d'ailleurs, le monde est aujourd'hui
plein de tensions, plein de danger, plein de myst~re.
Nous sommes tous tenus de dllfendre la fagon de voir
de notre gouvernement, et cela est bien; mais nos
travaux ont un autre aspect, calui qu'exprime la Bible
quand elle dit: "Heureux ceux qui procurent la paix",
mots qui, j'en suis sur, ont leur pendant dans les
autres grandes religions. On peut donner en exemple
de cet aspect de nos travaux ce qui s'est fait recema
ment pour le Congo, ce qui s'est fait~ la Cominission
du del;larmement quand elle a d€lcide ~ 1'unanimite de
reprendre les n€lgociations, et ce qui s 'est fait ici,
hier et aujourd'hui, pour 1'admission de nouveaux
Membres. Chercher ~ realiser 1'action commune, ~
emporter un consentement, voil~ evidemment le genre
de travail ob se resument les meilleurs espoirs de
1'humanit€l, fit c 'est l~-dessus, je crois, que la posterite nous jugera tous.

142. May I, in conclusion, repeat my thanks to all
o~ you and also express my thanks to the interpreters,
to the experts, to the members of the Secretariat and,
of course, to the Secretary-General, as well as to the
members of the Press, radio and teleVision, to the
photographers and to all those with whom I have laboured here during eight years. I shall always think of
you all with sentiments of friendship and of gratitude.

142. Pour conclure, permettez-moi de vous remercier une fois encore, et de remercier aussi les interprl!ltes, les experts, les fonctionnaires du Secretariat
et bien entendu le Secretaire general, de mame que
la presse, la radio et la television, les photographes
et tous ceux avec lesquels j'ai travaille ici pendant
huit ans. Je penserai toujours ~ vous tous avec amitia
et avec gratitude.

The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h 50.

22
Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

25203-December 1960-·1,775
