143

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

-----------------------------~-----:--:~-~-----:--:----------5. Toe use of mercenaries by colonial and racist
régimes against the national liberation movements
struggling for their freedom and independence from
the yoke of colonialism and alien domination is c~nsidered to be a criminal act and the mercenanes
should accordingly be punished as criminals.
6. The violation of the legal status of the combatants struggling against colonial and alien domination and racist régimes in the course of armed
conflicts entails full responsibility in accordance with
the norms of intemational law.

2197th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3104 (XXVIII). United Nations Conferenee on
Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2929 (XXVII) of 28_ November 1972 by which it decided that an internat1on~l
conference of plenipotentiaries should b~ ~onve~ed_ m
197 4 to consider the question of prcscnpt10n (hm1tation) in the international sale of goods and to emb~dy
the results of its work in an international convention
and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate,
Recalling further that, in the foregoing resolution, it
referred to the conference, as thc basis for its consideration, the draft convcntion on prcscription (limitation)
in thc international sale of goods as contained in chapter
II of the report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its fifth session,2~ together with the commentary thereon and such
commcnts and proposals as rnay be submitte_d by Governmcnts and intcrcsted international orgarnzat10ns,
Rea{Jirming the conviction, expressed in the forego-ing resolution, that the harmoniz_ati?n an_d :,1nipcati~n
of national rules govcrning prcscnption (hm1tation) m
the international sale of goods would contribute to the
removal of obstacles to thc dcvclopment of world trade,
Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To convene thc United Nations Conference on
Prescription ( Limitation) in the International Sale of
Goods at United Nations Hcadquarters in New York,
from 20 May to 14 Junc 1974;
( b) To provide summary records of the procecdings
of the plcna1y meetings of the Confcrcnce and of meetings of cornmittees of the wholc which the Conference
may wish to establish;
(e) To invite, in full compliancc with General _Assembly resolution 2758 (XXVI) of 25 October 1971,
States Membern of the United Nations or member~ of
speci:ilize<l agencies or the International Atomic Energy
Agcncy and States parties to the Statutc of the Intc:·national Court of Justice, as well as the Democrat1c
Repuhlic of Viet-Nam, to participatc in the Conference;
( d) To invite interested specialized .igencies and
international organizations, as wcll as the United
Nations Council for Namihia, t0 attend the Conference
as observers;
(e) To draw the attention of thc Sta tes and other
participants, referred to in suhparagraphs (e) and (d)
22 Official ReL·ords of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/8717), paras. 21 and 22.

above to the desirability of appointing as their representatives persons especiaHy competent in the field to
be considered;
(f) To place befare the Conforence all relevant documentation and recommendations relating to methods
of work and procedure, and to arrangc for adcquate
staff and facilities required for the Conference;
( g) To report on the results achicv_ed by the ~onfercnce to the General Assembly at 1ts twenty-mnth
session.
2197th plenary meeting
12 December I 97 3

3105 (XXVIII). Report of the Spccial f:ommittee
on the Question of Definíng Aggrcssion

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Spccial Committec on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its sixth scssion/:1 hc1d at Geneva from
25 April to 30 May 1973,
Noting the progress so far achicved by thc Special
Cornmittee in its considcration of thc question of defining aggrcssion and on thc draft definition, as reflected
in its report,
Believing that such progrcss makes it a practica! possibility for the Special Committec to elabor~te a ge?erally acceptablc draft definition of aggresston at 1ts
next session,
Considering that it was not possible for thc Spccial
Committee to complete its task at its sixth session,
Considering that, in its resolutions 2330 (XXIT) of
18 Decembcr 1967, 2420 (XXIII) o[ 18 December
1968, 2549 (XXIV) of 12 Deccmber 1969, 2644
(XXV) of 25 Novcmbcr 1970, 2781 (XXVI) of
3 December 1971 and 2967 (XXVJI) of 14 Deccmbcr
1972, the General Asscmbly recognized the widcspread
conviction of the ncc<l to expcditc thc dcfinition of
aggrcssion,
Considering the urgency of bringing tlw work of the
Spccial Committee to a succc,sful conc-lusion and thc
desirability of achieving the dcfinitinn of aggrcssion
as soon as possible,
Noting also the common dcsire of thc rnembcrs of
the Special Committce to continue their work on thc
basis of the results achicvcd and
arrivc with duc
spccd at a draft definition in a spirit of mutual undcrstanding and accommodatio!J,
1. Decides that thc Specíal Committec on thc ()uestion of Defining Aggrcssion shall resume its work, in
accordance with Gener:il As~embly rcsolution '::!330
(XXII), early in 1974 in Ncw York, with a vicw to
completing its task and to submitting to thc A~scP1bly
a_t thc twenty-ninth session a draft lkfinition of aggre~-

,ü

~1011;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to providc th,;
Spccia! Committce with lhe necessary facilitíc:- ami
~crviccs;
3. Decides to inclnde in thc provisional agenda of
its twcntv-ninth session thc ítem cntitled '"Rc¡iort of the
Special Committee on the Question of Dcfining Aggression".
2197th plenary meeting
12 Deceml,er 1973
2:, !bici., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplcment No. 19 (A/9019).
