UNITED NATIONS
,_/

,-_.".
SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2553’”

MEETING:

UN I&W&Y
MAR3c fTj$‘.j
~~1s
cc,umDN

30 AUGUST

1984

-

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2553) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 .:

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(916713) . . . . . . . ..*..........................*......*..............

1

SlPV.2553

Symbois’of United ~J$r@rs&cuments
are composed of capital letters combined with figures?IR&&ut
‘“of ‘“such $%ymbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
-The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Counck The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2553rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 30 August 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Lkandre

BASSOLE

(Burkina

in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual ‘practice, .I propose, with: the consent of the Coulicil, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Faso).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina, Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. ‘Al-Kawari
(Qatar), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. Al-MO&
(United
Arab Emirates) and Mr. Noman (Yemen) took the
plhces reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2553)

of the agenda

3. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): The situation in
Lebanon has come up for the consideration
of the
Council, in one way or another, on three occasions
earlier, and now, for the fourth time this year. In one
way or another, each recourse to the Council has been
linked, directly or indirectly, to one single event. That
event was the Israeli aggression against Lebanon in
1982, which has remained unvacated, despite the Council’s calls for cease-fire and total Israeli withdrawal
from Lebanon embodied in its resolutions 508 (1982)
and 509 (1982). The continued Israeli occupation of
southern Lebanon, in defiance of the Council resolutions and in flagrant disregard of all norms of international conduct, is an affront to the international community.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16713)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation iu the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713)

4. Yesterday [2552nd meeting], we heard a detailed
account of the high-handed Israeli measures and inhuman practices in southern Lebanon and a fervent
appeal from the representative of Lebanon, on behalf of
800,000 Lebanese suffering under the heel of the Israeli
occupation forces, to end Lebanon’s travail. In his
account of the nature of Israeli occupation of southern
Lebanon, he conveyed to us a vivid picture of the
intolerable state of affairs in the occupied area, the
inhabitants of which are being subjected, by the occupying Israeli authorities, to a rule of terror and torture,

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2552nd meeting,
I invite the representative of Lebanon and the representative of Israel to take places at the Council table;
I invite the representatives of Kuwait and the Syrian
Arab Republic to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the
Council table; Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait) and Mr. EiFattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. In his statement, the representative of Lebanon
spoke of the systematic terrorizing of towns and villages, sieges of homes, arrests of young and old, and
of women and children, torture of detainees, taking of
hostages, desecration of places of worship, closing
of shops, curfews and destruction of properties. He
also spoke of Israeli measures to prevent the harvesting
of crops in order to inflict further hardships upon
and demoralize the hapless population
of southern
Lebanon.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Qatar, the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen in which they request to be invited to participate
1

6. The woes of southern Lebanon under the Israeli
heel do not end here. We are also told that the occupying Israeli forces shrink from no measure which can
intimidate the population of southern Lebanon into
total submission and acquiescence in Israeli expansionist aims. The siege of villages, collective detention and
the periodic closing of the ports of Sidon and Tyre to
prevent the unloading of wheat for the inhabitants of
southern Lebanon are measures designed to achieve
that very objective. The reporting building of a tunnel
with the capacity to absorb all the waters of the Litani
River is a clear indication of Israel’s ruthless resolve to
divert the natural resources of the occupied territories
to its own advantage, regardless of the suffering and
destruction which such a policy would entail forthe
occupied areas and their inhabitants.

States to cover up their transgressions with tapestries
of rhetoric artfully embroidered with plausible excuses
and twisted facts.
12. The Council must not be deterred by these tactics
from fulfilling its responsibility of providing redress to
the aggrieved party. As requested by the representative
of Lebanon, it is incumbent on the Council to call on
Israel to cease forthwith its inhuman practices in the
occupied territories of southern Lebanon and to adhere
to the norms of international law and conduct in every
respect.
13. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): My delegation, Sir, has already officially extended its compliments
to you on
your assumption of the office of the presidency for this
month. As the sultry days of August come to an end,
I should like to add my personal feelings of friendship to
you and my official compliments on the able, fair and
dedicated way in which you have conducted your high
offke.

7. Thus the Israeli presence and practices in southern
Lebanon are not only in defiance of the relevant Council resolutions, but are also in flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ The
Hague Conventions II of 1899 and IV of 1907 respecting
the Laws and Customs of War on Land,2 the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Bights.

14. Lebanon needs all the creative understanding and
help it can get from its own citizens, from its neighbours
and from the international community.
15. It is tragically true that there is far too much
violence and conflict in many parts of the world, both
between and within countries. But that is no reason for
the Council to avoid an issue; it is even less reason
for Israel to compound the confusion and to take advantage of the situation. The incidence of conflict elsewhere does not justify Israel’s occupation of the territory of other States, in this particular case under
discussion a third of the territory of friendly Lebanon.
Even less is Israel justified in causing havoc and confusion through illegal harassment of Lebanese citizens.
Israeli forces and practices are alien to the people of
Lebanon, and by those policies they are not contributing to the prospects of reconciliation and peace in the
region.

8. The tragic events which have taken place in Lebanon for the past two years and the suffering and misery
with which the population of southern Lebanon continues to be afI’licted are the direct consequences of the
Israeli invasion of Lebanon two years ago. Israel’s
arrogance in maintaining
its aggressive presence in
Lebanon is equalled by the scorn in which it holds the
Council and the impunity with which it defies its decisions and the will of the international community.
9. The Israeli invasion of Lebanon is, in itself, a
product of the continued denial to the Palestinian people of their legitimate right to an independent and sovereign homeland in Palestine. The denial of this fundamental right to the people of Palestine is the root
cause of the turmoil and turbulence in the Middle East,
the repercussions of which have travelled far beyond
that region. There will be no peace in the Middle East
until justice has been done to the Palestinian people.

16. As children, we were taught that two wrongs do
not make a right. Innumerable wrongs make a travesty
of peace. The worst fears of Arab leaders about Israel’s
intentions over the past have all too often been proved
right. When will the Israeli authorities change their
present policies which, at ruinous cost, particularly
to Israel itself, are stagnating the economic development of the region, adversely changing its demographic
structure and gravely prejudicing the chances of peace?

10. The statement [ibid.] made by the representative
of Israel before the Council yesterday was an arrogant reassertion of Israel’s self-assumed right of unrestrained aggressiveness and expansion and unbridled
repression in the occupied territories, which is sought
to be justified on the basis of an unacceptable thesis that
these are unavoidable for Israel’s security.

17. Malta vehemently
regrets those actions. We
deeply regret the violence and the loss of life that still
scars the Middle East. For us, one life lost, one victim
persecuted, civilian or military, Arab or Israeli, is one
too many. We also regret the opportunities to turn away
from this confrontational
bitterness of the past that,
time and time again, are being lost.

11. The Council was not constituted to treat the
aggressor and the aggressed alike, or to judge their
actions and reactions by the same yardstick. The Council’s foremost responsibility is to ensure the security of
small States against the depredations and predatory
designs of militarily
stronger neighbours. It was not
constituted to condone aggression or to allow aggressor

18. My delegation made a comprehensive appraisal
on the wider issue behind these incidents not so very
long ago. I said at that time:
/.
2

“Today, Lebanon, a founding Member of the Organization, is, to say the least, in an unprecedentedly
dangerous situation, to our regret, even to our
shame.” [246Zst meeting, para. 157.1

try which they have seized. For 26 months the Israeli
military clique has continued to occupy one third of
Lebanese territory. This was a direct result of the fact
that Israel has obstinately refused to implement resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), the latter calling for an
immediate unconditional withdrawal of the aggressor’s
forces from Lebanon. This prime reason was quite
rightly mentioned yesterday in the statement made by
the representative of Lebanon.

That observation
remains applicable
today, even
though the level of conflict mercifully may have since
subsided.
19. In fact, we can be almost sure that more incidents
of the type detailed by the representative of Lebanon in
his statement yesterday and of those reported daily in
the press will arise in the future, as they have unfortunately arisen all too frequently in the past, as long as the
international community does not summon up the energy, dedication and determination
to tackle the root
cause of the Middle East problem, which is the unacceptable plight of the Palestinian people, and the unhindered exercise of their right to self-determination.

25. Time has but paid to the lying, propagandistic
verbiage of the Israeli statement and has laid bare the
true face of the Israeli aggressors. For more than two
years now they have been impudently domineering in
Lebanon, They sow undisguised terror and violence
there and openly seek to perpetuate their occupation of
part of yet another Arab country.
26. For the population
of southern Lebanon the
Israeli occupation
means daily mass repression,
shooting of unarmed inhabitants, systematic raids and
arrests, overcrowded
prisons and concentration
camps. In one of them alone, the notorious Ansar
camp, the place of Palestinian prisoners has now been
taken by more than 700 Lebanese prisoners.

20. It is a sad reflection on our times that both on the
question of Palestine and on the situation in Lebanon,
we have witnessed regression, not progress.
21. We will not today repeat the arguments we advanced on that previous occasion, except to stress their
continued validity. However, we have at least to emphasize the growing urgency for concerted political
action in the search for an enduring and equitable solution, on the basis of the general principles already identified. Action must be taken at the roots to cure the
disease: we must not be content merely with sporadic
reactions to its symptoms.

27. As regards Israeli policies in southern Lebanon
with respect to human rights, the occupying forces are
attempting to subvert the economic life of the areas
under their domination.
Here, too, we witness the arbitrary violation of economic links between southern
Lebanon and the rest of the country, as well as a virtual total blockade on the transport of local products
through Israeli check-points and the sytematic destruction of agricultural
plantations and crops. In other
words, the broad experience of colonial development in
the West Bank, the Gaza sector and the Syrian Golan
Heights is now cynically being used by Israel in
Lebanon.

22. In response to this clear need, next week at Valletta, the non-aligned countries of the Mediterranean
will meet in a dedicated effort at ministerial level to
chart a new course designed to reduce tension and to
seek to expand areas for fruitful co-operation through
concerted action. We hope eventually that others may
see the wisdom of this choice and join us in our common
efforts. The situation in the Middle East obviously casts
a long shadow over adjoining regions, none more so
than in the Mediterranean.

28. The policies and practices of Israel in southern
Lebanon incontrovertibly
demonstrate Tel Aviv’s desire to turn that region into another field for creeping
annexation, to isolate it and wrench it away from the
rest of the country, to push further northwards the
borders of Zionist expansion.

23. In the meantime, we urge Israel to turn away from
its militaristic policies, to respect internationally
recognized principles and the decisions of the Council, and to
join others in a peace process which will restore full
sovereignty to the people of Lebanon within its own
internationally
recognized boundaries and will also do
justice to the rights of the Palestinian people. To the
people of Lebanon, we pledge full solidarity in their
quest for peace and national reconciliation,
and we ask
all Member States not to abandon Lebanon in its hour
of need.

29. It is quite clear that this entire inadmissible practice by Israeli occupying forces in southern Lebanon
must be terminated.
30. It is the duty of the Council to demand that Israel
cease forthwith its policy of terror in the occupied
territory of Lebanon. Israel must rescind all the discriminatory, political, economic and other measures it
has introduced there with respect to the local people.
Israel’s attempts to dismember Lebanon, to undermine
the economic life of the occupied regions, to exploit in
a predatory manner the natural resources, must be
rebuffed. But these are merely palliatives. The main
point is that Israel must, without further ado, put an end
to its illegal occupation of Lebanon and withdraw its

24. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [interpretation from Russian]: The Soviet delegation supports Lebanon’s addressing the Council
with respect to the inadmissible actions by the Israeli
occupying authorities in the southern part of that coun3

troops. This has been called for by Council resolutions.
The implementation
of those resolutions is the key to
the elimination of the protracted, abnormal situation in
Lebanon.

tion bv Israel. Of course. if the United States reuresentatives want us to continue this list of United States
actions in Lebanon and surrounding area, we can.
38. However, those who like to dictate Lebanon’s
fate from beyond the seas made a serious mistake:
the troops of the American interventionists
were
shamefacedly compelled to evacuate Lebanon; the lopsided agreement imposed on Lebanon by Israel and the
United States failed. That is why attempts to impose
on Lebanon systems from outside constitute not only
a dangerous policy but a myopic and fruitless one.
Tel Aviv and Washington should understand that their
policy grossly to trample underfoot the sovereign
rights of States and the imposition of alien decisions on
other countries and peoples through the use of force is
obviously doomed to failure, in the Middle East as,
indeed, in other parts of the world.

3 1. And here we come to the cardinal issue: who gave
the go-ahead for Israel’s aggression in 1982 against
Lebanon? Why has Israel’s occupation of one third of
that Arab country continued for more than two years?
The answer to these questions is clear: it is that, without
the support of the United States, Israel’s recent act of
aggression itself and the entrenchment of Israeli forces
in Lebanon would have been impossible. This is proved
by some incontrovertible
facts.
32. Fact number 1: The United States knew that Israel
was preparing an act of aggression against Lebanon
eight months before it started. However, the United
States did nothing to prevent Israel’s invasion. Quite
clearly, Washington sanctioned that aggression.

39. The way to achieve genuine peace in the Middle
East is by a comprehensive
political settlement involving collective efforts under the aegis of the United
Nations, and the best machinery for this would be an
international conference on the Middle East.

33. Fact number 2: In August 1982, at the height of
Israel’s aggression in Lebanon, the United States was
the only member of the Council that voted against the
cessation of military assistance to Israel. Having vetoed that draft resolution of the Council at that time
[S/Z5347/Rev.I],
the United States took the part of the
aggressor and defended it.

40. A detailed programme here has been set forth
in the Soviet proposals dated 29 July this year [see
S/16685, annex]. We are convinced of the validity, fairness and political fair-sightedness of our proposals.
They provide an alternative to the continuation in the
Middle East of the policies of Israeli aggression in the
guise of protecting the interests of Israel. They are an
alternative to the policy of building up an imperialist
military presence in the Middle East in the guise of
assisting the Arabs.

34. Fact number 3: Soon afterwards, American
troops and military units of certain other North Atlantic
Treaty Organization
(NATO) countries appeared in
Lebanon in the guise of a Multinational
Force, which
ostensibly was seeking to assist Lebanon and even the
Palestinians. In reality, as everyone soon learned, this
was an attempt to turn Lebanese territory into an antiArab military base for the United States and NATO in
the Middle East.

41. A just, and therefore a lasting, peace in the
Middle East is not only possible, it is urgent.
42. Mr. VERMA (India): My delegation has already
had an opportunity
to felicitate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of August. India enjoys friendly and cordial
relations with your country, Burkina Faso. We share
the conviction that the Council is the richer for your
varied diplomatic experience and wise counsel and that
under your stewardship it will be able effectively to
address itself to the pressing problems before us.

35. Fact number 4: In May 1983, by exerting gross
pressure, the United States assisted Israel in imposing
on Lebanon a lopsided, humiliating
and insidious
agreement. In other words, the United States actively
assisted the aggressor to solidify the gains of its aggression in Lebanon.
36. Fact number 5: It was precisely the United States,
throwing off the pretence of peace-maker, that in 1983
unleashed military actions in Lebanon. The massive
shelling from the warship USS New Jersey and other
United States naval vessels and the barbaric bombings
by American aeroplanes of Lebanese settlements
clearly revealed that the United States had unleashed
open warfare against the Arabs.

43. May I also renew to your predecessor, the representative of the United States, our appreciation of
her able and dignified stewardship of the Council last
month.
44. The Council is once again meeting to consider the
tragic situation prevailing in Lebanon. The representative of Lebanon has given us a moving account of the
untold suffering of the hapless civilian population in
southern Lebanon as a result of Israel’s harsh and
repressive policies. Torture, harassment, detentions,
raids and other inhuman practices appear to have become the order of the day.

37. Fact number 6: For more than two years the
United States has been doing its utmost to prevent
the implementation
of Council resolutions concerning
an immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Lebanon. Thus the United States is trying
to make sure that Lebanon meets with the same fate as
the Arab lands occupied in 1967, that is, gradual absorp4

45. The serious econanic dislocation resulting from
Israel’s closure of roads. destruction of crops, forced
premature harvesting of Gelds and the like add to the
untold human misery. ‘I& human rights of the Lebanese people in the occupied areas are being trampled
upon mercilessly. The ac?ions of the Israeli occupying
authorities are in.clear violation ofthe’principles of the
Charter of the United Nations9 the provisions of the
1949 Geneva Conventions’ and the norms of international law. It is indeed appropriate that the Council,
which is entrusted under the Charter with primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, should take upon itself the task of finding
ways and means of ameliorating this serious situation
which could have wider repercussions for peace and
stability in the region.

untold suffering to thousands of innocent persons in
that country. Any solution of the problem of Lebanon
cannot be divorced fro-m our search for a comprehen;
sive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East which
must be based on the exercise by the Palestinian people
of their inalienable national and human rights.
50. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has
been deeply concerned over the grave situation prevailing in Lebanon. The Seventh‘Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, reaffirmed its
support for the safety of Lebanon, its territorial integrity, independence and right to exercise its sovereignty
throughout its territory within its internationally recognized boudaries. The Conference also called upon all
States to support Lebanon in the implementation of
Council resolutions 508(1982) and 509 (1982)in order to
ensure the withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Lebanese -territory [see St15675 and Corr.1 and 2, annex,
p. 281. The cherished principles of our Movement are
being defied by Israel’s continuing occupation of Lebanon. We would like to seepeace and stability restored
in Lebanon.

46. In June 1982, the international community was a
witness to Israel’s blatant aggression against Lebanon.
The memory of atrocities committed by Israel against
the innocent Lebanese and Palestinian people and of
the genocidal massacresof Sabra and Shatila still haunt
our minds. The invasion was undertaken on the alleged
grounds of self-preservation and security. It was obviously a part of Israel’s calculated policy to achieve a
systematic decimation of the Palestinian people and a
complete erosion of the independence and sovereignty
of Lebanon. The illegal occupation by Israel of Lebanese territory continues till today, and Israel’s stranglehold is strengthened with each passing day.

51. The Government and the people of India have
been profoundly anguished over the tragic events in
Lebanon. Our concern and sorrow at those tragic occurrences have been expressed on a number of occasions in our Parliament and elsewhere, including in the
Security Council and the General Assembly. From the
facts which have been placed before the Council it is
beyond doubt that responsibility for the hardships and
the inhuman treatment of the civilian population of
southern Lebanon lies squarely with the Israeli authorities.

47. With the passageof time and with mounting pressures from several quaters for ajust and comprehensive
peace in the area, we would have expected Israel to
display a greater sense of wisdom, sobriety and responsibility. On the contrary, the Israeli occupation forces
have continued to inflict hardships and inhuman treatment on the residents of the area, in clear violation of
the cherished principles of international law. In addition, we have been informed of Israel’s actions to carry
out illegal construction with a view to diverting the
waters of the Wazzani and Litani rivers to its own
territory and completely to isolate and cut off southern
Lebanon, the western Bekaa and the Rashaya district
from the rest of the country. Such acts will only result in
further hardships for the civilian population and should
be stopped forthwith.

52. My Government fully supports Lebanon’s just
demands, as outlined in the statement by the representative of Lebanon, for the immediate implementation of
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) and Israel’s complete withdrawal to Lebanon’s internationally recognized boundaries; for the immediate cessation of Israeli
practices in the occupied territories; and for the need
for Israel to respect the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the norms of international law
and the 1949 Geneva Conventions, among others.

48. In the past the Council has adopted various resolutions seeking to bring about an immediate end to
the fighting in that war-tom country and demanding
that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith
and unconditionally to the internationally recognized
boundaries of Lebanon. Unfortunately, those resolutions have remained unimplemented. We call for the
speedy implementation of resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982) in order to ensure the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from all Lebanese territories.

53. The time has come for the Council to act decisively and with a sense of purpose to halt Israeli
aggression and intransigence. We hope that the Council
will discharge its responsibility in order to restore the
rule of law and civilized conduct in Lebanon.
54. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) [interpretation from
Chinese]: The Chinese delegation has listened attentively to the statement by the representative of Lebanon.

49. The continuing conflict in the Middle East remains a most serious threat to peace. The tragedy in
Lebanon is a symptom of the malaise that has caused

55. The Chinese Government and people condemn
Israel’s forcible occupation of southern Lebanon, the
western Bekaa and the Rashaya district and the atroc5

‘.
.I
‘‘...
....
._
._
._
‘.‘.
‘.‘.
‘.
‘_

ities perpetrated against the Lebanese people in those
areas, and support the heroic struggle of the Lebanese
people and the just position and legitimate demands of
the Lebanese Government.

drawal of Israeli troops. The Chinese delegation is
ready to work with the other members of thecouncil
and make its due contribution to supporting the just
cause of the Lebanese people.

56. It is well known that the Israeli authorities have
all along harboured ambitious designs on Lebanon and
obstinately pursued a policy of aggression and expansion. Since their flagrant massive military invasion of
Lebanon in June 1982, the Israeli authorities have to
date been pertinaciously occupying the southern part of
the country and reinforcing their occupation there. The
Israeli occupation forces frequently storm and lay siege
to the peaceful towns and villages in southern Lebanon,
the western Bekaa and the Rashaya district, and unscrupulously search or detain the innocent local Lebanese, including the aged, women and children. They may
blockade ports and close highways at will and relentlessly plunder or destroy the natural resources and
damage the commercial, cultural and educational installations there. These perverse acts on the part of the
Israeli aggressor troops have reduced Lebanon to a
devastated land where the people live in dire misery. As
the Lebanese Government has pointed out time and
again, the Israeli practices in Lebanon have seriously
violated international law and trampled underfoot international conventions and the Charter of the United
Nations. They should be righteously condemned by
all the justice-upholding countries and peoples of the
world.

60. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Massamba Sarre. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
61. Mr. SARRE (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) [interprerutionfiom
French]: First I should like
to thank the members of the Council for having been
good enough once again to allow me to participate
in this debate, the importance of which is obvious to
everyone.
62. I should also like most sincerely and warmly to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. We know you as a
diplomat well versed in international affairs and committed to the ideals of peace and justice; hence I am
convinced that the Council’s work will be successful.
63. I wish also to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, representative of the United
States, for the exemplary manner in which she performed her lofty duties.
64. We have met again to take up the situation in
Lebanon. In May of this year, during another meeting
on the same subject and on the situation in the Ein ElHelweh Palestinian camps [254&h meeting], we had
thought that the Council would finally find the ways and
means to enable that country, an innocent victim, to
recover its independence and dignity, the better to
devote itself to the task of reconstruction and, what is
more, to make a contribution to the efforts to bring
about ajust and lasting peace in the Middle East. That
perfectly legitimate hope quickly gave way to recurring
outbreaks of violence to the point of threatening Lebanon’s very existence as a country, which merely aspires
to living in peace with all the other States of the region.

57. Where there is aggression and occupation, there is
resistance; and the longer the occupation, the stronger
the resistance. This is a law of history. It is precisely the
cruel oppression by the Israeli occupying authorities
that has forced the Lebanese people to rise up in resistance and self-defence. The struggle of the Lebanese
people is a just one, and it will continue to receive
widespread support from the international community.
58. The Israeli military occupation of southern Lebanon constitutes the biggest obstacle to the restoration
of the state sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and the realization of unification of the country
and the unity of the nation. Since its establishment, the
Lebanese Government of National Unity has made the
recovery of southern Lebanon from Israeli occupation
an important component of its administrative programme. We are convinced that, so long as the Lebanese Government and people close ranks, they will certainly accomplish the noble cause of safeguarding their
national independence and unification.

65. However, this acknowledgement of failure should
not lead to resignation on the part of the international
community; quite the contrary. It is the duty and the
responsibility of the Council to take all appropriate
steps to save Lebanon from imminent disintegration.
Indeed, everything leads us to believe that Israeli practices in southern Lebanon point in that direction. Not
content with occupying that part of Lebanon thereby
flouting the norms of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, Israel is doing everything possible to remove it from Lebanese sovereignty. For example, to go
from one place to another in their own territory the
Lebanese today must first obtain permission from the
Israeli authorities. For the rest, I would refer members
of the Council to the very enlightening statement made
yesterday by the representative of Lebanon.

59. The Chinese delegation wishes to reiterate that
the Council should play an active role in the question of
Lebanon and should implement in real earnest the relevant resolutions it has adopted; in the meantime, it
should consider other practical measures in the light of
the present circumstances so as to preserve Lebanon’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and
eliminate foreign aggression and interference. The key
to the solution of the Lebanese question is the with6

66. In light of all that took place yesterday, and also
taking account of the deliberations that have been going
on for nearly two years on the situation prevailing in
Lebanon, I believe that today we must rise above mutual recriminations
and get down to the task of peace,
which is our responsibility.
The framework for peace
has been defined by the General Assembly in its resolution 38/58 C of 13 December 1983. The Secretary-General, to whom we pay tribute for his constant effortsto
resolve the Middle East crisis, has already taken the
necessary steps with the parties concerned with a view
to implementing
that resolution. The replies received
to date by the Secretary-General are very encouraging,
and we can say that the international community as a
whole supports a just and comprehensive settlement of
the Middle East question.

Question of Palestine was held at Geneva from 20 to
22 August. Ninety-eight NGOs participated, including
six from Israel. In fact, four Israeli-Jews
and Palestinians-were among the keynote speakers. In the resolution adopted at that meeting, the NGOs pledged direct
support for General Assembly resolution 38/58 C,
which calls for an International
Peace Conference on
the Middle East.
72. As members will have seen, there is an international consensus on the need for a comprehensive
just and lasting settlement of the question of the Middle
East and Palestine. The international community also
espouses the idea that there can be no peace in the
Middle East so long as the question of Palestine has not
been settled in a just and lasting manner.

67. Indeed, in a statement on 27 March 1984 on the
Middle East [see S/26456, annex], the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the European
Economic Community
declared that any solution of
this question must include the right to existence and to
security of all States, including Israel, and that any
settlement-and
I stress this-must
take into account
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, which
implies recognition of the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination.
Those States called on all parties
to act in keeping with these principles and to begin the
necessary negotiations to apply them.

73. In the light of all these considerations, the Council, whose role it is to promote international peace and
security, must get down to action. In so doing it will
discharge its mandate and live up to the expectations
of history. Until that happens, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People expresses solidarity with the people of Lebanon, which has suffered so much to attain justice. It is
high time that justice, full sovereignty and integrity
were returned to the people of Lebanon.
74. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer for the League of Arab States, to whom the
Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure at its 2552nd meeting.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
‘,
make his statement.

68. Similarly,
the seventy-first Inter-Parliamentary
Conference, held at Geneva from 2 to 7 April 1984,
adopted a resolution entitled “Escalation ofthe dangers threatening international peace and security in the
Middle East region”, in which the Conference stressed
the need to promote dialogue between the parties concerned with a view to finding a lasting solution to the
crisis.

75. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Mr. President, I should like to
take this opportunity to express to you on behalf of the
League of Arab States our deep appreciation for the
gracious invitation you have extended to me. Through
you I should like.also to’thank the members who have
agreed to extend this invitation.

69. More recently, at the North American Non-Governmental Organization Symposium on the Question of
Palestine, held from 25 to 27 June at United Nations
Headquarters, the representatives of 60 non-govemmental organizations (NGOs) called upon the peoples
and Governments of the United States and Canada to
take decisive action to bring about a comprehensive
just and lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
the core of which is the question of Palestine. They
believed that all the parties to the conflict should meet
at an International
Peace Conference on the Middle
East, as called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 38/58 C.

76. Needless to say, Sir, your leadership in the deliberations of the Council has proven to be an articulation
of the wisdom that is characteristic of the people of your
country and the continent of Africa.
77. Yesterdav the renresentative of Lebanon made a
thorough statement on’ the Israeli practices that tend to
dehumanize the situation in southern Lebanon and in
the Bekaa Valley, areas under Israeli occupation since
June 1982, areas under occupation by Israel despite the
fact that there have been two unanimous resolutions of
the Council asking Israel forthwith to withdraw its occupation force from southern Lebanon.

70. At the ninth United Nations Seminar on the Question of Palestine, held at Tunis from 14 to 17 August,
the participants, which included parliamentarians
from
Europe and Africa, unanimously
endorsed the convening of an International
Peace Conference on the
Middle East.
71. Following that seminar,
Meeting of Non-Governmental

78. Two years have elapsed, and we are here today,
trying, despite the filibustering techniques of the Israeli
representatives in the Council, to focus on the inhuman, coercive practices of Israeli occupation forces in
southern Lebanon and in the Bekaa Valley,

the first International
Organizations on the
7

79. What comes to mind at this particular juncture is
that here is an Arab country, a founding member of the
League of Arab States, a Founding Member of the
United Nations,-one of the principal participants and
authors of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
coming before the Council to plead with it to have the
human rights of the people of southern Lebanon and the
Bekaa Valley respected under the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,’ and that the violations of
human rights are an overspill of the violation by Israel
of Lebanese sovereignty. And to the extent that Israel
violates the sovereignty of Lebanon it inextricably violates the human rights of the people under its occupation.

em Lebanon as a suspended Territory, through occupation directly or occupation by proxy, through mercenaries or by direct control. The southern part of
Lebanon, in the Israeli’s perception and treatment,
the sovereignty of the central Government of Lebanon
over the southern part of Lebanon is a concept of
suspended sovereignty. The central authority of the
Government of Lebanon, the legitimate Government of
Lebanon, can exercise certain formulas of an administrative presence, but it cannot have absolute sovereignty. The issue of sovereignty must be suspended
because Israel is not yet ready or has not developed
its expansionist position and policy to the extent of
claiming sovereignty over the southern part of Lebanon; hence the pretence of the Israeli representatives
that the Israeli authorities have no territorial ambitions
in Lebanon or any reason to divert and reroute water
supplies from the Litani and Hasbani rivers.

80. As it has presented the case of Lebanon before the
Council, the Lebanese delegation-has sought to define
the parameters of the Council’s deliberations because
of the urgent action it and the Government of Lebanon
feel is necessary to mitigate the dehumanizing process
that is taking place and the practices being engaged in
by the Israeli occupation in all fields of endeavour.

84. So we have a new jurisprudential position, the
notion that the southern part of Lebanon should be
excluded from the issue of genuine sovereignty. Perhaps for the sake of compromising with the intemational community Israel temporarily concedes that
there is a legalistic form of sovereignty over the southem part of Lebanon; yet it insists that there should not
be a factual exercise of sovereignty over that part of
Lebanon.

81. Listening to the delegation of Lebanon yesterday
state in detail the various practices and violations, I am
sure many members sought, as we did, to find a pattern
of behaviour on the part of the occupation authority in
Lebanon. I am sure we can all discern such a pattern.
Upon investigation I have concluded, as I am sure
many of us have, that there is indeed a definite pattern
of bahaviour on the part of the occupation forces of
Israel. The pattern is that there is no pattern, that Israel
seeks one day to break into houses, to bum houses to
create the impression that it is fighting so-called terrorists, that it envisages and anticipates the possibility
of there being so-called terrorists.

85. Therein lies the whole paradox of behaviour that
Israel has exhibited throughout its relationship to the
crisis in the southern part of Lebanon. Prior to 1978and
subsequently, Israel claimed that the Palestinian presence in southern Lebanon gave it a free hand to discipline this Palestinian presence and violate the sovereignty of Lebanon. Then when the Security Council
ordered Israel to withdraw, it complied in form in order
to deny in substance the right of the Lebanese central
authority to exercise sovereignty in the southern part of
Lebanon. It created and provided the mechanism, the
deployment, the finance and the support for a so-called
proxy army in southern Lebanon in order to deny consistently, systematically and with a prior plan the right
and the ability of the central authority of Lebanon to
exercise its prerogatives fully-not only administratively but in terms of security, order and military pre-sence. Israel has deliberately prevented the Lebanese
Army from reaching southern Lebanon to exercise its
proper functions of defending Lebanon. It has undermined all the security arrangements which were made
by the Armistice Commission in southern Lebanon; it
has done so in order to create a situation whereby the
south of Lebanon is deprived of its status as a part of
sovereign Lebanon; its suspended sovereignty emerges
from the suspended ability of the central Government
of Lebanon to exercise its administrative and security
functions in southern Lebanon.

82. The resistance of the people of the south of Lebanon is construed as either actual terrorism or as potential terrorism; therefore the pattern is that there is no
pattern-a surprise atttack on one town, a summoning
of the villagers in one particular village or another, the
burning of agricultural products, restricting citizens’
right of free transport: closing a road and opening it up
another day. In order to create an impression among the
Lebanese that there is no pattern for Israel’s coercive
measures and techniques of intimidation, it is essential
to thwart all resistance-whether actual resistance on
the ground or diplomatic resistance in the Security
Council-as well as mobilization on the international
moral level; everybody-diplomatically-must
be
thrown off balance. There must not develop a coherent assessmentof what Israel is doing, for a coherent
assessmentwould lead to a coherent response.
83. It is this deliberateness in precluding a pattern of
behaviour that is characteristic of Israeli occupation
and practices in the southern part of Lebanon. These
measures in southern Lebanon since the June 1982
occupation and prior thereto-since the invasion of
Lebanon in 1978-have been designed to treat south-

86. As we focus again on the practices which were
spelt out by the representative of Lebanon, we discover, despite the attempted cover-up and obfuscation,
the minute details of,Israeli efforts to befuddle pubhc
8
I

opinion and the international community. In seeking to
redress a single violation one is faced with a proliferation of violations. In their incremental impact they constitute one of the most devastating violations of the
sovereign rights of Lebanon, the human rights of the
Lebanese and of human rights in general, as enshrined
in international law and international conventions.
Israel’s meticulous pursuit of these practices testifies
to the Israeli objective of fragmenting its oppressive
measures in order to prevent the United Nations, the
international community, from perceiving and coming
to grips with the whole pattern .and plan of Israel in
southern Lebanon.

mentation of United Nations resolutions; they have
become Israel’s diversionary technique intended to bog
us down.
91. Of course, the socio-economic problems remain,
but they represent Lebanon’s quest--often, perhaps, a
tragic quest-to rediscover its cohesion, to rediscover
its unity, to rediscover its purpose, to rediscover its
resilience. Lebanon the reality and Lebanon the dream
are what is represented today by the Government of
National Unity, in which all the contending political
forces are seeking to bring credibility and effectiveness
to the authority of the Government, a credibility and
effectiveness which could be much facilitated by the
credible and effective establishment of that authority in
the southern part of Lebanon.

87. So, as we request redress for the grievances
flowing from these oppressive violations-violations
engineered by Israel in order to bog us down in redressing details-we find that this is not accidental, and
that the occupation is no “provisional occupation’*. We
find that all this emerges from a basic philosophy governing the State of Israel and its attitude towards the
Arab States in general and towards Lebanon in particular.

92. It is from there that the roots of destabilization are
set down and manipulated by Israel-which seems to
delight in analogies about the agony of the Lebanesein order to perpetuate its military, political and strategic hegemony over the southern part of Lebanon. For
Israel is seeking to settle many accounts on the small
territory of the southern part of Lebanon: accounts
with the United Nations through the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and accounts with United
Nations resolutions; accounts with the Arab States;
accounts with the pluralistic society of Lebanon.

88. For the last decade, Lebanon has experienced a
series of haemorrhages and tragedies; Of course, because Lebanon is a member of the League of Arab
States this is a matter of deep concern for the Arab
League. The visit today by the Secretary-General of the
Arab League to the President of Lebanon, Mr. Amin
Gemayel, and to the Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Mr. Karame, indicates that the League of Arab Statesis
definitely committed to expediting the process of Lebanon’s reconstruction and rehabilitation and the national unity which its present Government represents
and is committed to.

93. That is why the practices that have been spelt out
clearly and unquestionably are practices intended to
uncouple the actual from the objective: the actual practices of Israel from the objectives of Israel. That is why
we are incessantly consumed by the bloodthirstiness of
Israeli occupation in the southern part of Lebanon;
consumed by the need to relieve the people of the south
of Lebanon and permit them to engage in free traftic,
to have their products marketed, to have their students’ examinations uninterrupted, to have a free flow
of population, to reunify families, to alleviate the
housing problems in Beirut and other places.

89. At certain moments, I might speak with a measure
of emotion, because this is my country. I witness the
attempts by Israeli representatives to make analogies
about their occupation, and to manipulate the agony of
the Lebanese at this particular moment, putting it forward that such agony is inherent and constant in the
Lebanese body politic. I think that this degree of cynicism and lack of accountability is impermissible in the
international community.

94. We find that Israel wants us to be consumed with
its practices, so that we will feel helpless in facing it and
hopeless in preventing its objective from being fulfilled.
That is why the tragedy of Lebanon is so cruelly and
crudely manipulated.

90. Of course, we are experiencing a great deal of
agony in Lebanon: the baptism by blood inflicted basically by Israeli occupation; Israel’s refusal since 1948to
implement the very resolutions which gave it its birth
certificate by permitting the exercise by the Palestinians of their right to return to their homes and to their
homeland; Israel’s attempt to strip all United Nations
resolutions pertaining to the Palestinian question of
their relevance and efficacy, so that it can build an
exclusively Jewish State, precluding the right of the
people of Palestine to return and thus creating the
sdcio-economic consequence of a demographic presence by repeatedly striking at the Lebanese and Palestinian camps under one pretext or another. Such
pretexts have become the substitute for Israel’s imple-

95. As to the analogies and comparisons about the
territory north of the Awali River, let us assume for a
moment that at times there have been intermittent conflicts and tragic disputes. As I have said, this is a part
of our quest in Lebanon-the Lebanese quest and
the Arab quest-to bring about the overall security of
Lebanon and its unity.
96. But what is Israel doing south of the Awali River?
Why will Israel, as it says, ,“continue until it has
ensured the security of its borders”‘? For 11 months
prior to the invasion of Lebanon, to which the United
States delegation can testify, there was absolutely no
incident on the borders of southern Lebanon. Now
9
I

there is resistance on the part of the population in
southern Lebanon. What does Israel expect from the
people of the south of Lebanon who are being systematically harassed? Does it expect them to be submissive? Are Israel’s plans being interrupted by that
resistance? Or is submissiveness supposed to be inherent in any people that Israel dominates or whose
land it seeks to occupy? Is it inherent in Israeli policy
that the people of southern Lebanon-or
of the West
Bank and of the Golan Heights for that matter-should
be perpetually humiliated
by the exercise of Israeli
territorial
hegemony over us under the pretext of
Israel’s security?
97. Of course the representatives of Israel seek to
blow out of proportion a statement which to all the
Arabs is axiomatic. I am referring to the statement
made yesterday [2552nd meeting] by the Syrian ambassador when he said “the Lebanese people of which we
are a part”. The Israeli representative, in his conjured
paranoia, sought again to reinforce his diversionary
techniques. Let me state it clearly: of course the Lebanese are part of the Syrians and the Syrians are part of the
Lebanese, and so are all the Arab peoples part of each
other. There are in the Arab world two basic legitimaties: the legitimacy of the sovereignty of independent
Arab States and the legitimacy of our national constituency of belonging to one Arab culture, one Arab
civilization and one Arab destiny. It is this reconciliation of the two legitimacies which neither Israel nor,
unfortunately,
the United States can comprehend, as
is evident in its breach of intellectual contract when
it sought to broker the Israeli-Lebanese
Agreement of
17 May 1983. That Agreement does not take into consideration the interplay and the dynamic interaction of
these two legitimacies in the Arab world: the Arab
national constituency and the sovereignty and independence of independent Arab States. When it did not
take that into consideration, it planted the seeds of its
undoing. That is why, when the Karame Government
was formed in the aftermath of the abrogation of the socalled Israeli-Lebanese
Agreement, the infrastructure
for the national unity of Lebanon became possible and
the present Government of Lebanon represents that.
Lebanon, the Arab States in general and the Arab
League did not expect that “breach of intellectual contract” by the United States in its failure to comprehend
the dynamic interaction between these two legitimaties, especially since the United States was foremost in
helping to bring about this Arab national awareness
through the various universities and the school systems
that it established, through the presence of a large community of Arab-Americans
in this country, through its
intellectual anti-colonial history and through its understanding in the various universities and colleges which
are engaged in the study of Arab Middle Eastern culture. We thought that the United States would not only
understand the reality of this interaction but that it
could have a positive input for stability in the region and
for world stability and peace as a whole.

ment, the United States should consider this as a time of
reassessment of its overall policies in Lebanon and in
the Middle East in general. I do not want to repeat what
has often been stated, namely, that in an election year in
the United States politics overtake policies. There are
rumours and innuendoes in the United States-which
I do not want to accept because of my deep affection
for the United States-that
it cannot be embarrassed
by any attempt to condemn Israel or to censure it or
to deplore its activities or even mildly to criticize
it because of pragmatic considerations which will not
be announced, which will not be vocalized and which
will not be stated. But the Arab countries, especially
those that are friends of the United States, should
understand the subtleties and not force the issue,
especially when it pertains to anything that concerns
Israel at this juncture.
99. We in the Arab world do not seek any headlong
diplomatic confrontations with the United States. But
we are eager- and I think we have a right to be eagerthat the United States should be sensitized to the actual, well-proved and documented grievances that the
Lebanese under Israeli occupation face and experience, that the Palestinians under occupation face and
experience, that the Syrians in the Golan Heights face
and experience. We want the United States to be sensitized because we refuse to consider that a super-Power
with global responsibilities
for peace and international
security would allow its judgement to be deflected by
considerations that it will not announce but that it will
subtly communicate.
100. And then we are told that the occupation by
Israel of southern Lebanon is provisional. Well, what is
the definition of provisional? In the Israeli lexicon provisional means that there is no commitment
to a particular date. Israeli occupation of the West Bank moved
from the fact of occupied territories to administered
territories, and later to another level of annexed territories-or,
rather, Judea and Samaria-into
a situation also of suspended sovereignty, to their claim to its
annexation as being equal to the rights of the Palestinians to have their own State in their own homeland. Provisional until when? We will probably hear the answer:
until Israel determines that its security is established.
101. It arrogates that right to itself-not
to the United
Nations mechanisms, not to international judgement,
not to the international
community-and
even then
it does not allow any input into the determination
of
whether there is security or not. It arrogates to itself an
absolute right to determine “when and if ‘. So the term
in the lexicon of Israel, has the seeds of
“provisional”,
permanency, because semantic acrobatics have never
eluded Zionist parlance.
102. Once again the Council is faced with an urgent
request to investigate the charges, although the charges are documented and do not require investigation.
occupiers of southern LebWould the “provisional”
anon allow an investigation
by the Council? Or are

98. As I have often stated, instead of brooding over
the abrogation of the so-called Israeli-Lebanese Agree10

Rashaya district are but a link in an endless chain,
starting with the occupation of the land of Palestine
and the establishment
thereon of the State of Israel
and Israel’s repeated and unjust wars against the Arab
people and its attempts to annihilate the Palestinian
people.

there hints that the Council, whose power is determined
and defined by the Charter of the United Nations, must
face a situation of powerlessness on any issue in which
Israel is involved?
103. Israel considers that the United Nations should
treat it exceptionally because it thinks that it has an
exceptional relationship with the United States. Perhaps the relationship is exceptional, but we still believe,
and we want to believe, that there is a residual sense of
fairness and objectivity in the United States pertaining
to the fate of Lebanon and to the agony and tragedy of
the southern part of Lebanon, that this exceptional
relationship with Israel will not obfuscate its sense of
objectivity and its tradition of fairness.

110. We are now witnessing its practices against
southern Lebanon aimed at cutting it off from the motherland and illegally controlling its natural resources.
These practices follow upon those that have been directed against the Palestinian people in its camps in
Lebanon.
111. Undoubtedly,
the Council still remembers the
Israeli massacres against Palestinians and Lebanese
in Sabra and Shatila, and its meeting last May
[254&h meeting] on the massacres in the Palestinian
Ein El-Helweh camp.

104. That is why, inasmuch as Lebanon has defined
the parameters of the human tragedy of the people of
southern Lebanon and the Bekaa Valley, something
beyond a consensus sufficient to deter Israel from the
perpetuation
of its so-called provisional occupation
may emerge and then the notion of “suspended sovereignty” will forever be suspended and Lebanon will
recover its total authority over all its territory.

112. My Government is convinced that Israel’s attempts to portray itself as seeking peace in the Middle
East are but false and deceitful, as demonstrated by its
continued rejection of all peace initiatives, including
the American initiative.*

105. The PRESIDENT
(interpetation from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Yemen.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

113. Our conviction is strengthened by Israel’s continuous hampering of the convening of an International
Peace Conference on the Middle East that would be
attended by all parties. The convening of that Conference was requested by the General Assembly in its
resolution 38/58 C, of 13 December 1983.

106. Mr. NOMAN
(Yemen) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. This will undoubtedly contribute to
guiding the work of this body on the right path, thanks
to your well-known wisdom and expertise. At the same
time, I should like to extend my thanks to your predecessor, the representative of the United States, for
her presidency and the able manner in which she conducted the work of the Council last month.

114. While the question of Palestine has remained
unresolved for more than three decades and represents
a set-back for human ideals and morality, Israel’s continued occupation of parts of Lebanon and other neighbouring Arab States is concrete evidence of the increasing gap between objectives and ambitions, on the
one hand, and the painful reality of international relations, on the other hand. Israel has a great ally which
supports its expansionist plans and shields it from all
international
pressure or sanctions in response to its
repeated crimes, the most recent of which-its
crimes
in Lebanon-are
now before the Council.

107. Yesterday, we have all listened with the utmost
attention to the statement of the representative
of
fraternal Lebanon on the situation in southern Lebanon, which is occupied by Israel. This is a matter of
deep concern for my Government,
as well as a great
number of other peace-loving States, because it firmly
believes that the continued Israeli acts against Lebanon
and other neighbouring
Arab States are a constant
threat to peace and security in the Middle East and the
world.

115. The Government of the Yemen Arab Republic
firmly supports Lebanon’s just demands for Israel’s
immediate and unconditional withdrawal in implementation of the relevant Council resolutions. We call for
measures to compel Israel to lift its siege of regions
under its occupation, to respect the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the norms of international law and relevant international conventions and
to abide by Lebanon’s established sovereignty over its
natural resources and occupied territory.

108. In June 1982, the Council adopted two resolutions on the question, 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), the
latter demanding that Israel immediately
and unconditionally
withdraw from Lebanese territories.
As
everyone knows, Israel has not complied with these
two resolutions and has persisted in rejecting all other
relevant resolutions of the Council, as well as all international instruments.

116. Moreover, we call upon the Council to affirm the
necessity of protecting the safety and security of the
Palestinians in their camps in southern Lebanon. We
reaffirm our position of principle that the Palestinian
people must be granted its right to self-determination
and to statehood on its own soil, and that the Palestine

109. The practices of the Israeli occupation authorities in southern Lebanon, western Bekaa and the
11

Liberation Organization (PLO) must be accorded recognition as the sole, legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people. That is the only realistic approach
to the solution of the question of the Middle East.
117. Our request is but a call to the Council to fulfil its
obligations under the Charter to maintain international
peace and security.
118. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of Israel, who has asked to
speak.
119. Mr. BLUM (Israel): With regard to the statement
that we heard today from Mr. Maksoud, I think it can be
disposed of summarily. His theorizing about an alleged
Israeli concept of suspended sovereignty in southern
Lebanon is utter and unadulterated nonsense. The fact
that this sham theory was proclaimed by Mr. Maksoud
in so loud a voice merely attests to the fact that he is an
adherent of the maxim, “Raise your voice; argument is
weak”.

No amount of intellectual acrobatics of whatever decibels by Mr. Maksoud, however, can obscure the simple fact that the aforementioned Agreement was ratified
by the Parliament of Lebanon virtually unanimously.
Evidently the Lebanese Parliament also failed to recognize the “dynamic interaction of [these] two legitimacies”.
122. The representative of Lebanon will no doubt
wish to convey to the Parliament of Lebanon this gentle
rebuke to which it was treated by Mr. Maksoud. The
truth, of course, is entirely different. What the Parliament of Lebanon perhaps failed to foresee was not
the “dynamic interaction of [these] two legitimacies”
but the very dynamic action of one illegitimacy, that is,
the abuse of Lebanon by the Syrian invaders. This,
of course, as we all know, has been the cause for the
unilateral renunciation
of the Agreement of 17 May
1983 by the Government of Lebanon. But, true to form,
Mr. Maksoud has again displayed his inability or unwillingness, or both, to face up to the truth.
The meeting

120. Sovereignty in southern Lebanon, as in other
parts of that country, belongs exclusively to Lebanon
and to Lebanon alone. Mr. Maksoud, who has been
oblivious to this simple fact over the past decade, would
do well to remind the Syrian occupiers and the terrorist
PLO of this fact.
121. Mr. Maksoud also explained to us that the
Israeli-Lebanese
Agreement of 17 May 1983 failed
to recognize, and I hope I quote him verbatim, “the
dynamic interaction
of [these] two legitimacies”
Eparu. 97, above] and thus sought to justify the unilateral renunciation by Lebanon of that Agreement.

rose at 6.10 p.m.

NOTES
’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
z Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).
3 United Nations, Treary Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
4 See Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Washington, D.C. (U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982). vol. 18, No. 35.
p. 1081.

’

\

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
ma! be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NA¶ONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans ks librairks et Ies agences d@ositaires du
monde entier. Informer-vous
aupr& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Units. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gcnhe.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas est&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes &I mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Se.ccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Feb~

19934,050
