V.

131

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

crease food production through. inter alia, the provision, on a priority basis, of additional financial and
technical assistance to Africa by the International Fund
for Agricultural Development. the African Development Bank and the United Nations Development Programme and an increase in lending by the World Bank
to the agricultural sector in Africa:
4. Appeals to the international community to
provide urgently additional food aid to African countries to meet the current emergency needs in the region.
particularly as called for by the Economic and Social
Council in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1980 /58:
5. Calls upon current and prospective donor countries to achieve without delay the minimum target of the
Food Aid Convention of I 980, 1111 of 10 million tons of
cereal aid annually. as well as the minimum target of
500,000 tons of grains for the International Emergency
Food Reserve, as agreed upon in the relevant decisions
of the General Assembly:
6. Urges Governments and the international organizations concerned to provide the necessary technical,
financial and food assistance to food security projects in
the region, especially in the countries of the Sahe] and
the Sudano-Sahelian countries, in the framework of
their own activities, including strengthening the Food
Security Assistance Scheme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations through the
participation of current and prospective donors:
7. Urgently appeals to the international community
to offer its immediate assistance for the effective suppression of the present upsurge of the African migratory locust, which, if not immediately controlled, may
engulf a large part of the continent:
8. Urges the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to continue to play its leading role in
the co-ordination of the locust control efforts in the
region;
9. Recommends that the Programme for the Control
of African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Development, endorsed by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its
twentieth session in its resolution 8 /79 of 28 November
1979, should be implemented on an urgent basis under
the over-all co-ordination of that organization and with
the active financial and technical support of the international community:
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, to co-operate with the Organization of
African Unity in undertaking a study on the establishment of regional food trade and distribution organizations in Africa and to submit a report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session through the
Economic and Social Council:
11. Urges all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to intensify their
activities in Africa to assist Governments, inter alia, in
the areas of direct government participation in food production, agricultural processing. integrated research and
extension services;
12. Also urges the international community to assist
countries in the African region to achieve. between 1980
and 1985, the following goals:
(a) A significant improvement in their food situation and the laying of the foundations for the attain-

ment of self-sufficiency in cereals, livestock and fish
products:
(b) Significant progress towards attaining a 50 per
cent reduction in post-harvest losses, through, inter a/ia,
the construction of storage facilities;
(c) An improved physical infrastructure to facilitate
food distribution at the national, subregional and
regional levels:
(d) Greater and effective agronomic research, with
special emphasis on improved seeds and an adequate
supply of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals
suitable for African conditions:
13. Further urges all relevant organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to expand their
training programmes in the building up of national capabilities for the preparation, execution, monitoring and
evaluation of agricultural development projects;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to
submit a preliminary report on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

"" See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirty~fUth Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/Yi,1 \9). part one. para. 32. For the text o\'
the Convention, see TD,i\V HE•\ I .6 'I '·

''' See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Report nf the Conference of FA 0. Twentieth Session. Rome,
10-.'S Novemher /979 (C 79 REP and Corr.2), para. 43.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/70.

World Food Day

The General Assembly,
Considering that food is a requisite for human survival
and well-being and a fundamental human necessity,
I. Welcomes the observance of World Food Day, to
be held for the first time on 16 October 1981 and annually thereafter, as unanimously decided by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nat ions at its twentieth session:"'
2. Urges Governments and national, regional and
international organizations to contribute to the effective commemoration of World Food Day to the greatest
possible extent.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980

35/71.

Problem of remnants of war

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVJI), 2996 (XXVJI)
and 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, pertaining to
co-operation between States in the field of the environment, the international responsibility of States in protecting the environment and the establishment of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Recalling also its resolution 3435 (XXX) of 9 December 1975.
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 111 of 16 December
1976. in which it noted the interim report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the study of the problem of material
remnants of war, particularly mines, and their effect on

132

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

the environment, 112 and requested the Governing Council to ensure its completion,
Taking note of resolution 32 of 19 August 1976 of the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, regarding compensation for the
material remnants of war, 113
Recalling also decisions 80 (IV) of9 April 1976 1 '~ and
I 01 (V) of 25 May 1977 11 ' of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme,
Taking note also of resolution 26 / 11-P, concerning the
right to compensation for the effects of wars and mines,
adopted by the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers, held at Islamabad from 17 to 22 May 1980,' 1"
Recognizing that most developing countries have been
subjected to foreign occupation and exposed to wars
waged by certain colonial Powers, thus incurring tremendous loss of life and property,
Recognizing also that the presence of material remnants of war, particularly mines, on the territories of
certain developing countries seriously impedes their development efforts and entails loss of life and property,
Convinced that the removal of those remnants of war
should be the responsibility of the countries that implanted them and should be carried out at their expense,
I. Regrets that no real action has been taken to solve
the problem despite the various resolutions and decisions adopted by both the General Assembly and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
2. Calls upon those States which took part in those
wars to make available forthwith to the affected States
all information on the areas in which such mines were
placed, including maps indicating the position of those
areas, and information concerning the types of mines:
3. Supports the demand of the States affected by the
implantation of mines on their lands for compensation
for the losses incurred from the States which planted the
mines;
·4_ Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the States concerned to find ways and means, including
the possibility of convening a conference under the
auspices of the United Nations, for solving the problem
of material remnants of war, particularly mines, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
steps taken towards the implementation of the abovementioned resolutions and decisions and on the obstacles he has faced in that regard.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/72.

Implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of
the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/170 of 10 December 1977,
32/172 of 19 December 1977, 33/88 and 33/89 of
112
A/31/210.
"' See A/31/197.
114
See Official Records of the General Assemhlr. Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/31 /25), annex I.
·
"' Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/32/25). annex I.
'" See A/35/4 I9-S/ 14 I 29, annex I.

15 December 1978 and 34/184, 34/185 and 34/187 of
18 December 1979,
Recalling also section I I of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1978/37 of 21 July 1978 and Council
resolutions 1979/51 of 2 August 1979 and 1980/52 of
23 July 1980,
Noting decision 8 / 17 of 29 April 1980 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme' 17 and decision 80/45 of 30 June I 980 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme,'"

Having considered:
(a) The report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification,'' 0
(h) The report of the Secretary-General on the
restoration and improvement of the Fouta-Djallon
massif, 12 "
Reiterating its concern over the particular seriousness
of desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian region and the
severe effects on the region's economic and social development and on the way of life of its population, as well
as the need for the implementation in the region of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification on an intensified and sustained basis,
1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and the report
of the Secretary-General on the restoration and improvement of the Fouta-Djallon massif:
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the progress made
by the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in assisting the Governments of the region, under a joint venture of the United Nations Environment Programme
and the United Nations Development Programme, in
implementing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification:
3. Commends the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme for
the effective and co-ordinated manner in which they
have continued to support the joint venture:
4. Notes with satisfaction the addition of Djibouti,
Guinea and Guinea-Bissau to the list of countries to be
assisted by the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office
in their efforts to implement the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, and the inclusion of the pilot project
for the improvement and restoration of the FoutaDjallon massif within the programme of action of the
United Nations Environment Programme against desertification:
5. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to examine at its next
session the possibility of including Benin in the list of
countries which receive assistance, through the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, in implementing in the
Sudano-Sahelian region the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification and to report on this matter to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
'' See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-_fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/35 '25). annex I.
"' See Of]icial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1980.
Supplement No. 12 (hl980/421Rev.1). chap. XI.
''" A/35;41 I. annex, sect. Ill.
'·"' A 1 J'i/J68.
