General Assembly-T:..:h:..:ir:..:t,_y-:..:e~ig'.:::h:..::th::..:..:S_:_es:..:s_io_n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

44

right of the people of Namibia to self-determination. and
independence within a united and integrated Namibia.
including Walvis Bay. has becn restored. and to. r_efram
from taking any action which might imply recognit1on ot
thc legitimacy ofthe illegal occupation of Namibia by that
régime;
10. Ca/Is upon the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and installations from colonial Territories and to refrain from establishing new ones:
11. Urges ali States. directly and through thcir aetion
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system. to providc ali moral and material
assistance to the oppresscd people of Namibia and. in
respect of the other Territories. requests thc administcring
Powers. in consultation with the Governmcnts of thc Territories under their administration. to takc steps to cnlist
and make effectivc use ofall possible assistancc. on both a
bilateral and a multilateral basis. in the strengthcning of
the economies of those Territories:
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) in ali
Territories that have not yet attained independence and. in
particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals for the elimination
of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
sess10n;
(b) To make concrete suggestions which could assist
the Security Council in considering appropriate measures
under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial
Territories that are likely to threatcn international peacc
and security;
(e) To continue to examine the compliance of Mcmber
States with the Declaration and with other relevan! resolutions on decolonization. particularly those relating to
Namibia;
(d) To continue to pay particular attention to the small
Territories. including the sending of visiting missions to
them. as appropriate, and to recommend to the General
Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise their right to
self-determination, freedom and independence:
(e) To take ali necessary steps to enlist world-wide support among Governments. as well as national and international organizations having a special interest in
decolonization. for the achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations. particularly as concerns
the oppressed people of Namibia:
13. Ca!ls upan the administering Powers to continue to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its mandate and, in particular. to permit the access of visiting missions to the Territories to secure first-hand information and ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their
inhabitants;
14. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide or continue to provide to the newly
independent and emerging States all possible assistance in
the economic. social and other fields;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation of the present resolution. as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
93 !bid., chap. 11

adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.
86th p/enarr meeting
7 December 1983

38/55.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

/"he General .·L11cmh/_r.
l!aring examined the chapter ofthe report ofthe Special
Committee on thc Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
thc work of the l ·nited Nations in the field of decolonization. 9 '
Reca/ling its rcsolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960. containing the Declaration on the Granting of Indepcndencc to Colonial Countries and Peoples. and ali other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination ofinformation on decolonization, in
particular General Assembly resolution 3 7/36 of 23
November 1982.
Rcacrating the importance ofpublicity asan instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration
and mindful of the continuing pressing need to take ali
possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with ali
aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to
assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories
to achieve self-determination. freedom and independence.
A 1mrc of the increasingly important role being played in
the widespread d1ssemination ofrelevant information by a
number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization. and noting with satisfaction
the intensified efforts of the Special Committee in enlisting
the support ofthose organizations in that regard. including
its decision to organize in Europe in 1984 a seminar on
dccolonization wi th thc non-governmental organizations
conccrned.
1. Approres the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on thc Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the l lnited Nations in the field of decolonization:
2. Reatfirms the importance of effecting the widest oossible dissemination of information on the evils and dangers of colonialism. on the determined efforts of the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination. freedom and
independence and on the assistance being provided by the
international communitv towards the elimination of the
rcmaining vestigcs of coÍonialism in ali its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General. having regard to the
suggestions of thc Special Committee. to continue to take
concrete measures through ali the media at his disposal,
including publications. radio and television. to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the United
Nations in the ficld of decolonization. and. inter afia:
(a) To continue. in consultation with the Special Committee. to collect. prepare and disseminate basic material.
studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and. in particular. to continue to publish the periodical ObJectil'e: .!11stice and other publications, special anides and studies. including the Deco/onization series, and

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages:
(b) To seek the full co-operation of thc administering
Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks rcferred to
above;
(e) To intensify the activities of ali United Nations
information centres. particularly thosc locatcd in Western
Europe and the Americas:
(d) To maintain a clase working relationship with the
Organization of African Unity by holding pcriodic consultations and by systematically cxchanging rclcvant information with that organization:
(e) To enlist the support of non-govcrnmental organizations having a special intcrest in decolonization in the
dissemination of the relcvant information:
({) To ensure the availability ofthc necessary facilities
and services in this regard;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution:
4. Invites ali States. the specialized agencies and othcr
organizations of thc United Nations systcm and nongovernmental organizations having a special intcrest in
decolonization to undertake or intensify. in co-operation
with the Secretary-General and within their respective
spheres ofcompetence, the large-scale dissemination ofthe
information referred to in paragraph 2 above:
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow thc implementation of the present resolution and rcport thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
86th p/enarr meeting
7 Dcccmhcr 1983

38/56.

lnternational Year of Peace

The General Asscmh/_1·.
Recalling its resolution 37/ 16 of 16 November 1982. in
which it declared 1986 to be the International Year of
Peace,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 94 containing the draft programme of
the lnternational Year of Peace. 95
Taking into account the guidelines for international
years and anniversaries adopted by the General Assembly
in its decision 35/424 of 5 December 1980.
Recognizing that the International Year of Peace, which
will be linked with the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations, is especially important and will permit the
United Nations and its Member States to concentrate their
efforts towards promoting the idcals of peace. as evidence
of their dedication to serve peace by ali possible means.
Considering a/so that the preparations for the International Year of Peace must be carried through to ensure
positive results in international co-operation for the promotion of peace during the Year,
l. Endorses the principal objcctives of thc International Year of Peace indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General:
2. Invites ali States, ali organizations within the United
Nations system and interested non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Secretary-General in achieving the objectives of the lnternational Year of Peace;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a voluntary fund far the programme of the International Year of
94A/38/413 and Add.l and 2.
95 A/38/413, annex l.
96 /bid., annex V.

45

Peace and urges ali States and interested organizations to
contribute to that fund:
4. . t/so requests the Sccretary-General to carry out during 1984-1985 the necessary preparations for the observancc of the lnternational Year of Peace. including the
organization of regional seminars devoted to promoting
the objectives of the Ycar: 96
5. Further rcquests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the
draft programme ofthe International Year of Peace and on
the arrangements for financing it:
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session an item cntitled "lnternational Year of
Peaet:"
87th plenar1· 111cct111g
7
Decemhcr /983

38/57.

Thirty-five years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: international cooperation for the promotion and observance
of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights

/he General Asscmh/1·,
Reatfinning the continued significance and the validity
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 97
Wc!coming the progress made so far in the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
sincc the proclamation of the Declaration.
Rcculling that Member States have pledged themselves
to achieve. in co-operation with the United Nations. the
promotion of universal respect for and observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Acknowledging that, despite ali the efforts made bv the
international community to promote and protect h~man
rights. there is a need for constan! vigilance by the international community in this ficld.
Recalling a/so the responsibility of the intemational
community to remove the threat of war from the lives of
people. to preserve civilization and to ensure that everyone enjoys the inherent right to life. liberty and security of
person.
L1nderlining the importance of the teaching of human
nghts at ali levels. particularly in primary and secondary
schools.
1. Stresses the significance of thc thirty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
expresses grave concern at mass and flagrant violations
and ali other violations of human rights which continue to
take place in many parts of the world:
2. Takes note with sati~faction ofthe progress made so
far in the field of standard-setting on human rights since
the proclamation of the Declaration and reaffirms its com'!1itment to continue to strive for further progress in the
held of the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms:
3. Urges ali States to apply the Declaration resolutely,
as well as senously to consider ratifying or acceding to and
observing the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 98 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 98 the International
Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial
Discrimination 99 and instruments relating to apartheid.
and calls upon ali States to ensure greater observance and
97 Resolution 217 A (lll).
98 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
99 Resolution 2106 A (XXI. annex
