UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

__.--..
APR UZ 1993

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2548) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16692). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2548

NOTE
Symbols of United blations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document..
Documents of the.Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or- in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in .yearly volumes of Resolution? and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2548th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 16 August 1984, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Leandre BASSOLE (Burkina Faso)

Mrs. Kirkpatrick for her service as President of the
Council for the month of July.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet ‘Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

.

Adoption

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16692)

agenda (S/Agenda/2548)

1. Adoption of the agenda

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Nigeria, South
Africa and Thailand in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

,2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984from the Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16692)
.

The meeting

was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Statement

-

by the President

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Today is an extraordinary day. It is the day when,
having become a Member of the United Nations on
20 September -1960, my country has for the first time
during its history as an independent, free and sovereign nation acceded to the presidency of the Security
Council.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Muiiiz
(Argentina), Mr. Cesar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Onobu
(Nigeria),
Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa) and
Mr. Kasemsri (Thailand) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. At this solemn moment it is my great honour to
convey to the Council, and through it to the entire
world, the messageof peace of the people, the National
Council of the Revolution and the Revolutionary Government of Burkina Faso. Aware of the lofty and delicate responsibilities borne by the President of the
Security Council, my delegation intends to discharge
those responsibilities fully and to be present wherever
and whenever international peace and security are
being discussed.
Expression of thanks to the retiring

of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 15August from the Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Council to permit
me to participate, on behalf of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, under the provisions of rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, in
the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The
question of South Africa’.”

President

3. As this is the first meeting of the Security Council
for the month of August, I should like at the very outset
to pay tribute to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, representative
of the United States, for the great diplomatic skill and
courtesy with which she conducted the business of the
Council last month. I am sure I speak for all members in
expressing our admiration and deep appreciation to

‘6. On previous occasions the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice,
I propose that, pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, the Council extend an invitation to
1

..

‘.‘_
‘..-

-.
I.

the Acting Chairman
Apartheid.

of the Special Committee

11. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) [interpretation
from
French]: Allow me, Sir, to convey to you, on behalf of
the Group of African States and in my own name,
heartfelt congratulations
on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month. I am
particularly
pleased to do so, since you represent a
fraternal country, Burkina Faso, whose staunch commitment to freedom and dignity makes you very well
placed to understand the tragedy of the people of South
Africa. We are aware of your qualities as skilled diplomat and are convinced that you will with competence
and calm make the Council face up to its responsibilities
in the common struggle against apartheid and for restitution of the national rights of the people of South
Africa.

against

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bhatt, Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
took a place at the Council table.
7. The PRESIDENT
(interoretation
from French):
I should like to inform the me*mbers of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 15 August [S/Z66981 from
the representatives of Burkina Faso, Egypt and Zimbabwe the text of which reads as follows:
“We,‘the
undersigned, members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that during its
meetings devoted to consideration of the item entitled ‘The question of South Africa’ the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mfanafuthi J. Makatini, representative of the African National Congress of South Africa.”
:
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to the request.

12. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of the United States, who so
ably conducted the deliberations
of this body last
month.
13. Finally I should like very sincerely to thank you,
Sir, and the members of the Council for having kindly
invited me to address this body as Chairman of the
Group of African States.

It was so decided.
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that I have
received another letter dated 15 August [S/16699], from
the’representatives
of Burkina Faso, Egypt and Zimbabwe, which reads as follows:

14. The Council is meeting today to consider the serious situation prevailing in%outhVAfrica following the
decision of the Pretoria leaders to impose so-called
constitutional
reforms that seek to entrench and perpetuate the apartheid system.

“We, the undersigned, members of the Security
Council;have
the honour to request that during its
meetings devoted to consideration of the item entitled ‘The question of South Africa’ the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmed Gora Ebrahim, representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania.”

15. Seriously disquieted by the resistance of the oppressed people of South Africa and their national
movement, and internationally
isolated because of the
policy of apartheid, the Pretoria regime has now taken
recourse to constitutional ploys accompanied by a massive propaganda campaign to dull the vigilance of the
international
community.

If I hear no objection,
agrees to the request.

16. Thus on 2 November 1983 an exclusively white
minority stated its position on a so-called constitution
that would arbitrarily determine the fate of the vast
majority of the people of South Africa.

I shall take it that the Council

It was so decided.
17. Offered in the form of a euphemism which proves
that that which is preposterous does not kill-as
a
“change in the right direction’*-that
constitution completes a political, juridical and police arsenal that makes
the indigenous people non-persons. The South African
blacks are not only unwanted in their own land, they do
not exist. Thus they have been deprived of the first
fundamental right of a man in his country, the right to
citizenship.

9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
This meeting of the Council has been convened in
accordance with the request made by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the Group of African
States, contained in a letter dated 8 August [S/16692]
addressed to the President of the Council. I should like
to draw the attention of members of the Council to
document S/16319 which contains the text of a note by
the Secretary-General drawing attention to paragraph 6
of General Assembly resolution 38/11 of 15 November 1983.

18. According to this new constitution,
endorsed
-we are told-by
a white electorate, 24 million South
African blacks have suddenly been declared aliens in
their own country. That text, faithful to the cardinal
principle of apartheid, the hierachy of races, provides
for the establishment of a so-called three-house Parliament: one for a so-called racial group, that is the

10. I call upon the first speaker, the representative of
Algeria, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity
as Chairman of the Group of African States for the
month of August.
2

whites, one for those who are called CoIoureds in Pretoria, and one for persons of Asian origin. As for the
blacks, according to Pretoria they do not deserve to be
called a racial group or to have any kind of representation. They have simply been disregarded because
according to Pretoria they are aliens.

26. Since 1948 the institutionalization
of apartheid
has been implemented
through other legislative acts,
including the Group Areas Act, which established segregation in places of work and residence, the Population Registration Act, which divided the people into
racial categories, the Bantu Homelands
Citizenship
Act, whereby blacks are dumped in Bantustans, the
Prohibition
of Political Interference Act, which prohibited multiracial political parties, the pass laws and
the so-called 1961 referendum on the republ,ic of the
whites.
‘.
27. It is clear that the new constitutionis
merely
another link in a long chain intended to strengthen the
apartheid regime and to perpetuate domination by the
white minority.

19. Under the terms of this constitutional
charade,
each house will discuss its own matters. However, the
house for whites will be able to examine all questions,
because everything that affects the country concerns
them, whereas the Coloureds and the people of Asian
origin will not be able to discuss any matter unless it has
been previously approved by the white President of the
State. Clearly these two racial categories referred to by
Pretoria will never be able to threaten the power of the
white minority,
since seats have been distributed in
such a way that the whites will always retain a parliamentary majority.

28. The ideology of the Pretoria regime is such that we
cannot hope to get the leaders of that regime to join in
constructive dialogue likely to lead to a change in its
anachronistic structures. To cherish any illusion as to
any domestic change in that country by means of dialogue without discarding the racist ideology itself would
be merely a negative exercise and would but entrench
the structures of oppression.

20. This, then, is apartheid’s
new democracy, to
which, unfortunately, the Governments of some Member States seem to accord some credibility.
21. Because of the division of Dower. constitutional
bantustans are being offered to the Coloureds and people of Asian origin. Since the blacks of South Africa
-the true people of that land-are destined one day to
be dumped in so-called homelands, which are really
concentration camps, it remains for Pretoria to find a
spot for the other non-whites to prevent them from
harming the power of the whites.

29. It is in this context that we must view the latest
constitutional
manoeuvring by Pretoria.
30. In the present ideology, for Mr. Botha as for his
predecessors, there can be no South Africa without
total white supremacy.
31. Need we refer to statements of these leaders,
including Mr. Verwoerd, to be convinced that apartheid means exclusive monopoly on power? Indeed, in
the words of Mr. Verwoerd:

22. It is against this background that we should view
the latest decision by the Pretoria leaders. Mindful
of the danger ,of the struggle of the people of South
Africa and the national liberation movement, the Pretoria leaders have thus had recourse to these constitutional manoeuvres to break the unity of the oppressed
and to perpetuate the apartheid system.
I
23. An initial consequence of these so-called con‘stitutional reforms is the legitimization
of massive recruitment for the armed forces of the apartheid regime
of those called Coloureds and of persons of Asian origin, who would thus unwittingly become the instruments of .a policy of repression in the country and
aggression against the Namibian people and the people
of the independent African States.

.’

_-

“We want South Africa to remain white. .Keeping it
white can mean only one thing: guaranteeing domination by whites, guaranteeing them not only the leadership and the guidance of the country but also control and supremacy.”
32. Need we also refer to Mr. Vorster to be convinced
that apartheid means political domination? He said:
“We need the blacks because they work for us. But
the fact that they work for us can never authorize
them to claim political rights-not
now, not in the
future, not in any circumstances.*’

24. This new text does not open up the way to any
constructive change, as some might believe. In the past
Pretoria has always had recourse to legislative and
constitutional
manoeuvres to strengthen and consolidate its policy of racial segregation and to intensify its
oppression of the people of South Africa.

33.

Finally,

Mr. Botha himself said:

“The Republic of South Africa is a white State. The
blacks belong to another nationality . . . that of the
homelands.”

25. That was true of the 1909 South Africa Act, which
placed power in South Africa in the hands of a white
minority and deprived the African majority of its basic
rights.

34. Hence, as a dogma of racial supremacy and of
exclusive monopoly on power, apartheid exceeds all
the notions of domination and racism touted by other
systems throughout history.
3

35. In the ideological publication South African, the
following was stated in 1977:

40. In a similar surge of solidarity, the international
community, which has declared apartheid a crime
against mankind, clearly expressed its opinion in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 38/11, declaring that

“In the nineteenth century the black peoples found
themselves in the sphere of influence of the whites,
who felt obliged to apply vis-h-vis the blacks a policy
of responsible trusteeship.‘*

“the so-called ‘constitutional proposals’ are contrary
to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
that the results of the referendum are of no validity
whatsoever and that the enforcement of the proposed
‘constitution* will inevitably aggravate tension and
conflict in South Africa and in southern Africa as a
whole”.

That publication also spoke of historic heritage and
even of a-veritably divine mission that a reading of the
Holy Scriptures--surprising, to say the least-would
thus confer on the white race in South Africa: “a sacred
duty to guide and civilize the black peoples*‘. The white
race could not allow itself to have any contacts likely to
sully it; hence the legislation on sexual restrictions,
such as the 1927 Immorality Act. In 1983, 169 South
Africans were brought before the courts to answer
charges of “immorality”.

41: Apartheid cannot be reformed; it must be rooted
out. It is imperative for the international community to
keep up pressure on the Pretoria regime in order to
impose the restitution of the legitimate rights of the
South African people.

36. In addition, this same divine mission has turned all
South African territory into a potential promised land,
thus making it a divine right to lay claim to any comer of
that territory at the whim of the leaders of apartheid.

‘_

37. This racist apartheid ideology cannot be amended
or become bearable by dint of a few reforms when its
basic tenets are kept intact. The oppressed people of
South Africa, which has been denied its own identity and banished from its own homeland, has clearly
grasped the scope of this “constitutional reform” ,and
unreservedly condemned it, as borne out by the current
demonstrations by students of the Western Cape University.

‘.
:

38. Africa. which considers aDartheid as an affront to
the dignity of all its peoples, has strongly condemned
this so-called constitution. In a statement issued on
4 November last the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) declared:

42. The Group of African States is convinced that the
Security Council, like the General Assembly, will reject
the so-called constitution, as well as the results of the
2 November 1983 referendum, because they run counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
43. As the custodian of international peace and security, the Council must also clearly indicate to the Pretoria regime that the implementation of this “constitution” by means of an electoral charade will inevitably
aggravate tension and contlict in South Africa itself and
throughout southern Africa.

‘_

44. This so-called constitution must be cateaoricallv
rejected, since it leaves the very structures of a>artheih
intact and institutionalizes the exclusion of 24 million
blacks from their fatherland.
45. Only the total eradication of apartheid and the
establishment of a democratic non-racial society based
on the free-exercise of universal adult suffrage by all in a
united and unfragmented South Africa can lead to ajust
and lasting solution of the explosive situation prevailing
in that part of our continent.

“Lest the international community be confused by
the event that has taken place in South Africa, the
OAU wishes to remind all freedom-loving peoples, as
well as believers in the principles of human equality,
that the referendum and the so-called reforms are a
gigantic constitutional hoax designed to deceive the
international community while in fact the so-called
reforms are meant to perpetuate apartheid . ; .

46. Mr:KRISHNAN (India): Sir, allow me first of all
to congratulate you on your assumption of the high
offtce of President for the current month. We are happy
to seethe representative of a friendly non-aligned country presiding. The noble sentiments conveyed in your
opening remarks today, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Burkina Faso, are not only a manifestation of your country’s dedication to the Charter of the
United Nations but will also serve to inspire our work in
the Council.

“This is the reason why the OAU vehemently denounces and rejects these.so-called reforms.‘*
39. At its Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries
“unreservedly condemned that act as yet another
device to divide the oppressed people of South Africa
and consolidate and perpetuate apartheid and white
minority rule.” [See S/l5675 and Corr.2 and 2,

47. Having had the opportunity of working closely
with you, I have come to admire your eminent-personal
qualities and skill as a diplomat. It is, in a sense, particularly appropriate that the current discussion in the
Council should be taking place under the stewardship of

annex, p. 22.1

4
,

52. The‘ so-called ‘constitutional proposals of the
South African regime, much advertised as “constitutional reforms”, have elicited the strong reaction they
deserve from the international community. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March
1983,

a distinguished African like yourself, for nowhere ,is
apartheid as burning an issue, as emotive’and as painful, as in Africa itself. I have no doubt that the Council,
guided by your wisdom and statesmanship, will be able
to discharge its responsibilities in an effective and
meaningful manner.
48. I should also like to take this opportunity to convey our particular appreciation to Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
representative of the United States, for the dignified
and effective manner in which she conducted the affairs
of the Council during the month of July.

“noted with indignation the introduction by the
South African regime of so-called constitutional reforms and unreservedly condemned that’act as yet
another device to divide the oppressed *people of
South Africa and consolidate and perpetuate apartheid and white minority rule.” [Ibid.]
~8.

Apartheid is an issue which transcends territorial or geographical boundaries. No doubt, it is the
oppressed people of South Africa and Namibia that feel
the brunt of this abhorrent policy. Equally without
doubt, it is the entire African continent that agonizes
and stands against it and strives to eradicate this curse
from its soil. However, in the ultimate analysis and by
its very nature, apartheid is an offence against all
humankind. It represents a challenge to the universal
concepts of human dignity and equality among men. As
the General Assembly has so aptly proclaimed, apartheid is a crime against humanity and a threat to international peace and security.
49.

53. In November 1983, soon after the endorsement
of the so-called constitutional proposals by an allwhite electorate in South Africa, the General Assembly
adopted its resolution 38/l 1, declaring, inter-alia, that
the so-called constitutional proposals were contrary to.
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
that the results of the referendum had no validity whatsoever. The Assembly rejected the so-called constitutional proposals and all insidious manoeuvres by the
racist minority regime of South Africa further to entrench white minority rule and apartheid. The Assembly further declared that only the total eradication of
apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial democratic society based on majority rule, through the full
and free exercise of adult suffrage by all the people in a
united and non-fragmented South Africa, could lead to
a just and lasting solution of the explosive situation in
tl.
South Africa.

50. The Council meets today faced with a serious
situation. Decades of effort, innumerable resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations; and mankind’s
cries of outrage have not succeeded in making South
Africa abandon its policies of institutionalized racism,
so anachronistic and so revolting in the present age.
With characteristic arrogance and scorn for the will of
the international community, Pretoria has persisted in,
and indeed consolidated, its policy of apartheid, not’
merely in South Africa itself, but also in Namibia,
which the racist regime continues to occupy illegally.
At the same time, the Pretoria regime has sought, with
diabolical cleverness, to convey the impression that its
policies are evolving in the direction of greater hberalization and enlightenment, and that peaceful change
is afoot in South Africa: a kind of propaganda that has
found echo in the capitals of some,ofSouth Africa’s
powerful friends and allies. Much to our regret and
consternation, efforts are being made to shield South
Africa from international isolation, and even to encourage it in its conduct.

54. In defiance of the strong international reaction to
the so-called constitutional proposals, South Africa has
gone ahead with its plans and announced that separate
so-called elections would be held on 22 and 28 August
for segregated chambers of the so-called Coloured people and the people of Asian origin. It is on the eve of
these impending grave events that the Council has
been convened as a matter of urgency. We hope that the
Council will send a powerful messagethat will serve to
restrain the Government of South Africa. We also hope
that the Council’s action will encourage the concerned
people of South Africa not to take part in these sham
elections.
55. The position of the Government and the people of
India on the question of apartheid is clear, consistent
and unambiguous. It will be remembered that the father
of our nation, Mahatma Gandhi, commenced his crusade against tyranny and injustice not in India but in
South Africa. India was the first country to raise the
issue of apartheid in South Africa at the United Nations, in 1946; that same year, we became the first
country to impose comprehensive voluntary sanctions
against South Africa.

51. For the people of South Africa and Namibia, the
position today is no different from what it has been.
A minority population reaps all the benefits that derive from its self-entrenched, privileged status. The
overwhelming majority continues to suffer humiliation,
degradation and poverty, deprived of the most fundamental of rights and repressed under a formidable military and police established. The abominable conditions under which the indigenous African population
subsists in South Africa are known to all; and scarcely
need reiteration. The fate of the people of Namibia is no
better.

56. With regard to the so-called constitutional proposals and the impending “elections”, India’s stand is
clear. We believe that the elections scheduled for later
5

this month are nothing but a facade intended to mislead
public opinion worldwide. Behind them lies the sinister
motive of sowing discord between the Coloured and
Asian communities on the one hand and the black majority on the other. It is transparently clear that the
objective of this exercise is to gain tactical advantage
for the racist regime by diluting opposition to apartheid
abroad and thus reducing the pressure for political
isolation and economic disinvestment.
The ultimate
aim of this charade is undoubtedly further to entrench
upartheid;“in the guise of reforming it; We believe, as
our Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Ghandi, has stated,
that upur2heid cannot be reformed; it must be ended.
We welcome the massive and united opposition within
South Africa to the “constitutional”
manoeuvres being
carried out by Pretoria. We are confident that the people of South Africa as a whole will not be taken in by
them and will resolutely oppose them.

“The entire Non-Aligned
Movement stands with
the people of South Africa in their struggle for hu- .
man rights. I urge all people of South Africa, especially the black, Coloured and Asian communities, to
strongly oppose the ‘elections’ which are meant only
to divide and weaken the struggle against the abomination of apartheid.”
60. Mr. SHAKER (Egypt) [interpretation from Arubit]: First, Sir, I congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August. We are proud to see you, a representative of a
friendly African State, whose friendship is so dear to
us, guiding our work, especially since your diplomatic
skills and great knowledge of international
affairs are
well known. We wish you complete success in presiding over the Council’s work, as we consider the very
important matter before us.

57. The international community will not be deceived
by South Africa’s recent attempts to portray itself in a
different garb. The recent visit by the Prime Minister of
the racist regime to several Western European countries and the so-called elections later this month are of a
piece with this new strategy intended to gain international respectability.
It is an irony of our times that
some of the affluent and industrialized
nations that
proclaim their support for the cause of human rights,
equality and justice in other parts of the world continue
to collaborate with the racist Pretoria regime in various
fields, which has the effect of emboldening that regime
further to trample on the rights and dignity of its dispossessed maj.ority population and helping it to withstand
the pressure of international
ostracism.

61. I also thank the President of the Council for the
month of July, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
representative
of the United States, for guiding the Council with wisdom and skill and without having to resort to open
meetings.
62. At its previous session the General Assembly discussed what were then called constitutional proposals
made by the Government of South Africa to grant to
those whom the regime calls the Coloureds and those of
Asian origin limited participation
in South Africa’s
parliamentary life. On 15 November 1983 the General
Assembly adopted resolution
38/l 1, which clearly
showed that the international
community considered
those proposals merely a new step in the Pretoria
regime’s attempt to institutionalize
and entrench the
policy of apartheid. The General Assembly’s condemnation of those proposals in its resolution was based on
the fact that they ran counter to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and were merely another
manoeuvre to entrench white minority rule and upurtheid in South Africa.

58. The policy of apartheid lies at the root of all the
problems that have afflicted South Africa and the entire
region of southern Africa for many decades. It has been
held to be a crime against humanity. It constitutes the
worst form of violence against the dignity of man. It is
the moving force for the continued enslavement of the
people of Namibia. In the region, it has been responsible for constant tension and strife, and has been the
basis of repeated acts of aggression by South Africa
against independent African States. Apartheid poses a
clear threat to international peace and security, and any
attempt to consolidate it must necessarily exacerbate
that threat. The Council would do well to remind itself
of this and to alert the world to the danger.

63. The General Assembly, in that resolution, called
on all Governments and organizations to take appropriate action, in co-operation with the United Nations
and the OAU, to assist the oppressed people of South
Africa in their legitimate
struggle for a non-racial
democratic society. It requested the Security Council,
as a matter of urgency, to consider the serious implications of the so-called “constitutional
proposals” and to
take all necessary measures, in accordance with the
Charter, to avert the further aggravation of the situation
in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole.

59. In conclusion, I should like to read out to the
Council a special message sent by the Prime Minister
of India, and Chairperson of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, Mrs. Indira Gandhi:

64. As is well known, the resolution was adopted
without any opposition. However, as we have become
accustomed to seeing, South Africa paid no heed to the
will of the international
community.
Rather, it continued with its plans. It is now preparing for “elections”, which will take place at the end of this month,
on the basis of the so-called amendments, which were
approved in a referendum for whites only, despite the

“The new constitution under which the racist r-egime in South Africa has called for elections is designed to perpetuate a fraud on the people of South
Africa and on the very spirit of liberty. The suggested
levels of enfranchisement
denigrate the self-respect
of non-white communities and will continue to hold
the majority of South Africans in thrall.
6

clear refusal of what the regime calls theColoureds and
those of Asian origin.

step towards equality ‘between the races, that the Group
Areas Act would remain and would be implemented by
force, if necessary.

65. The fact that the Council is considering this issue
today is particularly important from Egypt’s point of
view. On the one hand, it shows that the international
community is insistent in its rejection of the so-called
constitutional amendments in South Africa and of the
consequences and measuresflowing from these amendments, and demonstrates that the Pretoria regime’s
insistence on continuing with its plans will not weaken
the international community’s opposition to the regime’s racist policies and its many manoeuvres to implement them. On the other hand, today’s meeting is
also a response to the General Assembly’s request in
the aforementioned resolution that the Council should
consider the issue. Egypt has always believed-and it
expressed its stand when it joined the Council-that the
Security Council is required to take up matters that the
General Assembly recommends for its consideration.

69. Furthermore, the black majority will not be rep
resented in the three legislative chambers created by
the Pretoria regime and will be- able to practise their
very limited rights only in the bantustans provided by
the racist regime. The white minority agreed to the socalled constitutional proposals only after these and
other assurances were published by the South African
press at the time. Do we need any further confiiation
or proof of the nature of these so-called proposals?
70. The specific danger of these so-called constitutional proposals in South Africa and of the elections
that are to take place in a few days’is that, in addition to
being a new step in the institutionalization and strengthening of the apartheid regime, they represent a new
attempt by the South African Regime to sow dissension
and division among the domestic opponents of its policies, principally the black majority and those classified
by the regime as Coloureds or Asians.

66. The Government of South Africa is attempting to
present the “constitutional proposals” to the world as
real reforms. Is it possible to reform a system which
divides rights and obligations between the population
and divides people between masters and slaves on the
basis of one criterion alone, the colour of their skin-on
whether they are white, black, dark or a mixture? Is it
possible to reform a,system which deprives 70 per cent
of the population-the rightful owners of the land-of
their right of citizenship, and gives them 17per cent of
it, resulting in their living as prisoners in their own
country-or, as one writer put it in an article in The
New York Times on 24 June this year, as “exiles in their
native land”? All this is happening while the minority
are living in freedom on the remaining 83 per cent of the
land.

71. By’these proposals which introduce a modicum of
moderation to the inhuman policy of apartheid, the
Pretoria regime is trying to hoodwink international
public opinion and to escape its international isolation.
However, we are fully convinced- that the aims of the
South African regime and its attempts, whether within
or without South Africa, are doomed. The reason is that
the downtrodden majority inside the country are fully
aware of the trickery and schemes of the regime and
know that the only way to eliminate the system of
apartheid, and create a humanitarian democratic State
. in South Africa, is by opposing the regime with a united
and consistent front. Similarly, international public
opinion has reached sufficient awareness and maturity
not to be tricked by this new mask, which will never
manage to cover the ugly face of apartheid.

67. Is it possible to reform a system in which a majority of the population loses its humanity to become merely a number on a pass whose loss means the
owner’s loss of his personality and rights, however
meagre they may be? I would also like to evoke what
the aforementioned article related about the suffering
and humiliation to which the black citizen is subjected
at 18Albert Road, Johannesburg, when he goes through
the necessary procedures to obtain that document so
that he may work in the cities.

72. The eyes of the world, the eyes of the African
continent and the millions of downtrodden people in
South Africa are watching our deliberations and their
results, since this Council represents the conscience
of mankind and is facing an issue which weighs heavily upon its conscience. We hope that the resolution
adopted by the Council will be a true reflection of the
feelings of the great majority of people in the world: a
denunciation of apartheid in all its forms and of any
measure designed to entrench and institutionalize that
policy.

68. Is it possible to reform a system in which the
downtrodden majority becomes merely another instrument which can be transferred from one place to the
other in accordance with economic needs and with only
one aim, which is to achieve maximum profit for the
ruling minority? The apartheid regime cannot be
amended and cannot be reformed. The only choice is its
complete elimination. Officials in South Africa, the
inventors of apartheid, uncovered the reality behind
these so-called constitutional proposals when they
stressed, time and again, during the discussions in the
white Parliament, that this new constitution would
maintain white superiority, that it did not represent a

73. Let that resolution clearly express that the conscience of mankind will no longer countenance the
stigma of apartheid, which affects us all very deeply.
74. In conclusion, let our resolution be a clear indication to the whole world, and to the downtrodden people
in South .Africa in particular, that this Council truly
deserves the confidence placed in it by the people of the
world and that it is able to express their wishes and
feelings.
7

75. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

in far different circumstances by distant imperial
Powers, often enclosed in arbitrarily drawn borders and
ill-prepared to stand on their own in the testing circumstances of the modem competitive world, they have
fought by and large a losing battle for harmony, stability, continuity and progress. Attempts by industrialized
countries to assist them are widely regarded today as
having been ill-conceived and misapplied, and the distance between the industrialized and non-industrialized
worlds continues to widen.

76. Mr. von SCHIRNDING (South Africa): Permit
me, Sir, on behalf of the South African delegation, to
convey to you our best wishes on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August.
77. This debate has no right, no right whatsoever, to
be taking ‘place. It concerns constitutional arrangements within the Republic of South Africa, and this is
manifestly ‘an internal affair. As such, in the unambiguous and explicit terms of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is beyond the ambit of this or any other
organ of the United Nations.

83. The second complication is the problem existing
in all quarters of the world today, of governing plural
societies. The research of the United Nations itself has
demonstrated the acuteness of this problem. In 1974,
for example, a United Nations seminar held in Yugoslavia on the promotion and protection of the human
rights of national, ethnic and other minorities concluded that assimilation

78. The fact that this debate has been called points but
once again to the irresponsible nature of the anti-South
African campaign at the United Nations, as exemplified
again this morning by the hypocritical statements of
the representatives of Algeria, India and Egypt. The
promoters of this campaign are quite evidently concerned that they are continuing to lose ground. They
have been thrown into utter disarray by the achievements recorded by the South African Government and
they are now seeking to regroup by means of this
irregular meeting of the Council. Those who persistently break the ground rules of the Organization will
certainly not be persuaded by reasoned judgment. Of
that we have no doubt. Prejudice is not inclined to
yield to reason, and, through the decades, antiSouth
African prejudice has been entrenched and institutionalized here at the United Nations.

“should not be forced on any minority, as it was a
process that should depend exclusively on free will
. . . [It] implied a series of measures of direct or
indirect coercion for the purpose of denationalizing
minorities, negating the rights of individuals to their
own identity . . . and from that point of view it could
be considered to approach the threshold of genocide.“’
84. Those conclusions were auoted in a 1979 United
Nations study on the rights of persons belonging to
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities. That study
acknowledged that:
“In nearly all the countries surveyed . . . ethnic . . .
and linguistic groups generally show a desire to preserve their own characteristics and their own traditions, irrespective of the length of time during which
they have lived under another culture.“2

79. Does this meeting imply that the Council proposes
henceforth to pronounce upon the constitutions of
other Member States, or is this debate simply a further
manifestation of the twisted logic of certain Member
States which, in pursuing their vendetta against South
Africa, will stop at nothing, even to the extent of blatantly violating the statute of this Organization?

85. I do not think it is necessary to go on. Those facts
are universally accepted but the United Nations has not
had the courage to come to terms with the hard realities
which exist in so many parts of the world.

80. By what authority do the majority of Members of
the United Nations presume to speak on the subject of
constitutions?

86. South Africa rejects categorically any attempt to
interfere in its internal affairs and will in no way be
impressed or influenced by the farcical proceedings
taking place here today. Nevertheless, for the sake of
those Governments that have a genuine interest in the
peace, stability and progress of the southern African
region, I shall provide a brief outline of the constitutional developments taking place in South Africa and
of the premises on which they are based.

81. In one country after another, constitutions-both
inherited and home-made-have simply been tom up
and tossed aside. Time and again power has been assumed by political or military dictatorships and
the people have had no say whatsoever in the matter.
Coups have occurred so regularly that even serious
students of international affairs have lost count of them.

87. South Africa seeks sincerely to come to terms
with the complexities and realities of our sub-continent
and with the challenges posed by our diversity. It does
so not because of any exceptional insight or political
wisdom, but much more simply because of its three
centuries of experience with what is perhaps the most
complex society on earth: a population composed al-

82. The problems of government and of international
relations have been greatly complicated by two developments that have occurred in the past generation. One
of them is, of course, decolonization. Since the Second World War, more than 100new States have come
into being. Bequeathed with constitutions developed
8

together of minorities-of white people, brown people,
people of Asian origin and various-black peoples; of
Christians, Hindus, Muslims and pagans; of first-world
and third-world peoples-but all of them human beings
entitled to recognition of their human dignity.

Indian members, and it will be their task to discuss
legislation about which there is disagreement among,
the houses. The purpose of these discussions will be to
find a way to amend proposed legislation in such a way
that it will be acceptable to the majority.

88. It is a monstrous distortion to allege that blacks
have been omitted from the political process. Whether
this Council likes it or not, a substantial percentage of
the black peoples of South Africa have themselves,
years ago, opted for political independence. This was
the clearest possible manifestation of their right to selfdetermination. Today there are four independent black
States, whether or not the world chooses to recognize
them. The time has now come to include in a meaningful
way, in the overall pattern of multinational development and co-operative coexistence, the Coloured and
the Indian peoples in the decision-making process. The
approach to their case must of necessity be different
owing to the different historical and cultural circumstances which pertain.

92. There will, in addition, be a President’s Council
that will act in an advisory capacity. It will also fiinction as final arbiter in the event of the three houses
of parliament failing to reach agreement on a specific
piece of legislation. Where a deadlock occurs the State
President may refer the various versions of a bill to
the President’s Council, whose task it will be-to determine which version should become law. The President’s Council will consist of 60 members of which
35 will be elected by the three houses and 25 by the
State President. The opposition parties will also be
represented in that President’s Council.
93. That, in brief, is an outline of the proposed new
dispensation. Overall, the constitutional architecture
has a horizontal and a vertical aspect. Political power
is being spread across the country’s communities,
through the autonomous institutions in their national
states, to the black people’s and now-through the
new tricameral parliament-to the Coloured and Indian
population groups. At the same time, political power is
being delegated downwards from the first to the third
-or municipal-level of government, and legislation
has been passed granting black urban communities of
comparable size local government powers as extensive
as those of the cities of Johannesburg, Cape Town,
Durban and Pretoria.
,
94. Last year the Prime Minister of my country appointed a special cabinet committee to investigate the
position of black people living outside the national and
independent states. This investigation is taking place in
consultation with the leaders of the widest spectrum of
opinion. It is a task to which the very highest importance and priority ‘is attached. This is an area where
there must-and will-be constructive development in
the coming years. What the South African Government
is seeking are structures that will provide for the political aspirations of all the peoples, of South Africa,
while protecting the rights of all minorities. Only last
June, during a visit to Western Europe, the Prime Minister of South Africa stated:

89. In 1976, the very year that the first black nation
became independent, a report was issued by a commission appointed to investigate the condition of the Coloured peoples. One of its main conclusions was that a
solution for them could not be found within the ambit of
either the homelands or the Westminster system. That
‘applied equally to the Asian community. In 1980, a
President’s Council--consisting of whites, Coloureds
and Asians-was established to recommend a constitutional arrangement for those three communities. In
the beginning its members held widely divergent views,
but after 15 months of patient negotiation they came
forward with a set of proposals. Those proposals eventually formed the basis of the Republic of South Africa
Constitution Act, which was approved by the South
African Parliament last year.
90. The new Constitution provides for a parliament of
three houses--one for the white, one for the Coloured
and one for the Indian communities. An Executive
State President, chosen for a maximum term of five
years by an electoral college of members of the three
houses, will preside over the Cabinet. The Cabinet will
have to implement general legislation passed by the
whole parliament, legislation which has therefore been
accepted by each house. No fixed numbers have been
determined for Cabinet ministers from each population
group, and merit will be the decisive consideration for
appointments to the Cabinet.

“I believe that we are creating a realisitic basis for
productive political co-existence in South Africa. We
have a long way to go and no wise statesman can give
you a political blue-print for all time. To attempt to
draw up such a blue-print would in any event be futile
because it could only be based on today’s realities.
What is certain is that we are on a road leading to the
broadening of democracy in South Africa, free from
domination by any group, and each maintaining control over its own particular values and culture. In my
opinion, we have the essential ingredients for a politically stable society in South Africa and I believe too
that there is a will to succeed on the part of all
concerned.

91. Each house will deal with its own community
affairs while matters of common concern will be submitted to all three houses. This is a system that is designed to do away with confrontational politics where
parties are committed to opposition to one another. The
emphasis will be on consensus, and to help achieve it
there will be joint select committees representing both
governing and non-governing parties on matt.ers such
as finance, justice, defence and foreign affairs. The
committees, therefore, will have white, Coloured and
9

“What we are doing now is acknowledging the
facts and circumstances in South Africa. After my
own people’s struggle against the colonial Power in
southern Africa at the turn of the last century, we
inherited a constitution in 1910 based upon the Westminster model. This constitution made no provision
for the political rights and aspirations of the black and
Asian peoples of South Africa and scant provision for
the Coloured people. I want you to know that what is
evolving in South Africa today is a process of devolution of power to the second and third levels of govemment,.with joint discussions and consultation in matters of common concern. This is something which is
worthy of note. We are working towards a form of
confederation which we hope will satisfy to a greater
extent the aspirations of our peoples than at present.
This is our goal.”

99. In the majority of the countries which are Members of the United Nations there is irrefutable evidence
that political freedom is becoming more restricted than
ever before, This is the ultimate and supreme irony of
today’s debate. While South Africa is broadening the
base of political participation at all levels, the Council
arrogates to itself the right to pronounce upon the merits of South Africa’s new Constitution.
100. This Organization’s
founders intended that the
Council should deal objectively
with grave issues
of international
peace and security. But the current
meeting has absolutely nothing to do with international
peace or security. On the contrary, it makes a mockery
of the principles for which this Council was established.
The United Nations has become widely known as an
ineffectual organization,
and with the current debate
the Council has become an object of ridicule. This is an
irregular meeting, an entirely uncalled-for meeting, and
whatever decisions may emanate from the Council’s
proceedings, they will be irrelevant. Indeed, my Government rejects them in advance.

When this mammoth task has been accomplished there
will be another and yet another, because progress is a
continuing process.
95. But our purposes are crystal clear. We seek to
secure fundamental rights-namely,
the opportunity
for men and women to be true to themselves and to
their kind, and to be safeguarded against domination by
others. The more specsc goals may be summarized as
follows: firstly, self-determination,
with the focus on
people and not on territory alone; secondly, autonomy
for’ each community
in the management of its own
affairs and co-responsibility
with others in managing
common affairs; thirdly, maximum devolution of power
so that grass-roots democracy will be encouraged and,
in the words of the Prime Minister, government will be
brought closer to the people; and fourthly, co-ordinated
and extended economic development throughout the
country-the,
establishment of the Commonwealth
to
which I have referred.

101. Mr. ARIAS
STELLA
(Peru) [interpretation
from Spanish]: Mr. President, I should like first of all to
congratulate you very cordially on the wise and intelligent way in which you have conducted the work of the
Council this month. This is also a most appropriate
occasion to ask you to convey to’your Government the
satisfaction of the Peruvian Government with the sovereign and nationalist decision recently adopted by
your country to give a new name to the nation you
represent.
102. I also take pleasure in extending sincere congratulations and thanks to the representative
of the
United States, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
for her wise
conduct of the Council’s work in July.

96. This, surely, is a bold and imaginative bid for the
realistic and fair ordering of a most complex society.
Surely it deserves, although it does not always receive,
the support of democratic Governments. It is preposterous that it should be condemned by dictatorships, by
one-party States and by regimes of one kind or another.

103. In a chapter dealing with the fundamental rights
and duties of persons, the political Constitution of Peru
establishes, inter a&z, the following provision: “Every
person has the right to equality before the law, without
any discrimination
by virtue of sex, race, religion, opinion, or language.“3 That norm accurately reflects the
nature and special features of the Peruvian nation, a
free and democratic society that has for many years
been of mixed blood and multiracial
and in which a
multiplicity
of ethnic and cultural nucleii distributed
throughout our territory have lived together with rights
and obligations that are.enshrined in our laws and fully
respected. Equality in Peru is thus understood as a
reality inherent in the national identity of the country.

97. While most of the Member States of this Organization continue their rapid slide into increasing economic
retrogression, while peoples of many of the countries
of the world are today poorer, more hungry and less
healthy than they were 25 or 30 years ago, the progress
which South Africa’s peoples are making is there for all
to see. According to reliable estimates, 5 million children will die of starvation in Africa this year.

104. Therefore the Government and people of Peru
find it incomprehensible
and totally unacceptable that
there should today exist in the world a community to
which a legal and political organization based on racial
classifications is applied. The clearest and most active
testimony to our revulsion at the segregationist policy
practised in southern Africa is provided by our participation in the Special Committee against Apartheid

98. Little wonder, then, that there are at least 1.5 million foreign workers earning their living in South
Africa. And most of them cross our borders illegally in
search of the most fundamental human rights: food,
shelter, clothing, work, medical facilities and education. By crossing our borders to find freedom from
starvation, and from social upheaval, they risk arrest.
10

and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, United Nations bodies to which we deem it
an honour to belong.

rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to race, religion, sex or language. Apartheid unquestionably falls under that category, and any attempt to
implant it is therefore not a question of internal jurisdiction, particularly when one bears in mind that that
jurisdiction in no way represents the 17million persons
who are the very victims of this reprehensible policy.

105. Moreover, and this deserves profound thought,
the overwhelming majority of members of the international community find it disheartening to see that
circumstantial reasons and unrealistic approaches are
still beingused to explain why this daily and systematic
affront to the dignity of man continues to be condoned.
Condescension and silence, equivocation and the misleading use or non-use of the power of persuasion are
making it increasingly difficult to find a peaceful way to
move towards the profound changes needed in southem Africa, the first without any doubt being the need
immediately, finally and unconditionally to eradicate
racism in all its aspects.

112. We sincerely believe it timely and necessary
once again to emphasize the senseof responsibility and
human solidarity of all the members of the international
community in this regard. It has become a ritual always
to agree in condemning apartheid. But it isregrettable
that after so many years we are still faced with its
gradual development and affirmation, while our unanimously expressed demands have failed to achieve its
elimination. There are reasons for this, and the ones
responsible are those who are called upon to commit
themselves to decisive and direct political efforts.
Apartheid will never be voluntarily relinquished by
those who have brought it about.

106. I shall not dwell at length on an analysis or detailed comments on this subject. Much has been said
and written on the unjust and inhuman system of
apartheid, and we are all well aware of the situation.
My delegation can add little. Other delegations will no
doubt make these points lucidly and brilliantly. I shall
merely confine myself to summing up my country’s
main positions.

113. The PRESIDENT: (interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is Mr, Uddhav Deo Bhatt, Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

107. First, we reiterate our vigorous condemnation of
as an aberrant form of discrimination and
domination that violently oppresses the majority indigenous population of South Africa and has stripped that
population of its civil, political and social rights and, in
general, of all its human rights.

114. Mr. BHATT (Acting Chairman of the &e&l
Committee against Apartheid): Sir, I thank you and
the other members of the Council for having given me
the opportunity to speak in the Council on behalf of the
Special Committee against Apartheid. Allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of August. I wish you all success in this
important task.

apartheid

108. Secondly, we unreservedly reject anything that
implies the expansion, institutionalization, consolidation and perpetuation of the policy of apartheid.

115. I also wish to thank the representative of the
United States for the able manner in which she conducted the Council’s business last month.

109. Thirdly, the so-called constitutional reforms
have clearly been designed to perfect the racist apparatus in its illegality. Apart from its content, which
we feel is self-explanatory, in the recent consultations
in which it is claimed the new arrangements were approved, the black population, more than 70 per cent of
the demographic structure of the country, did not take
part at all. Therefore, one can hardly speak of any kind
of legitimacy in these and any other previous acts which
for more than two decades have been aimed at building
a society founded on injustice. It is unimaginable that
we should eome to believe that the thrust of these
measures revealed some encouraging positive indication.

116. On behalf of the Special Committee against
I wish at the outset to express our cate.gorical rejection of the attempt by the South African regime to impose a constitutional fraud on the
oppressed people of South Africa.
Apartheid,

110. Consequently, just as the General Assembly did
in adopting resolution 38/l 1 on 15 November 1983, the
Security Council cannot now remain silent, nor can it
in any way endorse such arrangements. My country
firmly endorses this view.

117. The regime has announced that elections will be
held on 22 and 28 August 1984for segregated chambers
to the pseudo-parliament for the so-called Coloured
people and the people of Asian origin. The elections are
only the prelude to the implementation of the new racist
constitution which will come into effect on 3 September. According to this constitution the present all-white
parliament will be replaced by one consisting of three
racially segregated houses. Whites will elect 178members, so-called Coloured people 85, and people of Asian
origin 45, in their respective houses.

111. In this connection I wish to make a final relevant
remark. By virtue of the San Francisco Charter, the
United Nations is required to ensure respect for human

118. The new so-called constitution is devoid of legitimacy because it is not founded on the people’s sovereignty. It is a racist document prepared by the few to be
11

imposed on the overwhelming majority of the country’s
population by means of violence and force, centralized
and monopolized in the State machinery usurped by the
racist regime. It is a monstrosity which excludes the
African majority from the political process and denationalizes them through the inhuman policy of bantustanization. It is an abominable’device that divides the
black people on racial lines and deprives the overwhelming majority of the population of their fundamental human rights’ and freedoms instead of striving for
equality, justice and freedom for all. It is a fraud that
will inevitably invite violent conflict and civil strife.
:119. This sham constitution is an attempt to give illusory power to some sectors of the population-a power
which will be outweighed and nullified by whites in the
parliament-to enlist those communities into military
service against the growing resistance to apartheid, to
create a potentially dictatorial white executive by conferring extraordinary powers on the President and to
bring about a “final solution” by depriving the African
majority of South African citizenship through the socalled homelands policy. Yet, insulting the intelligence
of the international community, the apartheid rkgime
has been propagating the fraudulent constitution as
reform. The international community cannot he deceived by so-called reforms of apartheid. Apartheid
cannot be reformed; it must be totally abolished.

magnificent example of that unity. Yet, the regime has
proceeded with the implementation of the so-called
constitution without even holding a referendum among
the people concerned--except for the whites. What
was right for the whites was not deemed to be right for
the so-called Coloured people and the people of Asian
origin who had demanded the same treatment.
123. The apartheid regime remains a threat to the
peace and stability of the southern African region as
well as international peace and security. As long as
apartheid exists, there shall be no peace or stability in
the world.
124. The General Assembly has repeatedly declared
that the United Nations and-the international community have a special responsibility towards the oppressed
people of South Africa. It has recognized the legitimacy
of their struggle for the establishment of a non-racial
democratic society free from racism. For its part, the
Council too has recognized the legitimacy of the struggle for racial equality. It has characterized apartheid as
a crime against the conscience and dignity of mankind.
125. In view of the present critical situation, the Special Committee against Apartheid requests the Council
to take urgent action, in accordance with the Charter,
with a view to rejecting and defeating this latest manoeuvre by the apartheid regime and in support of the
oppressed people of South Africa in their struggle for
racial equality, justice and dignity.

120. Clearly, the new racist constitution is designed
further to entrench and consolidate white minority rule
in the country on the foundation of the criminal apartheid system. The imposition of such a constitution represents total defiance of all the purposes and principies enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and is an
affront to the international community.

126. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Thailand.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
127. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): First of all, Sir,
I should like to convey to you my delegation’s sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of August. I am confident that, with your
undoubted ski and diplomatic experience, the deliberations of the Council will proceed smoothly, with
fruitful results. I also take pleasure on behalf of my
delegation in seeing you, who have gained the respect
and admiration of all your colleagues as representative
of Burkina Faso, presiding over the deliberations of the
Council.

121. Last year, when the regime held an all-white
referendum on the constitution, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 38/l 1, declaring that the so-called
“constitutional proposals” were contrary to the principles of the Charter, that the results of the referendum
were of no validity whatsoever and that the enforcement of the proposed “constitution’* would inevitably aggravate tension and conflict in South Africa and
in southern Africa as a whole. In addition, at their
conferences, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the OAU and the countries of the Commonwealth have
all resisted and condemned this racist constitution.

128. I should like also to pay a warm tribute to your
predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, representative of
the United States, whose performance as President last
month was a very distinguished performance of the
highly important and often difficult duties of that office.
Her performance deserves our esteem and deep appreciation.

122. In South Africa the overwhelming majority of the
so-called Coloured people and the people of Asian origin have decided to boycott the fraudulent elections.
The history of the struggle against apartheid is the
history of the deep solidarity that exists among the
African majority and the so-called Coloured people and
the people of Asian origin. The latest conspiracy by the
regime will not succeed in subverting that unity which
has been forged in the heart of the struggle. As has been
demonstrated in South Africa in recent months, the
massive opposition to the racist constitution is but a

129. My delegation is indeed grateful to you, Sir, and
to the other members of the Council for the opportunity
to participate in the debate on this important item. It is
well known that all peace-loving countries in the international community, including Thailand, have been
12

I

seriously concerned about racial discrimination and
upa&zeid, which continue to be practised in South
Africa in violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and of fundamental human rights, to the grave detriment of peace and international security, as well as
of human dignity and civilized values. How can anyone, therefore, accuse others of hypocrisy when their
actions are not only legitimate, but peace-loving? The
accuser should instead examine his own actions, which
are more deserving of such an epithet.

133. Thirdly, the Government of Thailand has contin
uously supported and strictly adhered to all relevant
resolutions adopted by the United Nations on South
Africa. Thailand has no diplomatic relations with the
Pretoria regime and has voluntarily imposed a trade
embargo against, it since 1978. Thailand, therefore,
shares the legitimate concerns of the international community on this matter and is able to participate, side by
side with the African States, in the Council debate on
the basis of its own commitments and actions.
‘<
134. Finally, since Thailand is an Asian &ntry, it is
my delegation’s commitment to express its concern
over the inclusion in the so-called constitutional proposals of the so-called Coloured people and the people
of Asian origin, as so named by apartheid South Africa.
My delegation is of the view that the Pretoria regime has
attempted to lure the so-called Coloured people and the
people of Asian origin away from the black majority,
with the intention of creating division among them and
of making the so-called Coloured and the Asian people
unwitting instruments in the oppression against their
black brethren, as well as in aggressive acts launched
by Pretoria against the neighbouring front-line States.

130. My delegation decided to ask to participate in the
debate on this particular item for the following reasons.
131. First, my delegation is of the view that any further delay in taking appropriate measures to remedy the
situation arising from apartheid in South Africa will
undoubtedly aggravate not only the racial conflict
within South Africa, but also tension in southern Africa
and beyond. Moreover, my delegation notes with grave
concern that the so-called constitutional proposals
promoted by the Pretoria regime continue to defy the
Charter and resolutions of the United Nations and to
undermine not only the fundamental rights of the
indigenous people, who form the overwhelming majority in South Africa, but also international peace and
security in the southern African region as a whole. It is a
known fact that South Africa has subjected Angola,
Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Seychelles, Zambia
and Zimbabwe to subversion, military aggression,
incursions and other forms of destabilization. Indeed,
not only Pretoria’s policies of apartheid but also its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its defiance of
United Nations resolutions, its brutal repression of the
Namibian people, its acts of destabilization and aggression against independent African States constitute a
threat to international peace and security, as recognized by the Bangkok Declaration adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia on 25 May 1984

135. With regard to the item before us, my delegation
takes note with grave concern that the Pretoria regime’s so-called constitutional proposals of November
last year will inevitably worsen the status and impair
further the fundamental rights of the indigenous African
majority, which numbers over 20 million people, and
that the so-called referendum of 2 November was conducted only among the ruling white minority of 2.7 million people.
136. The so-called constitutional proposals constitute
yet another act of repression against the majority. As
such they are another in the agonizing series of endless measures of discrimination and cruelty against the
black people of South Africa. Those measures have
included the execution and incarceration of African
patriots, in defiance of all humanitarian principles and
appeals from the international community. They also
include indiscriminate attacks on, and massacres of,
civilian refugees in neighbouring countries. Such actions must never be condoned by the world, but must
instead be condemned by all mankind, regardless of the
excusesand pretexts given by the perpetrators of those
acts.

[see S/16601, annex].

132. Secondly, my delegation’s positionis quite clear:
the Government of Thailand consistently opposes the
policy of apartheid and the practices of racial discrimination in all forms. Moreover, Thailand continues to
condemn Pretoria’s policy of apartheid in South Africa
and in Namibia, and to demand the cessation of such
abhorrent practices. That is why my delegation voted in
support of resolution 38/l 1, adopted by the General
Assembly on 15 November 1983, in which it

137. The so-called constitutional proposals must
therefore be regarded as having no legal validity and as
being impossible for other States to recognize. Thailand, for one, will not grant them any recognition.

‘the Security Council, as a. matter of
urgency, to consider the serious implications of the
so-called ‘constitutional proposals* and to take all
necessary measures, in accordance with the Charter,
to avert the further aggravation of tension and conflict in South Africa and in southern Africa as a
whole.”
“Requests

138. Furthermore, unilateral actions by the South
African authorities to impose any.so-called negotiated
settlement on the majority of the population, or any part
thereof, should be considered as null and void ub initio,
and whatever the outcome of such unlawful actions it
should also be so regarded.

Thus, the authority of the Council is being invoked in
accordance with that resolution.
13

139. In conclusion, my delegation pledges once again
that the Thai Government will stand shoulder to
shoulder with the Group of African States on this issue
to bring about the complete eradication of apartheid
and the establishment of a non-racial democratic system in South Africa on the bases of majority rule,
justice, freedom, equality and human dignity.

the direct harm that that implies for the majority of the
population of South Africa.
147. Apartheid, the very idea of which seems inconceivable at the end of the twentieth century, is a regime
that is intrinsically inhuman and reprehensible, and one
which has been defined as a crime against mankind. A
legal system of this kind is incapable of improvement
through amendments. Discrimination based on racial
grounds cannot be improved, weakened or diluted in
any way. The only way to deal with this practice is to
bring about its complete and final elimination.

140. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Argentina.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
..
141. Mr. MURIZ (interpretation
from Spanish):
First, Sir, I should like to say how pleased I am to see
you presiding over the Council’s work. Our countries
are united by bonds of sincere friendship, and I assure
you that you can count on the full co-operation of my
delegation in the discharge of your lofty duties.

148. Argentina can accept no justification for a legal
regime which condemns the vast majority of the population of South Africa to live like foreigners in their
own country and, moreover, to be denied their fundamental human rights by discrimination based on racial grounds.
149. The policy of bantustanization, which the socalled constitutional proposals would consolidate, is
designed precisely to deprive still further that majority
of its inalienable rights and citizenship.

142. I also thank Mrs. Kirkpatrick for her effective
conduct of the Council’s work last month.
143. In addition, Mr. President, I thank you and the
other members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to address the Council on the question of the
constitutional proposals of South Africa.

150. These policies are being implemented through
increased repression and imprisonment of political, labour union and student leaders of the South African
national movement. Their clear injustice strongly suggests that the spiral of violence will increase.

144,. Argentina’s policy of rejecting all forms of racial
discrimination is well known. It has lasted since we
began our life as an independent nation 174 years ago,
and it has been reiterated by my Government in all
international forums, including the Council. Argentina
has also actively participated in the elaboration of international instruments on the matter.

151. We are convinced that the promotion and protection of fundamental human rights constitute the comerstone of the effective solution of the problems affecting
the oppressed people of South Africa.
152. South African persistence in maintaining its
racist system, and even in trying to refine it through the
so-called constitutional proposals, as well as its refusal
to end its illegal occupation of Namibia, are the causeof
the tensions in southern Africa, with their consequent
negative effects
I on international peace and security.
153. We believe that the Council is called upon to
discharge its responsibilities in this matter. My country
will comply with any resolutions adopted by the Council, as it has in the past with Security Council resolutions 418 (1977), 421 (1977) and 473 (1980):

145. On 15 November 1983 the General Assembly
adopted resolution 38/l 1, in which it
“Declares that the so-called “constitutional proposals” [of South Africa] are contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that the
results of the referendum are of no validity whatsoever and that the enforcement of the proposed
“constitution” will inevitably aggravate tension and
conflict in South Africa and in southern Africa as a
whole.”

The resolution was adopted with 141 votes in favour
-that is, by the vast majority of the Member States,
including Argentina-none against, and only 7 abstentions.

154. I conclude by reaffiiing the solidarity of the
people and the Government of Argentina with the oppressed people of South Africa. One of the most important and noble tasks of the United Nations is to steer
the efforts of the international community towards the
complete and final elimination of apartheid, through
the establishment of a democratic, just society in South
Africa, free from all discrimination. Argentina undertakes to continue to co-operate in efforts to that end.

146. The reason for the international community’s
rejection of the proposals can be of no surprise to
anyone. Even a superficial analysis of the proposals
shows that they are designed to perpetuate the apartheid regime instead of eliminating it, that they would
tend to destroy the unity of the oppressed people of
South Africa, thereby maintaining the supremacy of the
white minority in power, and that they seek to gain
acceptability for the policy of bantustanization, with

155. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
14

156. Mr. ONOBU (Nigeria): Sir, since this is the first
time the Nigerian delegation is speaking at these extraordinary meetings of the Council, we take this opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of August. My delegation is
optimistic that your well-known diplomatic skills and
leadership qualities will successfully guide our deliberations and enable the Council to take concrete measures on this important and pressing issue of which it is
seized.

declaration of Pretoria’s hypocrisy. Let it be said here
that South Africa is not a nation founded in God. Its
values are completely antithetical to the teaching of
love and humanity preached by all the great religions of
this world. Its coercive and brutal methods are against
all civilized societal norms.
161. This morning we listened to the statement of the
representative of South Africa. It was unrepentant and
unapologetic about racism and racial discrimination,
about apartheid and about oppression. The agent of
Pretoria insulted the wisdom of the Council and poured
scorn on the propriety of the agenda for these meetings,
saying that it was irregular. It is clear, therefore, that
South Africa will never change its ways unless it is
forced to do so.

157. My delegation wishes to address itself briefly to
the shocking and intolerable situation existing in South
Africa which continues to threaten international peace
and security. After more than 300 years of bondage,
slavery and colonialist criminality,
racist South Africa
now celebrates and glorifies anew in the subjugation
and oppression of the majority of its population.
In
addition to its traditional colonialist posture, apartheid
South Africa has today put in place a savage, sordid and
barbarous structure of racism, oppression and exploitation. The shameless apostles of apartheid haveturned a
country that the writer Alan Paton in ecstasy once
called “my beloved country” into a nation of temporarily homeless and denationalized
people. South
Africa has been turned into a country of refugees, as
well as a community of tortured, terrorized and harassed people. The racist regime has turned a beautiful
sub-region into a gulug, ruling by blood and iron, destabilizing contiguous States and poisoning, electrocuting and systematically
eliminating
a set of people
valiantly struggling for national self-determination
and
civilized and democratic rule.

162. Yet it is also evident that apartheid South Africa
is given life-blood and strengthened by those who believe in “constructive engagement” and other forms of
co-operation with it. Racist South Africa defies the
international
community because it can get loans and
other kinds of support sponsored by a constellation of
powerful States, because it facilitates the plunder of
Namibia’s resources by transnational corporations and
because it is also said to be a bulwark against a supposedly dangerous ideology.
163. There are mutterings in the camp of the mentors
of racist South Africa that the “new constitution’*
is a
progressive step. It is obvious that it is not.
,

158. Our task at these meetings of the Security Council is clear. The Council must pronounce decisive
juiigement
on the latest charade and manoeuvres of
racist South Africa. The moral task before the Council
is that it must unequivocally
condemn and reject this
absurdity and this singular act of hypocrisy and racism
in the form of the so-called “new constitution*’
being
promulgated by racist South Africa. This mischievous
“constitution”
was endorsed on 2 November 1983 by
an exclusively white electorate in total indifference to,
and total denial of, the interests and the rights of over
90 per cent of the population of South Africa. This
exclusive electorate is not wrong because it is white,
but wrong because its mentality is racist, its actions
Fascist, its rule totalitarian,
its soul corroded by hate
and bigotry. It is this South Africa that the whole world
and all men of good will and conscience reject and
abhor.

164. The so-called new constitution of racist South
Africa is an instrument of further entrenchment of racism, for so many reasons: first, it was adopted by a
racially bigoted and unrepresentative
minority of the
population; secondly, it seeks to aggravate the sociopolitical and economic tensions in South Africa; thirdly, it ranks races in a despicable tricameral system that
arbitrarily nominates the whites as the master race,
Coloured as second class, Indians and Asians as third
class, and implicitly
nominates a fourth class in their
ignominious
ranking of humanity;
fourthly, it denationalizes the indigenous populations by not only
divesting them of their civil and political rights but also
creating a landless alien people out of them, and bares
the hideous face of racist South Africa by again reinforcing the theory and practice of apartheid, a crime
against humanity; and fifthly, it is not a constitution but
a manifesto on racism.

I59.. The “new constitution”
of racist South Africa
begins thus: “In humble submission to Almighty God,
who controls the destinies of peoples and nations”; and
.it goes on to state as the first of its national goals its
intention “To uphold Christian values and civilized
norms, with recognition and protection of freedom of
faith and worship”.
160. The Nigerian delegation,
of the international community,

165. That is why the delegation of Nigeria believes
that the Security Council has no choice but to reject the
so-called new constitution,
to reject the impending
fradulent August elections set out by racist Pretoria
under the “new constitution”,
to build a solid international consensus against apartheid and racism and to
apply comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against
racist South Africa in order to compel that country to

and indeed all members
shudder at this brazen
15

dismantle apartheid ifit is ever to be re-admitted to the
civilized coummunity of nations.
The meeting

NOTES
I Study on the rights of persons belonging to ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities (United Nations publication,
Sales No.
E.78.XIV.l) para. 293.
2 Ibid., para.245.
3 Constitutions of the Countries of the World, Peru, September
1989, Oceana Publications, Inc., Dobbs Ferry, New York.

rose at 1.20 p.m.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UMTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
ma! be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Genhe.
KAK

IIO.lY’JNTh

liJi&AHUH

OPrAHH

3AI&l(H

0I~‘I~E~lHHEHHhI.Y

HAUHR

M~na~wrr
OpraHu3aqrf&i
06-be~w~e~nb1s
HaunH
MOXHO ~yn~rb
B K”W.%~WX SaraJWHLX H ~I-~HTCTB~X
80 acex paRoHax
~wpa. Hason~e
cnpaait~
06 HJ~IBHHI(X
B
BaureM RHHXHOM MaraxlHe
HOW ~I~WHTB no anpecy : OpraHn3aunfl
O~%~AUH~HH~IX
Hauwk.
CertsHR no nponame
W3aaHHk. Hero-Ffoplc
HIGH JKeHeaa.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

lmoo

9061313-Febmaty

1993-2,050
