United Nations

S/PV.9266

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9266th meeting
Tuesday, 21 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Camilleri. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tamaura
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baumann-Bresolin
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Phipps
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05414 (E)
*2305414*

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

also expressing concern that a deliberate act of sabotage
and terrorism might be to blame for the explosions that
caused the leaks.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Jeffrey Sachs,
Professor and Director of the Center for Sustainable
Development, Earth Institute, Columbia University;
and Mr. Ray McGovern, political activist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: On 30 September 2022, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Economic Development in the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Mr. Navid
Hanif, briefed the Security Council on the reported
leaks in the Nord Stream pipelines (see S/PV.9144).
His briefing was based on information and data from
publicly available sources. My briefing today is also
based on publicly available information that we have
to date.
As Assistant Secretary-General Hanif said in
September, in the course of 26 to 29 September 2022,
four leaks were detected in the Nord Stream undersea
pipelines in the Baltic Sea, near the island of Bornholm.
The first leak was reported on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline
on the morning of 26 September, when seismologists
detected a spike in activity. The second and third leaks
were reported on the evening of 26 September on the
Nord Stream 1 pipeline. A fourth leak was reported
on the morning of 29 September on the Nord Stream
2 pipeline. Neither pipeline was in operation. Supplies
in Nord Stream 1 had been halted in September, while
Nord Stream 2 never entered service. However, the
pipelines reportedly held several hundred million cubic
metres of natural gas at the time of the incidents.
Following the incidents, Danish, German and
Swedish officials announced they would launch separate
investigations into the leaks. The Russian Federation
expressed interest in joining those investigations, while
2/14

21/02/2023

On 18 October, Copenhagen police reported that
a preliminary investigation into the leaks found that
powerful explosions caused the damage. A month
later, on 18 November, the Swedish Security Service
and the Prosecution Authority reported that, according
to their preliminary findings, the pipelines had been
subject to gross sabotage. Swedish officials stated that,
in the investigations carried out onsite in the Baltic
Sea, investigators documented extensive damage to
the gas pipelines resulting from detonations. Swedish
authorities also said they had seized foreign items and
that explosive residue was identified on a number of
those items. According to officials quoted in local
media, the investigation is ongoing. On 4 February
2023, the German Attorney General stated that their
investigation was also continuing. We understand
that the Danish investigation is continuing as well.
Furthermore, we are aware of new reports alleging acts
of sabotage involving the two pipelines.
I reiterate that the United Nations is not in a
position to verify or confirm any of the claims relating
to these incidents and that we await the findings of
ongoing national investigations. Given the sensitivity
and speculation regarding this issue, we urge all those
concerned to show restraint and avoid any speculation.
We should avoid any unfounded accusations that could
further escalate the already heightened tensions in the
region and potentially inhibit the search for the truth.
And while we do not know exactly what happened
beneath the waters of the Baltic Sea in September 2022,
one thing is certain: whatever caused the incident, its
fallout counts among the many risks the invasion of
Ukraine has unleashed. One year since the start of the
war, we must redouble our efforts to end it, in line with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sachs.
Mr. Sachs: My name is Jeffrey Sachs. I am
University Professor at Columbia University. I am
a specialist in the global economy, including global
trade, finance, infrastructure and economic Statecraft.
I appear before the Security Council on my own behalf.
I represent no Government or organization in the
testimony that I will deliver.
23-05414

21/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The destruction of the Nord Stream pipelines
on 26 September constitutes an act of international
terrorism and represents a threat to the peace. It is
the responsibility of the Security Council to take up
the question of who might have carried out the act, in
order to bring the perpetrator to international justice,
to pursue compensation for the damaged parties and to
prevent future such actions.
The consequences of the destruction of the Nord
Stream pipelines are enormous. They include not
only the vast economic losses related to the pipelines
themselves and their future potential use, but also
the heightened threat to transboundary infrastructure
of all kinds: submarine Internet cables, international
pipelines for gas and hydrogen, transboundary power
transmission, offshore wind farms and more. The
global transformation to green energy will require
considerable transboundary infrastructure, including
in international waters. Countries need to have
full confidence that their infrastructure will not be
destroyed by third parties. Some European countries
recently expressed concern over the safety of their
offshore infrastructure.
For all of those reasons, the investigation of the
Nord Stream explosions by the Security Council is a
high global priority.
The destruction of the Nord Stream pipelines
required a very high degree of planning, expertise and
technological capacity. The Nord Stream 2 pipelines are
a marvel of engineering. Each section of pipe is made
of rolled steel of 4.5-centimetre thickness, and with a
pipeline internal diameter of 1.15 metres. The pipe is
encased in concrete of 10.9-centimetre thickness. The
weight of each section of concrete-encased pipe is 24
metric tons. The Nord Stream 2 pipelines, some 1,200
kilometres in length, contain around 200,000 pipes.
The pipelines sit on the sea floor.
Destroying a pipeline of heavy rolled steel, encased
in concrete, at depths of 70 to 90 metres, requires
highly advanced technology for the transportation of
the explosives, diving to install the explosives and
detonation. To do so undetected, in the exclusive
economic zones of Denmark and Sweden, adds greatly
to the complexity of the operation. As a number of
senior officials have publicly confirmed, an action of
this sort must have been carried out by a State-level
actor. Only a handful of State-level actors have both
the technical capacity and access to the Baltic Sea to

S/PV.9266

have carried out this action. Those include the United
States, Russia, the United Kingdom, Poland, Norway,
Germany, Denmark and Sweden, either individually
or in some combination. Ukraine lacks the necessary
technologies, as well as access to the Baltic Sea.
A recent report by The Washington Post revealed
that the intelligence agencies of the NATO countries
have privately concluded that there is no evidence
whatsoever that Russia carried out this action. That
also comports with the fact that Russia had no obvious
motive to carry out this act of terrorism on its own
critical infrastructure. Indeed, Russia is likely to bear
considerable expenses to repair the pipelines.
Three countries have reportedly carried out
investigations of the Nord Stream terrorism, namely,
Denmark, Germany and Sweden. Those countries
presumably know much about the circumstances of
the terrorist attack. Sweden in particular has perhaps
the most to tell the world about the crime scene, which
its divers investigated. Yet instead of sharing that
information globally, Sweden has kept the results of its
investigation secret from the rest of the world. Sweden
has refused to share its findings with Russia and has
turned down a joint investigation with Denmark and
Germany. In the interest of global peace, the Security
Council should require those countries to immediately
turn over the results of their investigations to
the Council.
There is only one detailed account to date of the
Nord Stream destruction, the one recently put forward
by investigative journalist Seymour Hersh, ostensibly
based on information leaked to Hersh by an unnamed
source. Hersh attributes the Nord Stream destruction to
a decision ordered by United States President Joe Biden
and carried out by United States agents in a covert
operation that Hersh describes in detail. The White
House has described Hersh’s account as “completely
and utterly false,” but did not offer any information
contradicting Hersh’s account and did not offer any
alternative explanation.
Senior United States officials made statements
before and after the Nord Stream destruction that
showed the United States animus towards the pipelines.
On 27 January 2022, Under-Secretary of State Victoria
Nuland tweeted, “If Russia invades Ukraine, one way
or another, Nord Stream 2 will not move forward.” On
7 February, President Biden said, “If Russia invades ...
again, then there will be no longer Nord Stream 2; we

23-054143/14

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

will bring an end to it.” When asked by the reporter
how he would do that, he responded, “I promise you we
will be able to do it.”
On 30 September 2022, immediately following
the terrorist attack on the pipeline, Secretary of State
Antony Blinken declared that the destruction of the
pipeline is “also a tremendous opportunity; it’s a
tremendous opportunity to once and for all remove the
dependence on Russian energy and thus to take away
from Vladimir Putin the weaponization of energy
as a means of advancing his imperial designs.” On
28 January 2023, Under-Secretary Nuland declared,
in testimony to Senator Ted Cruz in the United States
Senate, “I am, and I think the Administration is, very
gratified to know that Nord Stream 2 is now, as you like
to say, a hunk of metal at the bottom of the sea.”
Such language is not at all appropriate in the face
of international terrorism. I hope that the United States,
together with all other Security Council members, will
condemn this act of international terrorism and join
together in an urgent Security Council-led investigation
of this international crime in order to determine the
truth. The truth is not yet known by the world, but it
is knowable.
More than ever, the world depends on the Security
Council to do its work to stop the escalation to a new
world war. The world will be safe only when the
permanent members work together diplomatically
to solve global crises, including the war in Ukraine
and the rising tensions in East Asia. The Security
Council provides the unique global venue for that
peace-affirming work. More than ever, we need a
healthy, functioning Security Council carrying out
the mission assigned to it by the Charter of the United
Nations. A Security Council objective investigation
of the Nord Stream terrorism, in which all countries
contribute what they know, is important for the global
confidence in this body and, most important, for global
peace and sustainable development.
The President: I thank Mr. Sachs for his briefing.

21/02/2023

even asked me what I would say. These are my personal
remarks based on my experience for 27 years as an
intelligence analyst and as an observer. I notice that I
am called a political activist. This is my way of paying
back for the education I got as an intelligence analyst in
the United States intelligence community.
On my way here, at two airports this morning, I
noticed a bunch of little children and school-aged
children. It made me think back to my days as a schoolaged child. I was one of those who hid under their desk
because of the threat of the Russian atomic bomb, as
though that would protect me. Fast forward to when I
became a professional analyst and chief of the Soviet
foreign policy branch at the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) — I was able to tell the President and Henry
Kissinger that the Russians were really interested
in putting a cap on the arms race. Suffice it to say, I
was instrumental in the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
(ABM), signed in May 1972. I was there.
Thirty years of strategic stability — count them,
three decades — when Mr. Bush Jr., decided that he would
leave the ABM Treaty, without any real explanation.
And then Mr. Trump left the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty, which I thought would never
be concluded because it involved the destruction of
a whole class of nuclear-tipped intermediate-range
ballistic missiles in Europe and Siberia. Then we had
the Open Skies Treaty, which the United States left, and
now we are being warned that the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty is also in danger.
I must say that, after the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty was signed, I was feeling euphoric. I need not
worry about whether or not they were constructing
a building just to be demolished by the next nuclear
weapon. It is very sad for me to watch what is going
on now — the fact that people cannot get together and
deal. Verhandeln is the German word for negotiate or
deal. If we look at it, it comes from the word “hand”.
You reach out a hand and get to know and understand
what is bothering the other party.

I now give the floor to Mr. McGovern
Mr. McGovern: I associate myself completely with
the comments of Professor Sachs.
I do not have a prepared text, and so I was not able
to give that to the people who asked me to give it to
them. I was asked to do this less than a day ago. No
one suggested what I might say and, of course, no one
4/14

I do not want to get ahead of myself here. I do not
want to talk about Seymour Hersh’s article. I must
say up front, in full disclosure, that I am a friend of
Seymour Hersh. I will not therefore opine myself. I will
cite a distinguished former United States Ambassador
who was also Assistant Secretary of Defence. These are
the words he said about Seymour Hersh.
23-05414

21/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

“Hersh attracts whistleblowers because he has
a perfect record of protecting their identities and
accurately publishing what they reveal after due
diligence, despite Government denials and slanderous attacks that invariably follow. His reputation is
such that people of conscience seek him out.”
I repeat, people of conscience.
As a United States Army officer and a CIA
employee, I took an oath. It was an oath to support and
defend the Constitution of the United States against all
enemies, foreign and domestic. Some of us took that
oath seriously. And when we see this kind of thing
going on, we go to somebody who might be able to
protect us and get the word out.
That was two weeks ago. Has The New York Times
mentioned Sy Hersh’s article? Has it even reported the
denials? No, not yet. That is what the Germans would
say is merkwürdig — very remarkable. Let me go on
and talk about how to evaluate those who are smearing
Seymour Hersh’s name.
As Jeffrey Sachs already said, the CIA spokesperson
said that “the claim is completely and utterly false”. I
must confess, being an alumnus of the CIA, that our
public relations people do not have a very good record.
No one wants to go back 20 years to Colin Powell’s
speech before the Security Council (see S/PV.4701). We
all know about that. What I would like to do is simply
talk about what happened before that speech.
Before
that
speech,
some
conscientious
whistleblower gave the text of a United Nations
debriefing of Hussein Kamel Al-Majid, one of Saddam
Hussein’s sons-in-law. Who was he? He supervised
the radiological biological, chemical and nuclear
programme, such as it was, in Baghdad. He said to
his interviewers — United Nations, United States
and United Kingdom interviewers — “all nuclear,
chemical, biological and missile programmes had been
destroyed”. The interrogators asked him, “How do you
know?” Al-Majid said, “I was in charge of them. I do
not know how it works in your country but when I order
something destroyed, it is destroyed”. He was asked,
“How do you know? Did you check?” He said, “Yes,
I checked. Are you trying to get me to say they were
not destroyed”?
That was in 1995. Someone leaked that transcript to
Newsweek. On 2 March 2003, almost exactly 20 years
ago, Newsweek published a report that

S/PV.9266

“Hussein Kamel, the highest-ranking Iraqi
official ever to defect from Saddam Hussein’s inner
circle, told CIA and British intelligence officers
and U.N. inspectors in the summer of 1995 that
after the gulf war, Iraq destroyed all its chemical
and biological weapons stocks a and the missiles to
deliver them.
“Kamel ... had direct knowledge of what he
claimed: for 10 years, he ran Iraq’s nuclear, chemical, biological and missile programs.”
In classic understatement, in Newsweek, the author
John Barry said that “the defector’s tale raises questions
about whether the WMD stockpiles attributed to Iraq
still exist.”
Well — I guess. What happened? Newsweek
published that in a little blurb, first on its website. Then
the members of the media went to a fellow named Bill
Harlow, who was the CIA spokesperson, who said,
“Look, this report is incorrect. It is bogus. It is wrong
and untrue”. Those were the words he used — incorrect,
bogus, wrong and untrue. And what did the members of
the press do? They breathed a sigh of relief and said, “I
am sure glad you told us that, because we were going
to publish on that. It looked quite authoritative”. It was
indeed the transcript of that debriefing. I would just like
to say a word about those who are smearing Sy Hersh.
They do not have a good record of being credible.
Let me move on. I would like to talk a little bit about
“unprovoked”. We have heard more than 100 times
that the Russian invasion of Ukraine was unprovoked.
That goes back to the widening of NATO, despite the
promise not to do so. I had a personal experience with
one of Gorbachev’s chief advisers. His name is Viktor
Borisovich Kuvaldin. Approximately eight years ago,
I saw him in Moscow and said, “Mr. Kuvaldin, why is
it that that agreement was not written down?” He said,
“Mr. McGovern, I will tell you: the usual reasons. The
Germans had not bought into it yet and the Warsaw Pact
still existed, but really and truly Mr. McGovern, here is
what it was: we trusted you”.
We all know the history of how NATO more than
doubled in size with all countries to the East — more
than one inch to the East. I do not want to belabour
that point. It is simply that it is more than just NATO
enlargement. When Crimea was annexed by Russia,
Mr. Putin got up a month later and said: “We had to
annex Crimea because of the coup in Kyiv in February
of 2014”.

23-054145/14

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

21/02/2023

And even more important than NATO membership
for Ukraine was the prospect that medium-range ballistic
missiles would be put on the periphery of the United
States, which indeed they are capable of doing because
there are capsules, or holes, in Romania and Poland
that accommodate Tomahawk cruise missiles and will
eventually accommodate hypersonic missiles. That is
very serious. Mr. Putin made this point in December
2021 in talking to his chief military leadership.

our country during the suppression of blacks. I had
the privilege of working with Vincent Harding, who
was the author of Martin Luther King Jr.’s speech on
Viet Nam. He had a song, part of the refrain of which
went, “We are going to keep on moving forward, never
turning back”. What I would suggest is that we need
to keep on moving forward, and I would recommend
the second stanza of the song to all members. If they
listened, I would really appreciate it very much:

How do I end this? I would like to do a little
human business here. In terms of the verstehen, let me
just point out that when I was previously in Germany,
there was a button that one put on their lapel, which
read, “Putin verstehe”. Those who know German
know that means someone who understands Putin. I
thought to myself: “Woah, somebody is interested in
understanding Mr. Putin?” And my friend said, “No,
hey, for God’s sake, do not wear that button. That is
pejorative. That means that you are Putin’s pocket”.
Verstehen comes from the word stehen, which means
“to stand”. If you cannot understand where people
stand, then you cannot understand what bothers them.
And what bothers Mr. Putin, as well as membership in
NATO for Ukraine, is the emplacement of those holes
already operational in Romania and Poland, right on
the periphery of the United States. They are disguised
as anti-ballistic missile systems, but they can easily
accommodate cruise missiles, and, as I said earlier,
hypersonic missiles.

“We’re going to keep on moving forward. We’re
going to keep on loving our enemy. We’re going to
keep on loving our enemies. We’re going to keep
our loving our enemies, never turning back. Never
turning back.”

There was a slogan that emerged from the recent
German demonstrations, which was verhandeln statt
schießen. Verhandeln means to negotiate, to talk. You
reach out a hand, die Hand, to the other person and try
to understand them. Schießen means to shoot. Now that
makes good sense. But I have to tell members that that
is not welcome in Germany. A good friend of mine,
Heinrich Bücker, was convicted of saying that we ought
to put ourselves in Mr. Putin’s shoes and that we ought
to realize the far-right influence in the Government
of Kyiv. He was convicted in a German court. He is
appealing, but he will not pay the €2,000 fine. It is
therefore likely that he will end up in jail for several
months. That is freedom of speech. We enjoy that here
in the United States. I really am concerned about what
will happen to my friend.
Just suffice it to say that, with regard to
verhandeln — to extend your hand — let us be human
here. Let us not dust each other off. Let us extend our
hands. Verhandeln statt schießen. it was very bleak in
6/14

In conclusion, I will just refer to those children
whom I noticed, more than I usually notice children,
in the airports today. As members of the Council have
the power to do so given to them after previous major
World War, I ask them to do what is necessary so that
no one kills the children anymore.
The President: I thank Mr. McGovern for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have gathered together today for a very
important meeting. Although it has been convened
like others, it is significantly different in tone from the
previous meeting (S/PV.9144) on the sabotage against
the Nord Stream pipelines, which was convened on the
30 September 2022. As many of us recall, even then it
was clear in principle who could be behind the act of
international terrorism, which is exactly how we define
those events. The Russian investigative authorities
had already initiated criminal proceedings under the
relevant article of our country’s criminal code. The
United States leadership made several statements,
the meaning of which boiled down to the fact that, if
Russia continued to act contrary to the wishes of the
United States, then the Nord Stream pipelines would
be destroyed. In his inappropriate Russophobic tirades
on social media, a Former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Poland, Mr. Sikorski, who was privy to something,
thanked the United States. That was in addition to the
text message that former Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom Theresa May, who hates our country no
less, carelessly sent out. The United States, however,
has strongly denied — and, incidentally, continues
23-05414

21/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9266

to deny, conscious of potential consequences — its
involvement in the sabotage against vital international
pipeline infrastructure.

system. Along with their allies, who run with the
herd, they call that the rules-based order, where they
themselves dictate the rules.

Since then, there have been more examples of
officials in Washington gloating over the Nord Stream
bombing, not least thanks to the well-known Russophobe
and the godmother of the anti-constitutional coup in
Ukraine, Ms. Nuland. But, of course, we would not
have requested calling this meeting just because of
that. The fact is that, on 8 February, thanks to the wellknown American Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative
journalist Seymour Hersh, we learned not only that
the United States did it, but also how they did it with
the complicity of their Norway NATO ally. Based on
the facts and witness testimonies, he has convincingly
proven that, during the NATO BALTOPS exercise in the
summer of 2022, American divers planted explosives
under the Nord Stream pipelines that the Norwegians
activated three months later on 26 September 2022.
We now know with an extreme degree of probability
not only who blew up our gas pipeline, but how it was
blown up. Because of those facts, we can say that those
events were the result of the use of force, which runs
contrary to the purposes of the United Nations.

Still, in the past, they did not go so far as to blow
up foreign pipelines owned by States with which the
United States is not at war. But now that day has arrived,
and it may well be a precursor of an era in which crossborder and transcontinental communications become
legitimate targets for operations aimed at weakening
various States, which will be, as you can imagine, an
era of chaos and unimaginable damage for the whole
of humankind. The chances of that occurring are very
high, especially if the perpetrators of the Nord Stream
explosion are not found and brought to justice, and
if the countries that are behind it do not compensate
the affected countries for the damage they caused in
a manner stipulated under international law and basic
principles of justice. Then, and only then, would we
have a chance to avert this state of chaos. Everything is
in the hands of the members, and the choice is also being
made today, during today’s Security Council meeting.

In my statement, I will not dwell on other
details revealed by Mr. Hersh’s ground-breaking
investigation, which our two briefers, Jeffrey Sachs
and Ray McGovern, spoke about in detail earlier. Let
me just say that the breadth of the information that
he has gathered is amazing. His previous professional
experience and impeccable journalistic reputation
leave no doubt that the American journalist is telling
the truth. Not only is that striking, but so is their level
of cynicism and confidence in their own impunity
with which they committed that unprecedented crime.
Of course, we have become inured to the fact that our
American colleagues place themselves above the law,
while claiming, in fact, that they are the law. Only they
can interfere in the internal affairs of other States and
carry out unconstitutional coups and acts of aggression
against independent States with impunity.
I would like to remind members of the Security
Council that, as early as the end of the Cold War,
according to a document prepared in 2022 by the United
States Congressional Research Service, there have been
251 cases of using United States armed forces abroad.
They are then the only ones who are allowed to kill
and maim civilians in other countries while refusing to
hand over the perpetrators to the international justice

Contrary to what our former Western partners
will say today, we are not involved in spreading
disinformation in the Council. And we are not trying
to make accusations based on something being highly
likely, as was done, for example, by the representatives
of the United Kingdom here in this Chamber, who used
supposition and conjecture that run counter to facts and
common sense in an unconvincing attempt to accuse us
five years ago of poisoning the Skripals.
Regarding the Nord Stream explosion, there is no
doubt as to the motive for the crime, the perpetrator or
the manner in which the crime was carried out. That
is even better than the smoking gun all the American
detectives in Hollywood blockbusters dream of finding.
With such evidence, no lawyer would take on the
defence of our American colleagues and there would
be no doubt whatsoever in the jury’s verdict. But we
are not here in order to set up a trial in the Security
Council. As Council members are aware, we have
presented a draft resolution requesting the SecretaryGeneral to conduct an independent international
investigation to verify the facts that Seymour Hersh and
other independent journalists have put forward. We felt
compelled to do so because we have significant doubts
about the effectiveness, transparency and impartiality
of the investigations currently being carried out in a
number of national jurisdictions. And we do not see any
willingness on the part of our partners to cooperate.

23-054147/14

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

We have taken note of the letter circulated today by
the Permanent Representatives of Germany, Denmark
and Sweden stating that the authorities of those
countries have informed Russia about the progress
in the investigation. In reality, the situation is very
different. The leadership of those States had ignored
the communications that were sent in October 2022
from the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Mishustin, regarding the participation in the
investigation of representatives of Russia’s relevant
federal executive bodies and of representatives of the
Gazprom company. Similar requests made by the Office
of the Prosecutor General of Russia were also declined.
Since we are talking about a crime committed
with the assistance of an explosive device, which
therefore falls under the International Convention for
the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings of 15 December
1997, we do expect that the States that have something
to do with the incident, primarily the United States,
Norway, Denmark and Sweden, will uphold their
obligations under the Convention. However, in this
case too, the political will of their leadership is
lacking. More precisely, it is simply absent. Therefore,
unfortunately, we have no other way of getting to the
truth. The so-called investigations being carried out by
the Scandinavian countries and Germany are not only
non-transparent, but it is also quite clear that they are
aimed solely at covering their tracks and protecting their
big brother in America. We are not allowed to join in
them, and all our requests are being arrogantly ignored.
Incidentally, we find it rather odd that those
countries taking part in the investigations did not request
to participate in today’s meeting. With other meetings,
we see a whole line of those willing to take the floor.
And we of course do not, and cannot, have any trust in
them. But the Secretary-General is somebody we still
generally trust, and we hope the Council does too, so
that is why we propose that he should be put in charge
of the investigation. We have circulated in the General
Assembly and the Security Council an address of the
State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian
Federation containing a corresponding request, as well
as notes from the Russian embassies to the Foreign
Ministries of Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden
and the United States on that matter. Anyone who
wishes to consult those documents is welcome to do so.
If our American colleagues have nothing to fear, and
if they have no doubt in the fact that the conclusions of
their compatriots are wrong, then that means the United
8/14

21/02/2023

States does not risk anything, and soon we will be able
to confirm that. In that context, we will strive to identify
and hold accountable those who have encroached on
international peace and security. Therefore, we look
forward to our proposal being supported. Experts
are discussing the text at the moment. After the first
round of discussion, however, we have the impression
that Western experts are not interested in having an
objective international investigation in any case, which
of course only increases our suspicions.
The approach of Council members to our proposed
draft resolution and their interest, or lack thereof, in
finding the perpetrators and bringing them to justice
will indeed be decisive in terms of our further steps in
the context of this act of sabotage. We very much want
to believe that Council members will not disappoint
us or their own citizens, and that they will help to
determine the truth as to what happened, pursuant to
the Charter of our world Organization.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Mozambique
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Professor Jeffrey Sachs and Mr. Raymond McGovern
for their important briefings on the issue of the Nord
Stream incident that took place in September 2022.
We are aware of the allegation of sabotage made
regarding the incident. In our opinion, it is imperative
that a thorough investigation be effected in order to
determine the real cause of the incident. We call on
the relevant Governments to act in good faith, in an
expeditious and thorough manner, taking into account
the seriousness of the allegations.
Together with its potential security implications, the
Nord Stream incident could also represent an ecological
danger. The release of harmful substances into the
environment can have long-lasting consequences
for both the ecosystem and the health of the local
community. The European Space Agency estimates
that the emissions leak from the Nord Stream gas
pipeline was roughly equivalent to one and a half days
of global methane emissions. Therefore, in addition to
the potential security implications, the Nord Stream
incident also has a significant ecological impact, with the
release of huge amounts of methane gas. It is therefore
our responsibility to take all the measures necessary to
minimize harm to the environment and ensure that such
incidents are prevented from happening in the future. It
is crucial for the Security Council to remain vigilant in
23-05414

21/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

addressing incidents such as this and to work to find
a solution that upholds international law and promotes
the greater good.
In conclusion, the Nord Stream incident serves as a
reminder of the need to quickly de-escalate the conflict,
whose ramifications keep expanding.
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and the other briefers for their briefings.
Since September 2022, we have remained deeply
concerned about the explosions in the Nord Stream 1
and 2 submarine pipelines in the Baltic Sea because,
first, as we said time and again, nothing justifies attacks
on essential civilian infrastructure, including energy
infrastructure; secondly, in addition to endangering safe
maritime and air navigation, it meant an immeasurable
source of pollution of local marine life, with potentially
devastating climatic consequences, having released
hundreds of millions of cubic metres of gas into the
atmosphere; and, thirdly, it occurred amid an extremely
complex global geopolitical situation, in which any event
could trigger actions with unforeseeable consequences.
For all those reasons, Ecuador condemns such acts and
calls on all States of this Organization to demonstrate
the utmost caution and restraint.
We also acknowledge the security measures taken
by Denmark and Sweden in September to reduce the
risk to shipping, and we appreciate the joint letter of
today, 21 February, also signed by Germany, in which
they report on the investigations under way, in line with
the basic principles of the rule of law. We therefore
express our support for those investigations and await
their conclusions. The international community and
the Security Council should encourage the progress of
the investigations by preventing disruptive actions that
limit or affect them.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Professor Jeffrey Sachs and Mr. Ray McGovern for
their briefings.
The Security Council meets again today to discuss
the aftermath of the explosions on 26 and 27 September
2022, causing major gas leaks from the Nord Stream 1
and 2 pipelines, which carry gas from Russia to Europe
via the Baltic Sea. Strong suspicions of sabotage,
clearly linked to the war in Ukraine, surrounded
those particularly alarming developments given the

S/PV.9266

environmental damage caused by methane gas leaks.
I would like to point out that methane gas is 80 per
cent more warming than carbon dioxide and that, in
this case, the release of that gas into the sea represents
a genuine environmental disaster and a clear threat to
marine flora and fauna.
The meeting on 30 September 2022 concluded that
the possibility of an accident had been ruled out and that
investigations should be carried out to shed light on such
events (see S/PV.9144). My country takes note of the
opening of investigations by some European countries,
in particular Sweden, Denmark and Germany, and of
the results of the preliminary investigations, which
underscore the suspicion of sabotage.
My country reiterates its condemnation of those
unjustifiable attacks on civilian infrastructure. In
addition to the significant environmental consequences,
they cause economic losses, the effects of which go far
beyond the countries concerned, thereby increasing
the conflict’s impact on the economies of many
countries. We recall that the parties are obliged to
respect international conventions that protect civilian
populations and infrastructure against armed attacks.
Finally, my country calls on all the parties to
demonstrate responsibility, exercise the utmost
caution and do everything possible to ensure that the
perpetrators of the attacks are held responsible for
such acts.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
The United Kingdom condemns the acts of sabotage
targeting the Nord Stream pipeline. However, it is not
clear to us why, five months on, Russia is suddenly
pursuing the issue here with such urgency.
We welcome the letter from Denmark, Sweden
and Germany informing States Members of the United
Nations that investigations are ongoing. The United
Kingdom fully supports those technical investigations,
led by the competent national authorities, and awaits
their findings.
The only recent development regarding Nord
Stream of which we are aware is a new round of lurid
accusations by Russian State-controlled media and
public figures. They are the same actors that originally
chose to accuse the United Kingdom.

23-054149/14

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

The basis for the new accusations is an article
by an American journalist, which cites only a single
secret source. It is no surprise that the Russian
Ambassador chose not to dwell on the details, as such
details have already been comprehensively debunked
by other journalists, including on the basis of very
straightforward, open-source fact-checking.
It is therefore our view that the real reason for
Russia’s urgency today is a desperate desire to distract
attention one year on from the start of its full-scale
invasion of Ukraine, the massive casualties suffered by
the Russian military and the devastation that Russia’s
war has wrought on the people of Ukraine, as well as its
effects across the globe.
The United Kingdom takes the issue of attacks
on critical infrastructure very seriously. That is why
we have so frequently condemned Russia’s attacks on
Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, schools and hospitals
in the Council. However, we are not convinced that
Russia’s initiative today, or its calls for the establishment
of a United Nations commission of inquiry, amounts to
anything more than a distraction from its continuing
aggression in Ukraine.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing, and
we listened carefully to Mr. Sachs and Mr. McGovern.
Acts of sabotage against energy infrastructure,
such as the explosions that damaged the Nord Stream
1 and 2 gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea last September,
are unacceptable. They pose a significant threat to
international security, stability and prosperity. They may
also disrupt markets and undermine the predictability
of energy supplies, and, as we saw in this case, they can
carry a significant risk of environmental damage.
Last year’s explosions had devastating consequences
for our planet, leading to the worst methane gas leak
ever recorded. As we work together to address climate
change, such events only make our collective efforts
more difficult.
The United Arab Emirates takes the incident
extremely seriously. When we met last September to
discuss this issue (see S/PV.9144), the exact cause of
the explosions was unknown. What was clear was the
importance of conducting an investigation into the
causes of the explosions and preventing the situation
10/14

21/02/2023

from further escalating. The imperative for thorough
and credible investigations, alongside the need to reduce
tensions, is as relevant today as it was last autumn.
It is important that the investigations be grounded
in science and facts, not politics and posturing. The
gravity of the situation demands a serious and sober
approach and requires holding those responsible
accountable. It is vital that we send a loud and clear
message that such types of acts cannot be tolerated.
While several investigations are ongoing, we urge
all the parties concerned not to resort to unilateral
measures or escalatory actions. At a time of considerable
regional and international uncertainty, we can ill afford
any steps that could inflame tensions.
We await the establishment of the facts around the
incidents, the identification of those responsible and
the proper steps to ensure accountability.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing to the Security Council. We also thank
Professor Jeffrey Sachs and Mr. Ray McGovern for
their perspectives.
When we met in the Security Council last
September, we expressed great concern about the
unprecedented damage caused to the Nord Stream 1
and 2 gas pipelines as a result of what the preliminary
investigations by Denmark and Sweden had established
to be a deliberate act of sabotage (see S/PV.9144).
We welcome the recent joint update submitted to
the Council by Denmark, Germany and Sweden on
the matter and the confirmation of their respective
ongoing investigations by their national institutions.
We encourage their further action to conclusively
determine the full scope of the incident in respect of
the motive and actors. We affirm the international
community’s continuing interest in the matter, and we
stress that the ongoing investigative processes should
endeavour to keep the Russian authorities and operators
informed and that the cooperation of the latter should
be sought as necessary.
We reiterate our position that in accordance with the
objects of resolution 2341 (2017), critical infrastructure,
especially of a transnational kind, should be protected
and kept safe from harm as bridges for cooperation.
We note from the available assessment that the
environmental damage thus far has been localized and
appreciate the swift actions of the concerned countries
23-05414

21/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

to mitigate the immediate impact. However, we remain
concerned by the greenhouse-gas emissions, which
have non-localized consequences.
Before concluding, we continue to urge that all
relevant actors cooperate to establish the facts and
ensure that appropriate remedial action, including
ensuring accountability, is taken, in order to bring an
early closure to the matter. While investigations are
ongoing, we urge restraint by all parties concerned
and caution against unilateral actions that may be
detrimental to peace.
Mrs. Baumann-Bresolin (Switzerland) (spoke
in French): I thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her briefing. I have also
taken note of the remarks of Mr. Jeffrey Sachs and
Mr. Ray McGovern.
Switzerland is concerned about the damage to the
Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines, which resulted in
worrisome gas leaks last September. As mentioned by
several at the Security Council meeting last September
(see S/PV.9144), and as mentioned in the letter
transmitted to the Council by Denmark and Sweden on
29 September (S/2022/725), all available information
indicates that these were acts of sabotage.
Let me reiterate our position of principle: we
condemn any attack on critical infrastructure, such
as energy infrastructure, and the consequences
for supplying the population, the economy and
the environment.
It is important to stick to the facts and support any
credible effort to shed light on the explosions that took
place last September. In this regard, Switzerland notes
the letter sent today by Germany, Denmark and Sweden
with regard to the ongoing investigations.
Mr. Tamaura (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryDiCarlo, Mr. Sachs and Mr. McGovern for their briefings.
Japan is deeply concerned about the incident in
relation to critical infrastructure, namely, the Nord
Stream pipelines, in international waters in the Baltic
Sea. We are concerned about potentially long-term
damage and risk to the marine environment and climate
in the region.
The investigation of the incident is ongoing, and Japan
is closely monitoring the progress of the investigation.
At the same time, this incident reminds us once again
of the importance of ensuring the safety of energy

S/PV.9266

infrastructure. Any targeting of civilian infrastructure
and facilities must be avoided. We strongly condemn
any act of violence against them. We are closely
following developments and continue to urge those
involved to exercise restraint and refrain from engaging
in any activity that could disrupt peace and stability.
Energy resources, including natural gas, are
fundamental to people’s lives. Vandalism to critical
infrastructure is an unacceptable act that will have a
life-and-death impact on countless people. We hope
that the results of the ongoing investigation efforts by
Sweden and Denmark will clarify the cause, and the
Security Council will be able to discuss the issue on
the basis of the results of the investigation. In this
regard, we call on all parties to fully cooperate with the
ongoing investigation and provide credible information
in a transparent manner.
The time and resources of the Security Council,
which is responsible for the peace and security of the
international community, are not unlimited. It must
prioritize its efforts about where to allocate its resources.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): We thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
We listened carefully to the other briefers today.
We recognize their past history and service, though we
question their relevant knowledge to speak as an expert
briefer on the topic at hand.
The United States is deeply concerned by the
sabotage that took place on the Nord Stream 1 and Nord
Stream 2 pipelines last September. Deliberate actions
to damage critical infrastructure cannot be tolerated.
But let us be clear why we are really in the Security
Council Chamber today. Later this week, as we near the
one-year anniversary, the General Assembly will debate
the impact of Russia’s illegal and full-scale invasion
of Ukraine. Today’s meeting is a blatant attempt to
distract from this. As the world unites this week to call
for a just and secure peace in Ukraine consistent with
the United Nations Charter, Russia desperately wants
to change the subject.
This is not the first time that Russia has used its
seat on the Security Council to amplify conspiracy
theories from the Internet. We wish it would apply the
same urgency shown over the past three days, instead,
to the myriad credible reports of human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law caused
by its invading forces.

23-0541411/14

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

However, let me state clearly and plainly:
accusations that the United States was involved in
this act of sabotage are completely false. The United
States was not involved at all. Competent authorities in
Denmark, Germany and Sweden are investigating these
incidents in a comprehensive, transparent and impartial
manner. Resources for United Nations investigations
should be preserved for cases when States are unwilling
or unable to investigate genuinely.
Let us not be fooled by Russia’s claim that it only
wants an impartial investigation. Its draft resolution
clearly implicates the United States and mischaracterizes
statements by United States officials. Russia does not seek
an impartial investigation. It seeks to prejudice ongoing
ones towards a predetermined conclusion of its choosing.
The expedited timeline on which the Russian
delegation demanded we discuss this issue casts
significant doubt on the seriousness of its intentions.
The Nord Stream pipeline ruptures occurred five months
ago. Now, as we approach the one-year anniversary of
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russia claims it
is urgent the Council discuss it this week.
Russia, yet again, is abusing its position as a
permanent member of the Security Council by using this
meeting as a platform for disinformation and conspiracy
theories. It is regrettable that with everything else on the
Council’s agenda this week — North Korean ballistic
missiles, tensions in the Middle East, a humanitarian
crisis in Turkey and Syria following devastating
earthquakes — that Russia is again deliberately wasting
the Security Council’s time.
Russia’s claim to be concerned over the sabotage of
critical infrastructure rings hollow. For months, Russia
has relentlessly attacked its neighbour, striking cities
and towns across Ukraine, damaging and destroying
residential areas and medical facilities. Russia’s attacks
against Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure have left families
in Ukraine without heat and electricity during the coldest,
darkest period of the year. Later this week, countries
will vote in the General Assembly a on a draft resolution
reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and calling
for an end to hostilities in Ukraine in a manner consistent
with the Charter’s principles. That should be our priority.
Instead of indulging conspiracy theories, we should
focus on ways to diplomatically resolve this conflict in
a way consistent with the United Nations Charter and
fully restore the territorial integrity of a United Nations
Member State.
12/14

21/02/2023

Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing. We listened carefully
to the interventions of Mr. Sachs and Mr. McGovern on
the matter.
At the Security Council meeting on 30 September
(see S/PV.9144), we expressed our deep concern
regarding an apparent act of sabotage on the Nord Stream
1 and 2 pipelines in the exclusive economic zones of
Denmark and Sweden, in the Baltic Sea. Such acts are
unacceptable. We have welcomed the prompt response
and have supported the investigations initiated by the
national authorities of Denmark, Germany and Sweden
to determine the origin of the damage and the possible
perpetrators. As confirmed by the letter sent today to
the President of the Security Council by the Permanent
Representatives of Denmark, Germany and Sweden, the
investigation is under way, and we have full confidence
in the respective authorities involved to carry out a real,
comprehensive and objective investigation of this case.
We look forward to the conclusions of that investigation.
In that context, we do not see any need for a parallel
investigation by an international commission, as asked
for by the Russian Federation, to overlap with what
is already going on. From what we heard today, there
are no new facts, no new evidence, no attribution,
just assumption. Therefore, while we remain staunch
supporters of the freedom of speech and of healthy
debates, we do not see the Security Council as a
depository of conspiracy theories. We have deplored in
the past the misuse of the time and resources of the
Council to push baseless narratives fed by specific
narrow interests, and we reiterate that concern today.
The timing of the request for this meeting is no
coincidence. The aim is to divert, in whatever way
and by whatever means, even in this empty manner,
attention from the events scheduled on the first
anniversary of the Russian military aggression against
Ukraine. While it continuously attacks and bombs the
civilian and strategic infrastructure of Ukraine, killing
innocent people and making their life unbearable,
Russia is trying to mislead international public opinion
by misusing the Security Council.
We therefore believe that at this moment there is
no need for a Security Council resolution on this issue.
Instead, we call on the members of the Council and
the wider United Nations membership to fully support
the draft resolution on comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine, which will be introduced in the
23-05414

21/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

General Assembly this week, and confirm once more
that United Nations remains on the right side — a strong
foundation for peace and progress against aggression
and regression.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Professor
Jeffrey Sachs and Mr. Ray McGovern for their briefings..
The press article that motivated our meeting today
reports serious allegations about September’s incidents
regarding the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines. It is widely
known that there are claims that those incidents were
acts of sabotage. Nevertheless, the Brazilian position on
this issue remains the same as the one expressed at the
meeting called shortly after the events (see S/PV.9144).
Any response should be based on sound information
and the results of impartial investigations. We ask
other members to proceed with caution in the face of
assertions attributable to a single anonymous source.
On the other hand, the seriousness of the allegations
and the accusation of the involvement of State actors
in the episode must be given due consideration by the
Council. We understand the importance of secrecy to
the success of investigations, but given the political
implications of the incidents, we encourage greater
transparency in the dissemination of established
facts and restraint in the propagation of unproven
interpretations. Only in that way will it be possible for
us to go beyond the field of speculation.
Brazil reiterates its concern about the consequences
of the damage to the Nord Stream pipelines, which
resulted in the worsening of the energy crisis in
Europe and in serious long-term economic losses.
The damage to regional energy infrastructure is
particularly regrettable. We must also emphasize that
the harmful consequences for the environment need
to be carefully assessed by the proper international
bodies. Brazil is ready to cooperate in order to improve
monitoring mechanisms, with a view to preventing
incidents that could impact marine life and the level of
greenhouse-gas emissions.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
France clearly expressed its concern after the two
underwater explosions that damaged the Nord Stream
1 and 2 pipelines in the Baltic Sea on 26 September. It
was under our presidency that the Security Council met
on 30 September on the same subject (see S/PV.9144).
Our assessment remains unchanged. These events
are unprecedented and must be taken seriously. The

S/PV.9266

situation is all the more serious because the information
available indicates that the explosions were the result of
a deliberate human act.
Investigations have been initiated by Germany,
Denmark and Sweden. We have no reason to doubt the
seriousness of the proceedings, which are under way
and must be completed. I would like to thank those
three countries for their joint letter to the presidency of
the Council on the status of those investigations.
By contrast, we have every reason to doubt the
merits of the Russian approach. There is no emergency
or new credible information to justify the organization
of such a meeting five months after the incident. We
are also surprised by the zeal with which Russia is
pursuing an investigation into Nord Stream, while it is
doing everything to prevent a Secretariat mission from
being deployed to Kyiv to inspect the Iranian drone
debris there. What we are witnessing today is therefore
an attempt to divert the attention of the international
community when this Friday will mark one year since
Russia launched its war of aggression against Ukraine.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Professor Sachs and
Mr. McGovern for their briefings.
The Nord Stream gas pipelines are a major
transboundary infrastructure and energy transportation
artery. The damage to the pipeline in September had
a major negative impact on the global energy market
and the environment. It also caused energy shortages in
businesses and households in many European countries
this winter.
It is becoming increasingly clear that what
happened to the Nord Stream pipelines was by no
means an accident, but rather a deliberate human act.
From the perspective of physical conditions, it is hard
to imagine that any non-State actor alone would be
capable of carrying out such destruction.
In an open meeting of the Council held in
September (see S/PV.9144), many countries called for
an investigation into the incident in order to uncover
the truth and identify those responsible. That is also
China’s position. China supports speeding up the
investigation so as to swiftly determine the truth.
We live in an era of globalization, in which
cooperation among countries in energy, transportation
and communication is increasingly close and
transboundary construction spans continents and

23-0541413/14

S/PV.9266

Threats to international peace and security

oceans. Any deliberate sabotage of transboundary
infrastructure is a malicious act. Failure to determine why
it happened and who is behind the destruction will send
the wrong signal to those with ill intentions and make
them believe that they can get away with whatever they do.
An objective, impartial and professional investigation into the matter, the pursuit of accountability and the
release of the results of such an investigation as soon as
possible will not only relate to the incident itself but also
have a bearing on the security of global transboundary
infrastructure. Moreover, they are also closely related to
the interest and concerns of every country.
As the most authoritative and representative international organization, the United Nations can play an
active role in conducting an international investigation
and in ensuring the security of transboundary infrastructure. China welcomes the draft resolution presented
by Russia in the Council and believes that it is of great
significance in authorizing an international investigation
into the sabotage of the Nord Stream pipelines.
Recently, we have come across many details and
relevant information about the Nord Stream incident,
and that information is alarming. Today the briefers also
shared with us important information and their reasonable analysis. Faced with such detailed material and
comprehensive evidence, a simple statement of utterly
false and complete fiction is obviously not enough to
answer the many questions and concerns raised around
the world. Finding a way to dodge today’s meeting does
not mean that the truth can be concealed. We expect
convincing explanations from the relevant parties.
Such a request is entirely legitimate and reasonable.
The Nord Stream incident reminds us that security
threats in the modern world are increasingly interlinked,
transboundary and diversified. That calls for the establishment of a common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security concept, a multipronged strategy, an integrated approach and coordinated security
governance in order to meet various security challenges.
Chinese President Xi Jinping proposed a global security initiative, which provides a new direction and new
ideas to eliminate the root causes of conflicts, resolve
the security predicament and maintain common security.
The global security initiative concept paper, released
by China today, details the core concepts and principles of the initiative and provides an important path
to the implementation of the initiative and our 20 key
cooperation areas, which are action oriented. We are
willing to work with all parties to firmly support the

14/14

21/02/2023

core role of the United Nations in security governance,
strive to promote coordination and interaction among
the major Powers, actively promote dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of hotspot issues, effectively respond
to traditional and non-traditional security challenges,
continuously strengthen the global security governance
system and capacity-building, maintain peace and tranquility on Earth and create a better future for humankind.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing.
The damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines last
September, resulting in dangerous leaks into international
waters in the Baltic Sea, gives rise to serious safety
and environmental concerns. All available information
indicates that those leaks were the result of a deliberate
act. Any deliberate disruption of energy infrastructure is
dangerous and irresponsible, particularly in the midst of
a global energy crisis. The weaponization of energy and
infrastructure is unacceptable.
The damage from those leaks threatened to deprive
Europe of a key route for the delivery of a crucial energy
resource. Furthermore, the damage placed increased
strain on global energy markets already affected by
Russia’s war against Ukraine. That not only has an impact
on the countries that received energy through the Nord
Stream pipelines, but also has repercussions for developing countries around the world. The incident highlights
the vulnerability of critical energy infrastructure.
Malta underlines its solidarity with Denmark, Sweden and Germany and strongly supports the ongoing investigations to establish the full truth behind the leaks.
We welcome the letter circulated by Denmark, Sweden
and Germany providing an update on those investigations.
Malta once again condemns any deliberate destruction
of energy infrastructure. Let us not be distracted today
from the sheer extent of the damage that Russia’s war
of aggression has caused in Ukraine, particularly to
civilians. Attacks directed against civilians and objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population are
prohibited under international humanitarian law. Malta
condemns such attacks in the strongest possible terms.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

23-05414
