S/2017/865

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2301 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2017 and requested me to report
on a quarterly basis on its implementation. The present report is submitted pursuant
to that resolution.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The political context continued to be marred by an upsurge in violence that
began around Bangassou and Bria in May, contributing to a deterioration in the
security situation throughout much of the country. Criticism of the Government
became more pronounced, and several opposition figures openly challenged the
leadership of the President of the Central African Republic, Faustin Archange
Touadera, portraying the Government as incapable of ensuring stability. Some
political and civil society actors criticized MINUSCA for not forcibly disarming
armed groups, calling for the rearmament of the unreformed national armed forces.
Rising divisive rhetoric, employed by some national actors, contributed to an
increase in sectarian tensions, especially in the south-east, where Muslims in
general, particularly Fulani, were targeted. Attacks were carried out along ethnic
and confessional lines by increasingly fractured and unorganized armed actors
loosely affiliated with anti-balaka or ex-Séléka factions. Lingering strains between
the executive and legislative branches of government compounded the si tuation.
3.
In that context, on 19 September I co-chaired with President Touadera and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and in partnership with the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the European Union and
the World Bank, a high-level meeting on the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, held on the margins of the seventy -second
session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. Participants strongly
condemned attacks against civilians, expressed support for President Touadera’s
efforts and reaffirmed their support for the African Initiative for Peace and

17-17476 (E)

181017

*1717476*

S/2017/865

Reconciliation. It was agreed that a meeting of the International Support Group on
the Central African Republic would be convened within six months.
4.
Before the high-level meeting, President Touadera took steps aimed at
overcoming domestic political tensions. On 12 September, he appointed 16 new
ministers to an expanded Cabinet of 34 portfolios, including 18 members of the
previous Government. The appointees included four representatives of armed
groups and five Muslims, increasing the number of Muslim representatives to eight.
In terms of gender, there were five women among the appointees, up from four
previously but representing an overall decrease in the proportion of women in the
Cabinet. This effort broadens the Government’s political base and may calm
sectarian tensions and create an environment more conducive to the peace process.
The creation of 11 new ministries will place an additional burden on the State’s
budget.
5.
The Cabinet reshuffle was coupled with initiatives to create conditions to
extend State authority. The national strategy for the restoration of State authority
was adopted on 8 September. Four days later, the President appointed new prefects
to all 16 prefectures, nine of whom have a military background. Although no
members of the Muslim community were among the new prefects, the 73
subprefects appointed on 18 September were more ethnically diverse and includ ed
several active members of ex-Séléka groups, 21 members of the armed forces and 6
women.
6.
In a context of increasing violence, discussions with armed groups continued
within the framework of the Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, albeit with limited progress. At
several meetings held during the reporting period, national authorities challenged
armed groups on the prevailing insecurity while engaging them in direct dialogue.
Despite the participation of the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique (FPRC) in the Committee, the group continued to seize new territory
and build new military structures, announcing the deployment to Bria and Kaga
Bandoro of new “mixed” brigades comprising elements from the Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC). It was not yet clear whether the inclusion of
FPRC members in the Government would lead to a reduction in the latter’s
destabilizing military activities.
7.
Although the political context remained fragile, steps were taken towards a
broader, inclusive peace process. On 19 June, representatives of the Government
and 13 armed groups signed an accord under the auspices of the Community of
Sant’Egidio in Rome establishing a ceasefire regime, among other measures. In the
days following, violent clashes erupted between many of the signatories to the
accord, weakening public faith in it. On 21 June in Brussels, the Government and all
mediation actors, including members of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation and the Community of Sant’Egidio, agreed to adopt a single road
map for a broader mediation process. International partners affirmed their support
for the Government’s efforts to secure an immediate cessation of violence.
8.
On 17 July in Libreville, representatives of the African Union, ECCAS and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, as well as the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Angola, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo and
Gabon, adopted an integrated road map for the African Initiative. The road map
reaffirms the legitimacy of the country’s constitutional system, the importance of
the conclusions reached at the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, held in
2015, and the need for strong national ownership of the peace process to promote
reconciliation. On 29 August, the African Union Commission appointed Bédializoun
Moussa Nébié as its Special Representative for the Central African Republic.
2/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

9.
The panel of facilitators of the African Initiative met in Bangui on 11 and
12 September to develop a plan to advance the road map. Chaired by the African
Union and bringing together representatives of the Initiative’s members, the panel
seeks to facilitate direct engagement between the parties. The Government
announced that Jean Willybiro-Sako would serve as the national focal point for the
Panel.
10. The relationship between the executive and legislative branches gradually
improved. President Touadera and the President of the National Assembly public ly
committed themselves to positive, mutual cooperation in a joint appearance in July.
Following a series of consultations with a broad cross section of national
stakeholders, the National Assembly proposed its “Parliamentary Peace Initiative”
to the Government to contribute to the peace process. Although the ordinary session
of the National Assembly was in recess during the reporting period,
parliamentarians actively prepared for the next legislative cycle. Efforts included a
review of decentralization reforms in July, supported by the National Democratic
Institute, and an interparliamentary seminar held in July with parliamentarians from
the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Gabon, organized by the International Organization of
la Francophonie.
11. Social cohesion and reconciliation efforts suffered severe setbacks during the
reporting period. The volatile security situation eroded the ability and the
willingness of communities to take steps towards reconciliation. Cycles of reprisal
took place between non-Muslim communities and Fulani and other Muslim
communities in Bangassou, Zemio and other areas. Promising local initiatives to
overcome sectarian and ethnic divisions were undertaken in Bria, Kaga Bandoro and
other localities, although the implementation of agreements brokered by local peace
committees was uneven. Most reconciliation efforts were unable to make a tangible
impact on social cohesion and the situation of displaced communities. The
Government took important actions, including the adoption of a national
reconciliation programme on 11 September. The same day, President Touadera
created a committee to lead consultations on the establishment of a truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission, a priority identified at the Bangui
Forum.

B.

Security situation
12. While the situation remained relatively calm in Bangui, armed confrontations
and violence against civilians prevailed throughout the rest of the country,
especially in the south-east, the centre and parts of the west (Ouham and OuhamPendé prefectures). The violence was driven by increased competition among armed
groups over the control of resources, which was increasingly aggravated by inter ethnic and intercommunal tensions, particularly between Muslims and Christians.
New armed formations emerged, fuelling clashes and attacks on civilians. The onset
of the rainy season did not quell their activities. In the centre and the east, many
incidents involved criminal activities and attacks against Muslim communities by
anti-balaka groups. The resources of MINUSCA were stretched thin, particularly in
the south-east, although the Mission continually adjusted its posture to prevent or
mitigate the worst consequences of violence for civilians.
13. Armed groups repeatedly targeted peacekeepers during the reporting period,
primarily along the Alindao-Zemio axis. The majority of those attacks were
perpetrated by anti-balaka groups and their affiliates, who challenge the Mission’s
active protection of displaced ethnic Fulani and Muslim minorities. Th e attacks
were planned and coordinated in advance, revealing the growing use of modern
weaponry and communications. More than half of them occurred in Bangassou,

17-17476

3/22

S/2017/865

killing 3 peacekeepers and injuring 12 others. On 21 August, the anti -balaka faction
of Maxime Mokom issued a communiqué stating that it would take necessary action
if MINUSCA did not expel “foreign mercenaries” from the country. The declaration
was publicly condemned by the Government.
14. Increased intercommunal tensions and agitation against Fulani sparked cycles
of violence against civilians in Bangassou, Bria and Zemio. The anti -balaka forces
and the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC) both deliberately targeted
civilians from opposing communities.
15. In Bangassou, anti-balaka groups continued to dominate the town and harass
internally displaced persons, Muslims and women. The abduction on 21 July of a
pregnant internally displaced Muslim woman by anti-balaka elements triggered the
abduction of six Christian civilians by Muslim displaced persons. All abductees
were released the next day, following mediation efforts led by the local Catholic
priest. On 23 and 25 July, anti-balaka elements attacked a MINUSCA water convoy,
killing three peacekeepers and injuring four others. MINUSCA exchange d fire with
anti-balaka forces on 29 occasions in that area between June and 1 October.
16. A series of attacks and counter-attacks in the village of Gambo, carried out by
anti-balaka elements against UPC and armed Fulani individuals, took place between
3 and 9 August, resulting in the killing of at least 60 civilians and 22 UPC members.
A reprisal attack carried out by UPC with other ex -Seleka fighters and armed Fulani
on 5 August targeted the local health centre, resulting in the deaths of at least 45
civilians, including at least 10 volunteers of the International Committee of the Red
Cross.
17. The presence of large anti-balaka groups on a main road to Bria and ongoing
criminal activities by anti-balaka and FPRC units threatened the city. On 17 June,
anti-balaka forces and FPRC engaged in heavy clashes along the Bria -Yalinga axis,
leading to the death of FPRC faction leader Hamad Issa. FPRC attacked the Banda
community in retaliation on 18 June, while anti-balaka elements attacked the mostly
Arab Mandé district. Those clashes left at least 58 combatants dead and numerous
houses and offices of non-governmental organizations destroyed or looted. Some
40,000 people, including many members of anti-balaka factions, sought refuge at
the camp for internally displaced persons near MINUSCA. The clashes and the
looting forced all humanitarian actors to leave the city. FPRC continued its efforts
to reunify ex-Séléka factions, despite violent divisions between factions that had
complicated those efforts.
18. Violent clashes between anti-balaka elements and armed Muslim groups
erupted in Zemio on 28 and 29 June, temporarily displacing some 5,000 people. On
11 July, anti-balaka forces attacked the town’s hospital, which is supported by
Médecins sans frontières, reportedly killing 10 people. All humanitarian actors
withdrew from Zemio, leaving approximately 23,000 internally displaced persons
without humanitarian assistance.
19. During the reporting period, the number of attacks attributed to the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) decreased compared with the same period in 2016. Since
June, 12 incidents have been attributed to alleged LRA elements, with 4 persons
killed and some 35 abducted.
20. Armed groups continued to clash and to attack civilians, MINUSCA and
humanitarian actors in the centre of the country. In Ouaka prefecture, the killing of a
UPC fighter in Ngakobo on 6 June heightened tensions. In Basse -Kotto prefecture,
anti-balaka factions repeatedly targeted MINUSCA patrols. After being attacked on
4 June, MINUSCA engaged anti-balaka fighters in the vicinity of Alindao, resulting
in the killing of three armed individuals and the capture of two. On 14 June,
4/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

anti-balaka elements attacked a MINUSCA convoy on the Mobaye -Kongbo axis and
subsequently fired on MINUSCA convoys four more times, injuring two
peacekeepers. Following a series of anti-balaka provocations and attacks against
their communities, Muslim youth took up arms in Alindao and Dembe, establishing
links with ex-Séléka factions. While ex-Séléka groups did not directly attack
MINUSCA, they fuelled tensions in many areas and attacked civilians.
21. In Kaga Bandoro, both anti-balaka elements and the FPRC/MPC coalition
repeatedly threatened civilians, including internally displaced persons. The coalition
revived “mixed” brigades, which arbitrarily arrested civilians on several occasions
in July and August. On 1 July, MPC units attacked a displaced persons’ camp,
MINUSCA and humanitarian actors, forcing more than 1,100 civilians to flee and
leading humanitarian actors to suspend the provision of assistance in Kaga Bandoro.
22. Armed groups clashed repeatedly in attempts to expand their territory. In June,
in Ouham-Pendé prefecture, MPC attacked civilians, including women and
humanitarian aid workers, as it expanded westward towards Ngaoundaye, a strategic
location on a major cattle migration corridor towards Cameroon and Chad. On
22 June, the group detained an International Organization for Migration (IOM) truck
south of Paoua, releasing it following a ransom payment. Ant i-balaka elements
kidnapped four staff members of an international non -governmental organization on
24 July in the village of Pakale (10 km north of Bocaranga) in retaliation for the
earlier arrest of one of their fighters by MINUSCA. While the anti -balaka elements
subsequently released the hostages, they continued to threaten MINUSCA and
humanitarian actors in Bocaranga, demanding the release of their detained
colleague. The expansion of the MPC and Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (3R)
armed groups triggered clashes in July with local anti-balaka elements in Bang, Bele
and Nzoro, displacing some 1,500 people.
23. In Ouham prefecture, a tripartite dialogue among MPC, anti -balaka elements
and leaders of the Fulani community resulted in a ceasefire agreement on 15 June
and a commitment to end attacks against civilians. Following a brief lull in
violence, criminal and armed group activities resumed in July. Throughout August
and September, the area of influence of MPC expanded towards Cameroon. The
conflict appeared to increasingly assume identity-based dynamics with the outbreak
of serious clashes between 3R and anti-balaka elements in Nana-Mambéré
prefecture. In contrast, in Kouki, Ouham prefecture, communities respected a
voluntary non-aggression pact signed on 15 June.
24. Security in Bangui remained largely calm, although armed groups linked to
anti-balaka, ex-Séléka and so-called “self-defence” groups caused occasional
insecurity. In the predominantly Muslim PK5 district, they threatened community
leaders, harassed local traders and taxi drivers, levied illegal taxes and kidnapped
local residents. Efforts by anti-balaka groups to gain control of parts of PK5 slowed
the return of internally displaced persons.

III. Progress in implementing resolution 2301 (2016)
25. In the light of the stalled political process and the deteriorating security
situation, MINUSCA focused its efforts on local dialogue, the protection of civilians
and the prevention of violence. It continued its efforts to persuade armed groups to
cease hostilities and honour their commitments to engage in disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation, while supporting community violence
reduction initiatives. MINUSCA used its good offices to encourage the Government
and other stakeholders to build more inclusive governance mechanisms in order to
foster an environment more conducive to national consensus and political progress.
17-17476

5/22

S/2017/865

A.

Immediate priorities
Protection of civilians
26. MINUSCA intensified its efforts to ensure greater flexibility and robustness in
order to address expanding threats against civilians, increasing population
displacements and rising intercommunal tensions. It adjusted its deployment and
strengthened civil-military coordination, in close collaboration with humanitarian
organizations. The civil-military response focused on protecting civilians,
supporting local mediation efforts and carrying out advocacy with armed groups.
27. To address the security vacuum in the east following the withdrawal of the
African Union Regional Task Force, MINUSCA recalibrated its forces. An
additional infantry company was deployed in Bria. The deployment of an
engineering company was postponed so that the Mission coul d deploy an additional
company in Bangui, which enabled it to dispatch additional detachments outside the
city as needed. The area of responsibility of the contingent in the south -east was
adjusted and its headquarters relocated from Bria to Bangassou. The special forces
unit and the quick-reaction force rotated in deployment to secure the Bambari and
Bangassou areas, while addressing emerging hotspots. The entire reserve of the
Force Commander and parts of contingents in Bangui were redeployed to hotspots
in the centre and the east. Meanwhile, a 450-strong battalion was deployed in the
west to replace the repatriated contingent of the Congo.
28. Through the United Nations Mine Action Service, MINUSCA disposed of
2,867 pieces of ammunition and explosive devices and provided risk education to
12,685 beneficiaries.
Promoting and protecting human rights (including women and children)
29. The human rights situation deteriorated significantly during the reporting
period. MINUSCA documented 809 human rights violations, abuses of international
human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law, which affected
1,173 victims, comprising 786 men, 168 women, 169 children (91 boys and 78 girls)
and 50 unidentified victims. The most frequent violations were arbitrary killings,
cruel and inhuman treatment, conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary detention,
deprivation of liberty, abductions, attacks against schools and denial of
humanitarian access.
30. The following were responsible for 540 human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law: ex-Séléka factions (299), anti-balaka factions (165),
the MPC/Revolution et justice (RJ) coalition (28), LRA (9), 3R (11), RJ (3), the
Front démocratique du people centrafricain (8), the Union d es forces démocratiques
pour le rassemblement (3) and other organized self-defence armed groups (14).
National security forces were responsible for 269 violations, including 244 cases of
arbitrary detention, of which 160 were attributed to the national gen darmerie, 98 to
the national police and 11 to the national armed forces.
31. On 30 May, MINUSCA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights released the human rights mapping report on
serious violations and abuses of international human rights law and humanitarian
law committed from 2003 to 2015. MINUSCA organized a series of workshops with
national authorities and institutions, civil society, United Nations agencies and
international partners to increase national ownership of its findings.
32. The Government adopted a road map for the operationalization of the National
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Commission, which identified steps to
prepare for an inclusive truth-seeking process. The Government adopted legislation

6/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

for the vetting of candidates for the defence and security forces. The National
Committee for the Prevention of the Crime of Genocide, War Crimes, Crimes
against Humanity and All Forms of Discrimination continued to develop its strategy
for the period 2017-2022, with MINUSCA support. MINUSCA conducted 35
workshops to raise awareness on human rights for 1,561 participants, of whom 532
were women.
33. The Mission continued to apply the United Nations human rights due diligence
policy in its support for national security forces. It conducted 25 risk assessments of
planned support for national internal security forces; support was authorized for
18 cases, and mitigation measures were recommended.
Conflict-related sexual violence
34. MINUSCA received reports of 55 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence,
affecting 53 women and 33 girls, with 43 incidents involving rape, 8 involving
sexual assault and 4 involving forced marriages. The following were allegedly
responsible for the highest number of incidents: ex-Séléka factions (17), the
MPC/RJ coalition (11), anti-balaka factions (10) and others (17).
35. On 14 June, the Government inaugurated a rapid intervention and sexual
violence prevention unit. The unit was trained and a sexual violence referral system
developed, and public awareness-raising efforts were carried out in Bangui and
Bouar, all with United Nations support.
Children and armed conflict
36. On 21 September, the Government ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. During the reporting period, 863 children (20 per cent of whom were girls)
entered reintegration programmes led by the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) and partners, after having separated from anti-balaka (74 per cent), MPC
(12 per cent) and RJ (14 per cent) armed groups.
37. On 23 September, following the issuance by FPRC of a command directive
prohibiting the recruitment and use of children and ordering their separation from
the group in May, the FPRC/MPC coalition formally released 74 children, including
48 girls, in Kaga Bandoro. The country task force on monitoring and reporting
initiated a dialogue with self-defence groups from the PK5 district of Bangui to
promote the safe and orderly release of all children, which resulted in the
identification of 865 children.

B.

Sustainably reducing the presence of, and the threat posed by,
armed groups
Reconciliation and extension of State authority
38. MINUSCA and IOM facilitated several “peace caravans” and sensitization
campaigns bringing high-level government officials to areas at risk or affected by
violence for direct talks with the population and local officials. The Mission
supported formal and ad hoc local conflict resolution and reconciliation initiatives.
Together with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), MINUSCA
continued to assist the Ministry of Social Affairs and National Reconciliation in
forming a nationwide network of peace and reconciliation committees; 10 were
established in Bangui and in three neighbouring localities. Separately, ad hoc peace
committees continued to operate in 12 locations, assisting in the de -escalation of
active conflict, such as in Bangassou and Batangafo, and helped to implement

17-17476

7/22

S/2017/865

measures aimed at preventing potential crises, as in Bambari, Berberati, Kaga
Bandoro and Ndélé. They helped to bridge gaps where other State structures do not
exist, such as in Bria, and contributed to improvements in the lives of civi lians, such
as by reopening the Bambari central market.
39. The pace of the deployment of State authority remained slow, constrained by
high turnover, lack of training, scarce financial and logistical resources and the
security situation. The Government, with support from MINUSCA and UNDP, was
developing a road map defining priority geographical areas and public and financial
services with a view to restoring State authority.
40. Moderate progress was achieved in Bambari. As of September, there were 373
civil servants in the town, including teachers, health workers, magistrates and
internal security forces. MINUSCA worked with partners to rehabilitate six
administrative buildings.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
41. Pending broad political agreement to back the implementation of the national
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme, the
Government launched a pilot project on 30 August. A total of 230 project
participants from 14 armed groups will be reintegrated into civilian life, and 230
will be trained by the European Union Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic for integration into the national armed forces. The project’s
disarmament and demobilization phase for Bangui was completed on 7 September,
with 140 combatants from eight armed groups participating.
42. Community violence reduction programmes continued at the community level
through the engagement of ineligible combatants. In Bangui, 1,900 beneficiaries
participated in vocational and agricultural training. In Ouham -Pendé prefecture,
7,000 beneficiaries, including almost 5,000 women, engaged in labour -intensive
community projects. In June, pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes were transformed into community violence reduction initiatives such as
longer-term income-generating activities, supporting more than 4,000
ex-combatants, including 737 women.
43. During the reporting period, 162 items of unexploded ordnance and 425
rounds of small arms ammunition collected through the pre-disarmament,
demobilization an reintegration process were destroyed.
Security sector reform
44. Significant progress was achieved with the signing of a national defence plan
by President Touadera on 11 September. The plan foresees a 9,800-strong defence
force by 2021, drawing from the existing workforce of 8,548, which will itself be
reduced through vetting and retirement. National authorities resumed the simplified
verification process. During the reporting period, 2,437 members of the Central
African armed forces were verified, for a total of nearly 5,800 personnel verified to
date; more than 800 were found to be eligible for retirement. The plan envisages a
garrison-based army and the organization of the armed forces into four military
zones. In addition, it includes a new concept for the employment of the armed
forces.
45. The Ministry of Defence drafted a plan for the deployment of armed forces
battalions trained by the European Union Military Training Missio n, with the
support of the Training Mission and MINUSCA, although a number of critical
aspects required to reach a sufficient level of effectiveness, such as logistical and
operational support, had yet to be defined. On 12 June, President Touadera
8/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

inaugurated the new armed forces training centre in Bouar, which had been
rehabilitated by MINUSCA.
46. MINUSCA continued to support the management of weapons and ammunition
through training and the completion of seven infrastructure projects. A road map for
the operationalization of the National Commission on Small Arms and Light
Weapons was adopted by national authorities on 11 July.
47. The Ministers of Defence and the Interior signed a decree on 31 August,
selecting 250 candidates for recruitment as police officers and 250 for recruitment
as gendarmerie officers, with MINUSCA support. Following assessments, 700
candidates (23 per cent of whom were women) were shortlisted, representing all
regions except Haute-Kotto and Mbomou prefectures, where recent violence had
prevented assessments. The quota for candidates from those prefectures will be
increased for the 2018 recruitment effort. MINUSCA supported the screening
process.
Rule of law and efforts to combat impunity
48. Progress was made in operationalizing the Special Criminal Court with
support from MINUSCA and UNDP. Seven out of the 11 international and national
magistrates to lead investigation and prosecution activities were deployed. The
Special Prosecutor began to develop the prosecutorial strategy, in consultation with
ordinary courts and the International Criminal Court, and the victim and witness
programme. Twenty judicial police officers and the deputy international registrar
were selected and are awaiting nomination. Although funding has been secur ed for
the initial operationalization of the Court, a significant gap remains in terms of
ensuring that it can sustain investigations and prosecutions until the end of 2019.
49. Using its urgent temporary measures, MINUSCA apprehended 48 alleged
perpetrators of, inter alia, incitement to hatred, illegal possession of firearms and
criminal conspiracy. At the request of the Government, and owing to the lack of
judicial and penitentiary infrastructure outside the capital, MINUSCA supported the
transfer of 32 of those apprehended to prison facilities in Bangui, although those
facilities remain significantly overcrowded. The Ngaragba central prison and its
annex at Camp de Roux are at 196 per cent and 145 per cent, respectively, of
capacity. MINUSCA provided advice on investigations and judicial proceedings
against those 32 individuals, as well as against 13 FPRC members who had been
indicted in March on counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
50. MINUSCA and UNDP jointly supported efforts to improve access to justice
and the deployment by the Ministry of Justice of magistrates throughout the country.
Fourteen courts were operational outside Bangui. The security situation prevented
the redeployment of judicial actors in the east. National authorities endorsed the
national strategy on legal aid and finalized the review of the draft law on legal aid,
with the support of MINUSCA and UNDP. A third legal aid clinic was opened in
Bossangoa, in addition to those in Bangui and Bria.
51. Prison officials at Ngarabga prison and its annex at Camp de Roux prevented
or managed several major incidents, including a large prison disturbance, a planned
hostage-taking and a mass escape, benefiting from the Mission’s monitoring and
training. The Government developed an outreach strategy for 300 national
corrections recruits, with MINUSCA support, as part of its efforts to demilitarize
national prisons.

17-17476

9/22

S/2017/865

Natural resources management
52. The Government began to develop a national strategy for the establishment of
a multisectoral coordination mechanism to combat the illicit trafficking of natural
resources, with MINUSCA support. Within the framework of the Kimberley
Process, an independent auditor for the inspection of diamond stockpiles was
designated, while the Government took steps to strengthen the Ministry of Mines,
Energy and Water Resources.

C.

Coordination of international assistance and the Mutual
Engagement Framework
53. The Government established mechanisms for the implementation of the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the Mutual Engagement Framework,
as well as a technical committee chaired by the Prime Minister. The two remaining
technical-level coordination groups, for the second pillar (the social contract) and
the third pillar (economic recovery) of the Plan, became operational in June and
July, respectively. The first pillar (peace, security and reconciliation) has
implemented 33 per cent of its strategic activities to date. The steering committee,
chaired by President Touadera, met on 19 July and 11 September to assess progress,
including the provision of support to Bambari, and took action on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration pilot project and on the equipping and
redeployment of the Central African armed forces.
54. Out of the $2.28 billion pledged at the Brussels Conference in November
2016, 87 per cent of the funds were confirmed for the period 2017 -2019. The
anticipated rate of the delivery of those funds is currently 21 per cent, reflecting
challenges to the State’s implementation capacity.

IV. Humanitarian situation
55. The humanitarian situation deteriorated significantly during the reporting
period, with an increased number of people in need over a wider geographical area.
Armed clashes engulfed territories that had been relatively stable, including Basse Kotto, Haut-Mbomou and Mbomou; 14 of the 16 provinces hosted people in need of
assistance. The upsurge in violence caused the number of internally displaced
persons in the country in 2017 to increase by 50 per cent (200,000), bringing the
total to almost 600,000 at 84 sites and with host families. The number of refugees
surpassed 500,000, bringing the total of people displaced — internally or abroad —
to more than 1.1 million, the highest ever recorded for the country.
56. Half of Central Africans, 2.4 million in total, require humanitarian assistance,
representing one of the highest proportions of those in need per capita worldwide.
Nearly 1.1 million people require food assistance across the country. Humanitarian
partners continue to assist some 700,000 persons, includi ng some 400,000 internally
displaced people, through general food distributions, nutritional interventions and
early recovery initiatives. Global acute malnutrition has reached critical levels.
57. Despite the staggering needs, humanitarian activities rema in severely
underfunded. As at 18 September, only 30 per cent of the revised Humanitarian
Response Plan for 2017 had been funded, despite sustained efforts to mobilize
donors.
58. The Central African Republic continues to be one of the most dangerous
places to work for humanitarian actors, who have been frequently targeted by armed

10/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

groups. As at 18 September, 11 humanitarian workers had been killed in armed
attacks.
59. The deterioration in the security situation has led to the shrinking of
humanitarian space in the country. This requires an increase in assistance by air and
the creation of hubs and surge teams that are quickly deployable to improve
responsiveness to nascent crises.

V. Socioeconomic developments
60. During the reporting period, mounting insecurity disrupted farming activities
and cattle-breeding, which may result in a setback compared with 2016 figures.
Growth has the potential to improve during the 2017 rainy season as a result of
steady investment in agriculture, especially in certain rural areas near Bangui that
are deemed stable. Manufacturing industries experienced a shaky rebound, showing
an 11 per cent increase in the production of cigarettes and 2.8 per cent increases in
the manufacturing of household goods and in brewery production. As a result of the
reopening of the cotton-processing factory in Bossangoa in February, a promising
horizon is forecast for cotton producers.

VI. Mandate renewal
61. Given the forthcoming end of the current MINUSCA mandate period, and
pursuant to resolution 2301 (2016), the Secretariat and the Mission conducted an
assessment in the light of the evolving context, with a view to developing
recommendations on the mandate for the succeeding perio d for the Security
Council’s consideration. The assessment found that, since late 2016, the security
situation had progressively deteriorated outside Bangui, with growing sectarian
violence and a heightened risk of ethnic cleansing in parts of the country. The
violence had unfolded despite the launch of a number of peace initiatives and
Government-led efforts to implement the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration agreement reached at the Bangui Forum. The lack of coherence
between various peace initiatives had limited the ability to create an inclusive
political process in which the grievances of armed groups could be addressed.
62. Competition over the control of territory and access to natural resources, as
well as power-sharing aspirations, had led to a further fragmentation of armed
groups and a proliferation of armed self-defence groups. The spreading use of
incendiary rhetoric had heightened the risk of mass atrocities. The Muslim
population was increasingly stigmatized as “foreign”. The dynamics of the conflict,
previously characterized by clashes between armed groups, were now exacerbated
by growing intercommunal violence along ethnic and religious lines. The violence
had expanded geographically, particularly to the south-east, a region hitherto spared
from conflict. The evolving nature of the conflict had exacted a heavy toll on
civilians, humanitarian actors and MINUSCA, which had suffered increased attacks,
with 12 peacekeepers killed as a result of hostile acts since January.
63. During the reporting period, MINUSCA was largely successful in
implementing its mandate to protect civilians, particularly by securing Bambari. It
made some progress towards reducing the presence and the threat of armed groups,
as previously reported. However, changing conflict dynamics and the geographical
spread of violence and attacks on civilians exposed the limits of the overall political
and operational response of MINUSCA, including its mobile and robust posture.
The Mission’s efforts to adapt to the evolving situation were compromised by the
spiralling violence owing to the lack of a comprehensive peace agreement or
17-17476

11/22

S/2017/865

another form of political arrangement between the Government and armed groups.
This, compounded by the lack of national capacity and ownership, compromised the
sustainability of MINUSCA efforts in many areas, particularly disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the extension of State authority. The fact that
the Mission’s resources were already over-engaged hampered its ability to
simultaneously prevent and respond to all incidents in a widening geographical area,
while holding ground that it had previously stabilized.
64. In the light of the above, MINUSCA should prioritize its efforts in some areas
under a renewed mandate, while streamlining and making adjustments in others. It
should focus on its core peacekeeping tasks and prioritize support for the national
and local political process, augment its capacity to protect civilians and facilitate the
creation of a secure environment for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The
Mission should streamline its other mandated tasks and/or adjust how it implements
them. The leveraging of the comparative advantages of MINUSCA, the United
Nations country team and other partners would be a particularly effective way to
facilitate such changes.
65. A stronger security strategy is essential to support the political process,
degrade threats, prevent further conflict and better protect civilians. Such a strategy
should seek to continue to optimize the current uniformed capabilities of
MINUSCA, including by further improving performance, flexibility and mobility,
while seeking an increase in the Mission’s authorized troop ceiling to shore up the
strategy. MINUSCA should use its urgent temporary measures proactively and
enhance support for investigations and prosecutions, while reporting to the Security
Council on any obstruction to the effective implementation of those measures.
Recommended tasks under a renewed mandate
Good offices and support for the peace process
66. The adoption of the road map for the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, under national leadership and with the support of all key
stakeholders, offers an opportunity for more coherent, effe ctive support for the
peace process. It is therefore recommended that MINUSCA, through its good
offices, enhance its support for inclusive political dialogue, in partnership with the
African Union and under the leadership of the Government. To that end, th e Mission
should work with the members of the Initiative and other mediation actors to
support the Government’s efforts at the national and local levels and the increased
participation of political parties, civil society and women. This should be backed by
a stronger communications strategy on the part of the Government to engage the
population. Together with partners, MINUSCA should help to ensure that national
and local processes provide a framework for new security and political
arrangements, which could include ceasefires, disarmament and administrative
mechanisms that reflect the country’s diversity. In a context of growing
intercommunal violence, MINUSCA should promote a greater focus on national
reconciliation and support local conflict resolution. The Mission should also be
mandated to monitor and report on public incidents of incitement to hatred,
intolerance and violence, which could be supported through the strengthening of the
sanctions regime to hold accountable the instigators of political viole nce and those
obstructing the political process.
67. MINUSCA should support national authorities in addressing transitional
justice as part of the peace and reconciliation process. This could include the
provision of advice on the design and implementation of comprehensive, gendersensitive transitional justice mechanisms based on human rights principles. It could

12/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

also integrate various ongoing efforts in the justice area, including the Special
Criminal Court and the establishment of a truth and reconciliation committee.
68. MINUSCA, in coordination with the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), should continue to seek the sustained support of the
subregion for the peace process by proactively engaging neighbouring countries and
subregional organizations. MINUSCA and UNOCA should also continue to work
with subregional partners to address cross-border security issues, including the
illegal flows of small arms and weapons.
Protection of civilians
69. The protection of civilians, including, as needed, through the use of force, will
remain a priority task. The Mission should enhance early warning and upstream
prevention, including for pre-emptive operations. If emerging threats are identified,
the Mission should also deploy temporary multidisciplinary teams to respond and
reinforce local capacity for conflict resolution. Taking into account governmental
responsibility for protecting civilians, the role of other partners, and the limited
capacity of any peacekeeping operation to protect civilians throughout a country,
MINUSCA should ensure that political and security strategies for the protection of
civilians involve the Government, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other partners, also as part of an overall strateg y for the
progressive transfer to national authorities of the responsibility to protect civilians,
including the provision of security. MINUSCA should accelerate the gradual
transition of its security functions to national forces where the security situati on
permits and without prejudice to its mandate to protect civilians, and also as a way
to project force and greater security across a larger part of the country and as a key
component of the Mission’s eventual exit.
Extension of State authority, including the rule of law
70. MINUSCA should continue to support the Government in implementing the
latter’s strategy for the extension of State authority. In the light of the evolving
context, the need for sustainable efforts, and the Mission’s priorities, MI NUSCA,
the United Nations country team and relevant partners should articulate a clear
division of labour based on mandates and comparative advantage. This would allow
MINUSCA to focus on immediate-, short- and medium-term priorities, while
handing over responsibility for longer-term activities to relevant partners.
MINUSCA should continue to support the Special Criminal Court, while reinforcing
the capacities of ordinary courts and police to address serious crimes. It should also
reduce the scope of its activities by sequencing its efforts on priorities and in
targeted geographical areas where it can have the greatest impact, taking into
account sustainability, the presence of other partners, and lessons learned in
Bambari.
71. MINUSCA should provide advice to the Government on interim security and
administrative arrangements that are acceptable to the population and under
government oversight. The aim should be to reduce the number of armed
confrontations, enhance the protection of civilians and help to st rengthen or restore
State authority where it is weak or non-existent.
Security sector reform
72. At the normative and strategic levels, MINUSCA should prioritize support for
the establishment of a superior council of national security and stronger
parliamentary oversight. At the operational level, the recently adopted national
defence plan provides a strategic framework for the rebuilding of the Central
17-17476

13/22

S/2017/865

African armed forces. The draft concept of the deployment of armed forces
battalions trained by the European Union Military Training Mission establishes a
framework for coordination between national authorities and international
stakeholders. On those bases, MINUSCA should explore providing further support
to these trained units of the armed forces, taking into account operational and
protection imperatives and as an element of its exit strategy. Such su pport could be
facilitated through a memorandum of understanding or similar arrangement, aimed
at enabling the forces to reach a sufficient level of operational capability as quickly
as possible. The details and mechanisms should be identified by MINUSCA t ogether
with the Government, the European Union and other relevant partners, particularly
donors, taking into account the forces’ lack of equipment and sustainment.
73. Support provided to the Central African armed forces should be implemented
in accordance with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy.
MINUSCA support must also be accompanied by concrete commitments on the part
of national civilian and military authorities that they will ensure that such
deployments are sustainable, do not pose a risk to the stabilization of the country, to
civilians or to the political process, and will strengthen government oversight and
command and control. It will also require greater commitment to transform the
armed forces into an ethnically representative and geographically balanced army.
The Government, MINUSCA and the European Union Military Training Mission
should formulate detailed benchmarks, with timelines, for the gradual deployment
of the trained units. MINUSCA should also support the Government i n
strengthening the institutional capacity of the national police and gendarmerie, in
accordance with the five-year capacity-building and development plan for internal
security forces (2016-2020), particularly command and control structures and
oversight mechanisms, as well as support the deployment of the police and
gendarmerie in priority areas, including through co -location, advice, mentoring and
monitoring, in coordination with other partners such as the European Union, the
United Nations country team and bilateral partners.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
74. In the light of increased intercommunal violence and the proliferation of self defence groups, MINUSCA should focus on gender-sensitive community violence
reduction projects in close coordination with development partners. It should
implement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration projects only where
feasible, as an incentive to armed groups to remain engaged in the political process
and in preparation for the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.
Promotion and protection of human rights
75. While carrying out its current mandate, MINUSCA, with the United Nations
country team, should support the Government in following up on the
recommendations set out in the human rights mapping report and its use by the
Special Criminal Court to inform national and international strategies and actions to
fight impunity.
Natural resources management
76. In recognition of the continued critical importance of addressing natural
resources as a conflict driver and of the harnessing by the Government of its
revenue and tax base, the Mission should exercise its comparative advantages in
tackling the illicit exploitation of natural resources as part of a broader strategy, the
development of which should be led by the Government and its main development
partners.
14/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

Military component
77. As indicated in paragraph 27 above, the Mission has taken steps to optimize its
deployment in response to the increased needs arising from the deteriorating
security situation. In addition, MINUSCA is taking and will continue to take robust
measures to enhance performance. All of the Mission’s military resources are fully
engaged, which has left it with no spare military capacity and no further avenues for
reconstituting reserves or addressing current and emerging hotspots within its
current troop ceiling. MINUSCA and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
reviewed the Mission’s military capabilities using the updated threat and conflict
analysis, determining that it required a minimum of six addition al infantry
companies in the current context.
78. I therefore recommend an increase of 900 military personnel. The proposed
additional personnel would comprise (a) two infantry companies (300 troops) to
reinforce the military footprint of two battalions in the east and the centre; and
(b) one battalion (600 troops) in the centre and the east as part of the Force
Commander’s reserve.
79. In practical terms, the additional troops and capabilities would not allow
MINUSCA to protect all civilians in the country. They would, however, provide the
force with greater flexibility to rapidly deploy available troops to address threats
posed to civilians in priority geographical areas, while reinforcing its pre -emptive
and reactive postures, particularly in the centre and the south-east, which are areas
of heightened threat to civilians. The reinforcement of existing battalions would
give the force more room to manoeuvre with respect to the tasking and employment
of troops, particularly in priority geographical areas, b y freeing up the special forces
and the quick-reaction force for more proactive operations, and would increase its
ability to shape and influence security situations, rather than react to them. In the
medium to longer term, the impact of the additional tro ops would be threefold. After
containing the security situation, the Mission would work to reverse it by regaining
balance and initiative vis-a-vis the armed groups. This would enhance its ability to
hold ground in areas cleared of armed groups and expand its coverage. Second, the
Mission would help create conditions allowing the political process to unfold by
reducing gains from armed group activity. Finally, the force would help to create
favourable conditions for the deployment of State administration an d the delivery of
services in priority areas, as well as the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Police component
80. To support the redeployed national police and gendarmerie, MINUSCA should
seek to increase its formed police footprint outside Bangui, particularly in Berberati
and Bossangoa. This would help to protect civilians and facilitate the gradual return
of internally displaced persons and refugees. To do so, MINUSCA should accelerate
the handover of security for key officials and the static guard duties of national
institutions in Bangui to national defence and security forces. This should be
complemented by converting one protection support unit into a formed police unit.
As the security situation evolves, the Mission should review the establ ished
command-and-control structure of the joint task force in order to enhance the
operational performance of police contingents. A rebalancing of the strength of the
military and police components should eventually be considered if the security
situation allows.

17-17476

15/22

S/2017/865

VII. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military (including capacities)
81. As at 5 October, MINUSCA had deployed 10,658 military personnel (99 per
cent of the authorized strength of 10,750), comprising 11 infantry battalions, a
special forces company, a quick-reaction force company, an unmanned aerial
vehicle unit and several enabling units, namely, a military police company, four
engineering companies, a heavy-transport company, three level II hospitals, a signal
company and three helicopter units, including a combat helicopter unit. Women
constituted 2 per cent of military personnel. Troop-contributing countries continued
to improve the equipment of their respective contingents and self -sustainment. The
multiplying hotspots, however, had led to a proliferation of temporary and
permanent operating bases, which had weakened the tro ops’ projected strength. The
Mission had developed night-capable helicopter landing sites in Bambari,
Bangassou, Berberati, Bossangoa, Bria, Ndélé and Paoua, in addition to the two
already in Bangui.

B.

Police
82. As at 5 October, MINUSCA had deployed 1,968 police personnel (94.61 per
cent of the authorized strength of 2,080), comprising 295 individual police officers
(73.75 per cent of the authorized strength of 400, owing largely to difficulties in
generating specialized recruitment profiles) and 12 formed police units, comprising
1,673 personnel (99.58 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,680), including 103
women. A total of 81 individual police officers were deployed in 10 locations
outside Bangui, while four formed police units were deployed in Bambari, Bouar,
Bria and Kaga Bandoro, respectively, and half of a formed police unit was
temporarily deployed in Bangassou.

C.

Civilian personnel
83. As at 5 October, MINUSCA had deployed 1,386 civilian personnel (79 per
cent of a total of 1,747 authorized positions (798 international, 695 national and 254
United Nations Volunteer)). Women constituted 24 per cent of civilian personnel
overall and 21 per cent of such personnel in senior positions at the P -5 level or
above. The recruitment and retention of female staff, including United Nations
Volunteers, remains extremely challenging.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
84. During the reporting period, MINUSCA continued to deal with issues related
to the implementation of the status-of-forces agreement, including with the Central
African customs office on the import of goods and materials for the Mission and
national telecommunications officials, who had attempted to impose fees on the
issuance of toll-free telephone numbers. Those issues were resolved through
communication on a regular basis between the Mission and the Government,
including by way of an established status-of-forces working group led by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The reimbursement to the United Nations of fuel taxes
that had been imposed on MINUSCA and United Nations agencies in 2015 and
2016, contrary to the agreement, was accepted by the Government, which

16/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

acknowledged that the fees paid constituted charges from which MINUSCA and
United Nations agencies were exempted.

VIII. Safety and security of United Nations staff
85. The security situation remained challenging for all categories of United
Nations personnel. Demonstrations and carjackings took place in Bangui and the
surrounding area during the reporting period. Across the country in recent months,
both national and international personnel received kidnapping threats. Armed actors
directly targeted United Nations premises and convoys, particularly in the south -east
and the centre. During the reporting period, 154 o f the recorded security incidents
directly involved United Nations personnel, including 10 peacekeepers who lost
their lives (4 as a result of hostile activities, 3 owing to accidents, 2 reportedly as a
result of suicide and 1 as a result of illness) and 16 who were seriously injured
(12 as a result of hostile activities and 4 owing to accidents). Many attacks were
committed against humanitarian workers, and United Nations personnel were
relocated for extended periods because of elevated risk levels.

IX. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
86. There was a progressive reduction in the number of allegations made during
the reporting period, with 4 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
MINUSCA forces being made, compared with 14 in the previous period. The four
allegations are currently pending investigation by the relevant troop -contributing
country and the United Nations. MINUSCA, in cooperation with United Nations
agencies and implementing partners, enhanced prevention efforts and the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy by conducting
ongoing risk assessments and implementing mitigating measures, promoting strict
non-fraternization policies and continued training for all personnel as well as
journalists and governmental and non-governmental organizations. MINUSCA has
conducted a refresher training programme for its immediate response team, which is
able to respond quickly to reports of sexual exploitation and abuse and gather and
preserve evidence pending investigation. The Mission has also established an
emergency action team on sexual exploitation and abuse to provide advice, monitor
and implement immediate actions. In addition to the process led by United Nations
Headquarters under Security Council resolution 2272 (2016), by the end of the first
quarter of 2018, MINUSCA will conduct a critical assessment of the effectiveness
and performance of troops, to examine whether there are linkages between their
performance and conduct. With regard to support for victims, MINUSCA
established a network of 36 humanitarian organizations to receive complaints of
sexual exploitation and abuse and established a Mission-wide emergency action
team to advise on and monitor the implementation of immediate remedies.
MINUSCA established victim assistance protocols with service providers, including
UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund, to ensure that all victims are
supported and assisted within 24 to 72 hours of the receipt of an allegation,
including through counselling and emergency medical assistance. On 23 July, the
Secretary-General appointed Jane Connors as Victims’ Rights Advocate to
strengthen the assistance provided by the United Nations system and its partners, as
well as access to justice for victims, including in the Central African Republic.

17-17476

17/22

S/2017/865

X. Financial aspects
87. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/299, appropriated the amount of
$882.8 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the period from 1 July 2017 to
30 June 2018. As at 18 September 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the
Special Account for MINUSCA amounted to $196.3 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$2,799.0 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made
for the period up to 31 July 2017, while reimbursement of the cost of contingent owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

XI. Observations and recommendations
88. Following the end of the political transition more than a year ago, the Central
African Republic had seemed to be recovering steadily from its deep crisis. It is
tragic that the deterioration in the security situation in recent months, particularly in
the south-east, has put the country back into a cycle of violence, despite the efforts
of many to prevent the conflict from escalating. Civilians have suffered the brunt of
that violence. Entire communities have been torn apart. Armed groups have
fragmented and expanded their areas of control. Intercommunal tensions have risen,
fuelled by a broad, deliberate campaign of misinformation designed to inflame
communities and undermine peace and stability. If this trend continues, there is a
serious risk that the situation will worsen, with potentially catastrophic
consequences for the people, the country and the subregion. This would be
unacceptable.
89. The window of opportunity for reversing this senseless spiral of violence and
hatred is rapidly shrinking. Seizing it demands urgent, decisive and coherent action
on the part of all stakeholders, particularly national ones. It is in this context that I
co-chaired, with President Touadera and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and in partnership with ECCAS, the European Union and the World
Bank, the high-level meeting on the political, security and humanitarian situation in
the Central African Republic, held on the margins of the seventy -second session of
the General Assembly. It provided President Touadera with an opportunity to
articulate his strong determination to bridge internal divides and take immediate
actions, in partnership with the international community, to prevent the country
from sliding back into full-blown conflict.
90. I welcome the steps taken by President Touadera to overcome political
divisions in the lead-up to the high-level meeting. Those efforts must rapidly be
translated into tangible reductions in violence and bring all Central Africans
together to chart a path to peace. I would recall the responsibility of all national
stakeholders and institutions to prevent conflict, protect civilians and work in
unison to promote inclusivity and advance reconciliation. Political stakeholders
must put their people and country before opportunistic interests.
91. I am shocked at the continued use of hateful discourse, aimed at provoking
sectarian violence, by those who should be working to heal the nation’s wounds and
prevent further violence. I am equally troubled by the continued activities of a rmed
and criminal groups that prey on civilians and destroy their country. This is
shameful and must stop. I hope that the Security Council will take decisive action to
hold accountable those who are inciting violence and hatred and obstructing the
peace process. Communities themselves must set aside their differences, recalling
our shared humanity, and reject those who espouse hateful discourse. In addition,
18/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

members of armed groups and others must immediately honour their pledges to
cease hostilities and attacks on civilians, end forced displacement and stop using
arms to secure political and economic gains.
92. Support from the international community, including the United Nations, will
never be successful without the full, unified commitment and engageme nt of Central
African authorities at all levels. Central Africans hold the primary responsibility for
peace and stability in their country. Time is of the essence. I therefore call on the
President, his Government and all Central Africans to seize the mome ntum
generated by the high-level meeting to strengthen their ownership of the peace and
recovery process, improve governance and accelerate the delivery of tangible peace
dividends. The United Nations will continue to lend its full support to such efforts.
but cannot and should not replace the role of Central Africans themselves.
93. I am hopeful that the launch of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation and the formation of its panel of facilitators will reinvigorate the
peace process. The United Nations stands ready to support the Initiative. I call on
the Government of the Central African Republic and members of the Initiative to
accelerate their efforts, while ensuring that peace efforts are as inclusive as possible,
with the participation not only of armed groups, but of all sectors of society. I wish
to reaffirm the determination of the United Nations to work in partnership with the
African Union, under the leadership of the Government, to secure local and national
agreements that contribute to the stabilization of the security situation, the extension
and restoration of State authority, and more inclusive and accountable governance
mechanisms.
94. The renewed momentum for the building of genuine and inclusive dialogue
must be accompanied by adequate security. While national authorities, supported by
international partners, have made notable progress, the State remains absent from
large portions of the territory. The escalation and spread of armed confrontations
and violence across the country has often left MINUSCA overstretched and thinly
dispersed, unable to respond to emerging security demands, thus allowing space for
armed groups to proliferate and foment further conflict. MINUSCA has made
considerable efforts to adjust its posture and deployments and generate additional
capacities within its ceiling. The Mission has reached its limit. Increasing the troop
ceiling will facilitate a more effective response in some areas. The Mission will also
continue to take appropriate measures to increase the performance and robustness of
the force. However, a word of caution: a peacekeeping operation cannot replace a
State or stabilize an entire country alone. It is a shared undertaking between all
national actors and international partners.
95. The National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the Mutual Engagement
Framework will remain at the centre of the engagement of the United Nations
system. The Mission will continue to engage national authorities to implement the
national strategy for security sector reform and promote an inclusive, nationally led
reform process. I welcome the progress made in selecting the 500 police and
gendarmerie officers and call on national authorities to sustain their efforts to build
and deploy an effective police and gendarmerie force that bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of law and order.
96. I am encouraged by the progress made in adopting a framework for the gradual
reoperationalization of the national armed forces. I urge national authorities to take
the measures necessary to ensure that their redeployment outside Bangui does not
constitute a threat to the population or the political process. This will require
improved capacity to sustain and command security forces in the field and to
transform them into ethnically representative and geographically balanced forces. I
welcome the launch of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration pilot
17-17476

19/22

S/2017/865

project, with the support of the European Union Military Training Mission, as an
important confidence-building measure for the political process, the reduction of
violence and the eventual launch of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration programme. I welcome the support provided by the Training
Mission in the area of defence sector reform and encourage the international
community to increase support for the further strengthening of the national armed
forces.
97. The need for justice, and the demand of Central Africans to end impunity as
expressed at the Bangui Forum, need to be clearly artic ulated to ensure
accountability for the gravest crimes and redress for victims. Transitional justice
mechanisms should form part of the peace process to strengthen national cohesion
and reconciliation. I urge national authorities to develop a vision of tra nsitional
justice that incorporates the various ongoing efforts in this area, including those
relating to the Special Criminal Court and the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation committee. MINUSCA will enhance its efforts to arrest those most
responsible for obstructing the peace process as well as those who have committed
the most serious crimes against civilians and international actors.
98. Unless it is accompanied by early recovery, economic and development
initiatives, as promoted in the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, progress
in stabilizing the security situation will remain fragile. It is critical that international
partners remain engaged in support of national authorities at a time of competing
demands and scarce resources. The international community must not disengage at
this crucial juncture. As efforts to protect civilians and advance the political process
continue, recovery efforts are more important than ever for the sustainable return of
internally displaced persons and refugees to their areas of origin and to give a
chance to a new generation of Central Africans to envision a future free from
violence.
99. I am appalled by the continued attacks on peacekeepers and aid workers, both
international and national. I condemn in the strongest terms the cowardly attacks
that killed 4 peacekeepers and wounded 12. Those attacks constitute serious crimes
under international law, and I call for the perpetrators to be held accountable.
100. The humanitarian situation in the country is of grave concern. I cannot stress
enough the importance of the full engagement of the international community to
support efforts of the United Nations system and humanitarian partners to address it.
Available resources are limited. Current funding gaps must b e urgently addressed in
order to attend to the most basic needs of a growing segment of the population. The
increasing obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid in parts of the country are
simply unacceptable. I call on Central African authorities and particularly the armed
groups to ensure that humanitarian actors are granted safe and unhindered access to
all parts of the country.
101. On the basis of the findings outlined in the present report, I recommend that
the Security Council extend the mandate of MINUSCA for a period of one year,
until 15 November 2018, with an authorized troop ceiling of 11,650 military
personnel, including 480 military observers and staff officers, an authorized strength
of 2,080 police personnel, including 400 individual police officers and 1,680 formed
police unit personnel, and 108 corrections officers.
102. I also recommend that MINUSCA focus on its core peacekeeping tasks by
prioritizing its support for the political process at all levels, while augmenting its
capacity to protect civilians and facilitate the creation of a secure environment for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Therefore, I recommend that the Security
Council prioritize, streamline, adjust and augment the mandate of MINUSCA as
described in paragraphs 66 to 80 above. The political and conflict prevention
20/22

17-17476

S/2017/865

approach reflected in those recommendations requires an equivalent augmentation
of the Mission’s security strategy. This will not by itself guarantee the full
protection of civilians throughout the country. It is aimed at enabling the Mission to
enhance its capacity to prevent a further deterioration in the security situation while
creating space for the political process to advance.
103. MINUSCA must also continue to work towards improving its own
accountability and to implement the United Nations zero -tolerance policy with
respect to sexual exploitation and abuse. Progress was achieved with a reduction in
the number of allegations. I urge the Mission to continually improve its efforts to
prevent, deter and punish acts of sexual exploitation and abuse and to take all
measures possible to care for victims.
104. There have been many attempts to address the cycle of violence. It is my view
that if we stay the course, with a committed national leadership to advance inclusive
politics and responsible good governance and a well-coordinated and coherent
international response, the country will have a real chance to prevent a further
relapse into violence and to sustain peace. The Central African Republic must seize
the opportunity provided by the ongoing joint peace initiative under the broad
umbrella of the Mutual Engagement Framework and the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan to address the root causes of its long -term fragility.
105. I am grateful to my Special Representative, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his
unwavering dedication and leadership. I am deeply appreciative to the personnel of
MINUSCA, the United Nations country team and the troop - and police-contributing
countries for their dedication to the cause of peace in a highly challenging
environment. I am also grateful to my Special Representative for Central Africa and
Head of UNOCA, François Louncény Fall, for his role in the subregion in support
of the Central African Republic. I thank the African Union, ECCAS, the European
Union, the World Bank, international partners and non -governmental organizations
for their continued efforts to work with Central Africans towards a better future.

17-17476

21/22

S/2017/865

22/22

17-17476
