..

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

NEW

RECORDS
YEAR

.YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation

in the occupied

124) ..*....................................

1
1

Arab territories:

Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/131 15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
T’with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents .of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2124th MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 12 March 1979, at 3.30 b.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kane (Mauritania) and Mr. Fall (Senegal) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2124)
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l31 15)

4. Mr. BAFI (Iraq): Mr. President, first I should like to
congratulate you on the occasion of your assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I trust that we shall all
benefit from your wisdom and experience during our
deliberations.

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
5. The Iraqi delegation strongly supports Jordan’s
request to the Security Council to consider the most
ominous and accelerating erosion of the status of Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Arab territories in consequence of the Zionist occupation authorities’ systematic,
relentless and deliberate policy and practice of settlement, colonization and despoilation of those territories,
which constitute a grave threat to world peace and
security.

Adoption df the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13115)

6. The Israeli occupation forces have continued to
ignore United Nations resolutions and to confiscate
Palestinian territory in areas where the presence of Palestinians was considered to be illegal, in order to force the
Palestinian Arabs to abandon their homes; and they have
continued the demolition of hundreds of houses belonging to Palestinian Arabs. Moreover, the question of the
torture and ill-treatment of political prisoners is one that
cannot be emphasized enough. It is now an open secret
that Tel Aviv is trying to acquire an arsenal of nuclear
weapons. The refusal of the Zionist entity to sign the
Treaty of the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons is
confirmation of this fact. The Security Council must not
fail to bring these facts to the attention of world public
opinion.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2123rd meeting, I invite the representatives
of Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Pakistan,
Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Yemen and
Yugoslavia, as’well as the tepresentative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, to participate in the debate
without the right to vote.
At the invifatio? of the Pres$eift, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. Hum (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) tookplaces at the ColinciltableandMr.
Abde1 Meguid (Egyptj, Mr. .?aipal (India), Mr. Shemirani
(Itan), Mr. Bafi (IraqJ, Mr. Tuirhi (Lebanon), Mr. Naik
(Pakistan), h4r. Hussen (Sonitiiia), Mr. El-Choufi (Sytidn
Arab Republic), &. Erdlp (T&k&y),
Mr. AI-Haddad
(Yemen) and &. Komatftta (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at ihe sidt! of the Council Chamber.

7. Now the Ziohist authorities have launched a campaign to have Jerusalem rtcognited as t.heir capital. It
must be emphasized that such a step would be in violation
of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
The I-Ioly City of Jerusalem is the heart of the Islamic
world of 800 million people, and it is being struck by the

2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the repfesentatives of Mauritania and Senegal in which they ask to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
I

Arab nation, impose Zionist occupation on the Arab
land, ,and perpetuate the gains of aggression. In fact,
those who stand against this aggresive policy represent
the majority of the Arab nation; they,are the ones who
express the Arab nation’s spirit and aspirations. They are
the ones’who want peace, but they reject capitulation to
aggressive policies, and demand freedom and liberation
of their land from the Zionist invaders. This policy is
more realistic and more capable of being accepted and
implemented, in spite of the fact that it does not satisfy
the imperialist and Zionist forces.

Zionist invaders, who have come from all over the world.
The heedless onslaught by world Zionism should be met
and iovercome by the world community. The Zionist
occupation authorities* ongoing, unabated and heedless
policies in Jerusalem and its environs, over the past 11
years are designed to alter and eventually to obliterate the
religious, historical and national character of the Holy
City of Jerusalem.
8. The Iraqi delegation views the situation with the
most profound concern and disquiet. It is insufferable
and totally unacceptable, inasmuch as it poses a serious
threat to one of Islam’s foremost religious and historical
legacies. Furthermore, it deprives the 800 million Islamic
people of their inalienable legitimate rights to perform
one of their pivotal religious functions, functions which
they have been exercising for 1,400 years.
-.

14. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Pakistan, whom I invite to take place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
15. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Sir, on behalf of the delegation of Pakistan, and on my own behalf, it gives megreat
pleasure to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council during the current month.
Nigeria, with which my own country has throughout
enjoyed closeand friendly relations has been in the vanguard of the universal struggle against all forms of foreign domination, repression and discrimination. With
your personal commitment to the cause of justice and
freedom my delegation fully sharesthe confidence,that
under your able direction the Council will addressitself in
a realistic and affirmative manner to responding to the
deteriorating situation in the Holy City of Jerusalemand
in all the occupied Arab territories.

9. The purposeof the current Zionist aggressivepolicies
and practices in Jerusalem is to erasetotally the Islamic
and Arab legacy in the Holy City and itsenvirons, and to
squeezeout the indigenous citizens of Jerusalem-both
Moslems and Christian Arabs.
10. The Iraqi delegation views with the most profound
concern the current ongoing processof emasculation and
colonization by the Zionist occupation authorities in
Jerusalem, and regards all such measuresthat have been
taken so far or might be taken in the future as illegal and
in violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949,’ and also of the principles and precepts of
international law and United Nations resolutions.

16. I should also like to express our appreciation to
your predecessor,Ambassador Bishara of Kuwait; who
presided over the Council’s deliberations during the last
month with exemplary skill and untiring effort.

11. Iraq vehemently opposes the Muslim world being
denied its inalienable religious and historical rights and
entitlements in the Holy City of Jerusalem, in consequence of Zionist occupation, and holds that the redemption of Jerusalem can only be achieved through Zionist
forces’ immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal from Paiestine and all the occupied Arab territories
and the restoration of all the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, including their inalienable right to
return to their homes and properties, and to achieve
self-determination, national independence and sovereignty.

17. While addressing the Council on an issue which
touches the most cherishedsensibilitiesof a large segment
of mankind, we are profoundly and sadly consciousthat
Ambassador Jamil Baroody is no longer with us. In his
death, the United Nations has lost one of its most outstanding and dedicated representatives. Our deepcondolencesgo to his family and to the Government of Saudi
Arabia.
. .
18. This is not the first time that the question of the
Holy City of Jerusalemand the situation in the occupied
Arab territories is being discussedin the United Nations.
Ever since the six-day war of June 1967, the concern of
the international community to end Israeli occupation
and the mistreatment of the Palestinian inhabitants has
been extensively debated. General Assembly resolutions
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) and Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271(1969) and
298 (1971) are a testimony to the continuing concern.
evinced by the international community towards the
question of the, Holy City of Jerusalemand the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. My country, along
with other fraternal Islamic States and all peace-loving
States, played a role in the deliberations leading to the
adoption of theseresolutions.Here I wish to refer specifically to resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969), adopted at
the initiative of Pakistan, which laid down the fundamental principle that Jerusalem cannot be acquired and

12. The Iraqi delegation urges the Council to take
prompt and effective action, including the applicatibn of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to
ensure compliance with the Charter and resolutions on
this most crucial subject, and to keep the situation and
developments pertaining to Jerusalem under constant
and close scrutiny, with a view to deciding what further
stepsshould be taken to restore legitimacy and normality
to the Holy City, whose alienation would pose a serious
threat to world peace and security.
13. The Iraqi delegation views the attempts which are
now under way to go back to the so-called “Camp
David” accords as not representing a realistic policy
becausethey would impose the policy of status quoon the
’ United Nations, Treury Series. vol. 75, p.287.
2

’

annexed by the right of military’ conquest and that no,
measures and actions taken to alter in any way the status
of Jerusalem could be considered valid, Resolutions 271
(1969) and 298 (1971) reiterated these basic principles.

gings below the foundation of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, thus
threatening a sanctuary venerated by all Muslims
throughout the world; thirdly, the virtual transformation
of the 1,400-year-old holy Ibrahimi sanctuary in Hebron
into a synagogue;,fourthly, colonization by Israel of 29
per cent of the total area of the West Bank and other
occupied Arab territories; fifthly, the main water resourcesof the West Bank have been taken over by the Israeli
occupation authorities with the inevitable consequence
of driving out the indigenous Palestinian population
from their ancestral homes; sixthly, all cities, towns, villages and centres of Palestinian habitation have been
encircled and cut off from one another. The representative of Jordan very aptly describedtheseattempts-and I
quote from his statement-“systematically and relentlesslyto vivisect, isolate and cut into bits and pieceswhat
used to be a contiguous West Bank and an Arab Jerusalem” [2123rd meeting, para. 621; seventhly, the continuing proliferation of Israeli settlements, which have now
reached a total of 79 in the West Bank alone-possibly
80; eighthly, the systematic subjection of the Palestinians
to torture and ill-treatment, as detailed by the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories; and ninthly, Israel’s plans to establishpermanent
domination over vast tracts of confiscated Arab lands
and thereby to deny to the Palestinianpeople their inalienable rights. These actions are a manifest violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Personsin Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

19. The last; time the question of the Holy City of,
Jerusalem came before the Council was in March 1976,
when a draft resolution [S/12022] sponsored by Pakistan as
a member of, the Council, along with Benin, Guyana,
Panama and the.United Republic of Tanzania, called upon
Israel to respect and uphold ,the inviolability of the Holy
Places in Jerusalem under its occupation and desist from all
other actions and policies designed to change the legal status
of Jerusalem and to rescind measures already taken to that
effect. As has been pointed out by previous speakers, the
inability of the Council to adopt that draft resolution
encouraged Israel to continue its policies of military annexation, colonization of the Holy City of Jerusalem and other
occupied Arab territories and denial of the just and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
20. I have considered it necessary to give a brief resume
of the past discussions in the United Nations on the status
of the Holy ,City of Jerusalem and the situation in the
occupied Arab territories and Pakistan’s contribution to
those debates,as a demonstration of the deepand continuing attachment of the Government and the people of
Pakistan to these issues.Our participation in the present
debate is thus a further reflection of our firm belief that
durable peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved
without Israel withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalemand the restoration of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people.

23. The above actions constitute a clear and continuing
threat to international peaceand security and contribute
to a seriousworsening of the situation. The deteriorating
situation in Jerusalem and the occupied Arab territories
as a direct result of Israeli actions hasmade it imperative
for the Security Council to discharge its responsibilities
under the Charter and to take appropriate corrective and
remedial action to reverse and arrest this potentially
explosive situation. The minimum that the Council
should decide on would be to accept and implement the
three interim steps proposed by the representative of
Jordan.

21. My friend and colleague, the representative of Jordan, has given a comprehensiveaccount [2123rdmeeting]
of the ominous and accelerating erosion of the status of
the Holy City of Jerusalem and the plight of the Arab
population in the occupied territories. His lucid and welldocumented account lays bare the essential elementsof
the disturbing situation. The graphic and detailed presen-’
tation made by the representative of the PalestineLiberation Organization [ibid.] throws further light on Israeli
designson the Holy City of Jerusalem and the occupied
Arab territories. Moreover, the Council also hasbefore it
a letter from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People [S/13132] which corroborates the testimony
before the Council. These documents, as well as recent
accounts by objective and impartial sources, reveal a
consistent pattern of Israeli policies and practices of
annexation and colonization.

24. That the situation in Jerusalem touches, indeed
assaults, the most cherished sensibilities of millions of
adherentsof the three great religions around the globe is a
political fact of paramount importance. Its importance
cannot but submerge calculations of transient expediency. It is our firm conviction, as expressed in the
Lahore Islamic Summit Declaration of February 1974,
that the restoration of Jerusalem to Arab sovereignty
remains a permanent and unchangeableprerequisite for a
resolution of the Middle East conflict. The 42 Islamic
States Members of the United Nations have, in a declaration adopted recently [1314J1 expressedtheir most profound concern and disquiet at the alarming situation in
Jerusalem, which if allowed to continue would almost
totally erasethe whole Islamic and Arab legacy from the
Holy City. The declaration regards all measureswhich
have .been taken for the colonization of Jerusalem and
other occupied Arab territories, and which might be
taken in the future, as illegal and in violation of the

22. Previous speakershave already describedthesepolicies and practices in considerable detail. I would only
outline someof the more ominous of theseIsraeli actions:
first, the Holy City of Jerusalem has been expanded
15-fold through Israeli colonization and expansion,
stretching from Bethlehem in the south to the town of
Ramallah in the north, a distance of 40 kilometres-the
Holy City hasbeen deliberately reduced to a tiny enclave;
secondly,. the demolition of the sacred historical sites in
the old quarter of Jerusalem, and in particular the dig3

principles and precepts of international law and United
Nations resolutions. That declaration regards all these
measures as null and void and demands that they should be
rescinded immediately.

to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949”
and
‘6

. . . to desist forthwith
from taking any action which
would result in changing the legal status, geographical
nature or demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem”.

25. The Middle East is poised on the knifeedge of
history. A just and lasting peace in the region has proved
to be elusive. In my opening remarks I expressed the
conviction that the Council would give a realistic and
affirmative response to the deteriorating situation in the
occupied Arab territories. What is indeed unrealistic is
the assumption that Israel can continue to flout the dictates of justice, to defy world opinion and United Nations
decisions, to suppress internal dissent and for ever hold at
bay the Arab people, spurning and mistrusting their
offers of a peaceful settlement of the conflict. The imperative of peace demands a total reversal of this unrealistic
attitude.

31. However, there seems to be no sign’ that Israel
intends to abide by those provisions. On the contrary, we
are receiving every day through the mass media and other
sources fresh news about the increasing number of Israeli
settlements, demolition of houses and buildings, expropriation of land and property belonging to the Arab
people, and measures calculated to change the institutional organization of the Holy Places. Many reports and
news items indicate that such practices are being concentrated in and around the Holy City of Jerusalem, which is
sacred to the Moslem world. Reported Israeli plans to
transfer essential government offices, including those of
the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, to Fast
Jerusalem and news about the pressures being exerted on
diplomatic missions in Tel Aviv to do likewise leave little
room for optimism as to the intentions of the Israeli
Government.

26. The Government
of Pakistan has been closely
watching the progress of President Carter’s current peace
initiative in the area. I need hardly reiterate that no
lasting peace in the Middle East can be achieved without
Israeli withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories,
without the restoration of the Holy City of Jerusalem to
Arab sovereignty, and without the restoration of the
legitimate and national rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to establish a sovereign State of their
own under the leadership of their sole representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization.

32. The international community as a whole and the
Muslim people in particular cannot remain indifferent to
those developments which seem to be aiming at the ultimate annexation of the occupied territories, including
Jerusalem, by gradual assimilation.

27. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

33. Such practices undoubtedly constitute a violation
of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, as well as the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, and create a major obstacle to efforts within and
outside the Organization to promote a solution in the
Middle East. In this connexion, I should like to reiterate
my Government’s
view that the Israeli interpretation
concerning the applicability of the provisions
of the
Geneva Convention to the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories is totally unacceptable and devoid of any legal
basis.

28. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the current month and to wish you
success in leading the Council’s deliberations. Furthermore, I shauld like to thank you and the other members
of the Council for giving me the opportunity to participate in the discussions on this important question.
29. The situation in the Middle East continue to be
serious as a consequence of the fact the key issues
between the Arab States and Israel are still unresolved.

34. Turkey, as a country situated in the area, is very
seriously concerned in the peace and stability of the
Middle East. It is our sincere desire to see the realization
of a just, durable and comprehensible solution to this
problem. Our views regarding the principles and fundamentals of such a solution, as have been expressed many
times recently, are as follows: first, Israel should withdraw from the territories occupied since 1967; secondly,
the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, including their
right to establish their own State, should be recognized;
thirdly, the independence, sovereignty and security ofthe
recognized frontiers of all the countries of the region must
be safeguarded; and, finally, in the long run negotiations
for a just and lasting settlement must take place with the
participation of the PalestineLiberation Organization, the
legitimate representativeof the people of Palestine.

30. The problem that we are discussing today is one of
those key problems which deserve the utmost attention of
the international community. However, this ,problem is
not new to the United Nations. The policies and practices
of the Israeli authorities in the occupied Arab territories
have for long been a subject of discussion and bitter
criticism in various United Nations organs. We have
adopted a number of resolutions on this question, the last
of which was adopted by the General Assembly about
three months ago [resolution 33/1138]. That resolution,
which my country also joined in sponsoring, calls upon
Israel, inter alia:
‘6. . . to comply strictly with its international obligations
in accordance with the principles of international law
and the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
4

.w..

,. ‘

._

,...

,

35. We sincerely hope that any decision which may be
taken by this august body will contribute to the reahzation of a just, durable and comprehensive solution of the
problem before us.
36. Mr. ROLbN ANAYA.(Bolivia)
(interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation has followed with the same concern as everybody else in Latin America this protracted
debate on the continuing state of friction which has been
disrupting the Middle East. We now have before us the
question raised by Jordan concerning the situation in
Jerusalem and the Isaeli settlements in Arab territories.
37. We are greatly perturbed over the situation in that
region. There are several reasons for our concern. Our
concern is universalist, human and religious in nature.
Aside from the material, economic and political interests
which so inflame certain Powers, Bolivia has a tremendous
universal and human interest in the situation in the
Middle East. This interest is reflected in our relations and
integration with the Arab and Jewish peoples, which, like
all peoples of the world, found work and a home in Latin
America, and particularly in Bolivia, which is a kind of
unifying centre, the ethnic and geographical heart of
South America. There they have become part of our
general national culture, which is thus enriched by a
tremendous human wealth from all parts of the world.
They mix with and are accepted by us without any prejudices or reservations.
38. Since the nineteenth century Bolivia has been welcoming a steady flow of immigrants
from Syria,
Lebanon, Palestine and other Arab countries who have
now become truly Bolivian and who live in all parts of my
country. The Arab immigrants have now become “blood
of our blood and flesh of our flesh”, as has been said in
the past by a distinguished
representative
of Latin
America in the General Assembly.
39. At that most,difficult time when the Jewish people
were being persecuted, it was once again Bolivia which,
throughout the Second World War, opened its doors to
the immmigration of those people at the time of Nazi
persecution, inhuman excesses, racist prejudices and
imperialist and colonialist domination, which we all
thought had been crushed, in a great glow of universal
sanity, when we signed the Charter of the Organization in
1945.
40. Thus, like all the rest of Latin America, Bolivia’s
vigorous ancestral Latin stock was enriched, not only by
people from Europe, from and through the motherland
of Spain, but also by people and races from all other parts
of the world. It is because of their universal and human
condition that the people of Bolivia have adopted a universal approach. Our people, along with a strong indigenous
strain, are a mixture of Spanish and other Europeans,
but also of Arabs, of black people from Africa, of people
from Asia and also of Jewish people, to such an extent
that we may be called a race only if by what is meant by
race is merely biological origin. Bolivians are simply
people. That is why they are so concerned over any lack
of respect shown for people anywhere in the world; and
we know something about this through the white domi-

nation of a neighbouring country with a colonialist oligarchy. Because we are more mixed with the indigenous
peoples than others, Bolivians have no access to the sea,
their right to which was wrested from them a century ago
in a shameful war of conquest.
41. For the reasons I have just stated, my country has
always tried to adopt the most constructive and impartial
approach to the problems of the Middle East, even
though the Arab community is more deeply and broadly
settled in my country than in any other part of Latin
America. Like the Arab and Israeli peoples, we too have
sought and worked for a positive and lasting peace in the
Middle East. We know the areas of power and influence,
of pitiless trade in armaments, which is not carried on by
the small countries, but by big Powers, who profit from
this trade in death, in a world in which two thirds of the
human population drag out their lives in poverty.
42. It is because we are convinced of the benefits of
peace that we have, to the best of our ability, worked to
the small extent we can at the international level to try to
ensure that the Arab peoples and the Israeli nation can
live together in peace. We have looked for methods to
mediate the problem; often we have preferred to abstain
in the voting purely with the aim of helping to achieve
agreement, and also in order to avoid adding more fuelhowever little-to
the flames of conflicting interests.
43. Resolution 242 (1967) is a veritable charter for
peace in the Middle East. Its carefully worked-out
balance was inspired by Latin America, particularly in the
context of the General Assembly, before thedecision was
taken in the Security Council. However, the provisions of
that resolution still await implementation.
44. We srive to be impartial and we can in no way go
against the principles which for us are firm and immutable,
that is, we reject any predatory action. We are and always
will be opposed to territorial conquest; we are and always
will be opposed to the use of force, the violation of the
principles of peaceful coexistence, military occupation, the
violation of the rights of the downtrodden,
any lack
of respect for individuals and peoples who are poor, poor
because they are dependent and not because they do not
work; like my people, they too have worked for the world
and they provided a bridge of gold and silver which
served the mercantile leaders of Europe at a time when
“Vale un Potosf’ was a common saying. That was the
time when everything we had went towards the economic build-up of modern States, beginning with the
industrial revolution-we
even sold our tin for next to
nothing during the Second World War, in our determination to co-operate in the common cause of the democracies. It is because of these convictions we have acquired
through harsh and bitter experience that my delegations
stands shoulder to shoulder with all the dependent peoples of the world who are struggling at different levels
against the colonialist plundering of their national
wealth, against racist humiliation,
against territorial
occupation. Our position is the same as theirs; we are
against invasion in South-East Asia, in southern Africa,
and we support the indigenous peoples who are struggling resolutely for their political liberation, as we did

ourselves a century and a half ago, from colonialist
racist systems, whose only right is might.

and

50. Moreover, from the point of view of my people’s
religious convictions-which,
as everyone knows, is
Christian-Catholic-we
are most distressed to learn that
none of the Holy Places which are so important for peace
and understanding
among all peoples,, have been
respected and’preserved
in the proper manner, for the
ancient city of Jerusalem has become a battlefield and the
scene of a sad rivalry, leading to its being profaned even
more. This is another powerful reason to take firm action
in seeking a definitive solution to the problem of the
Middle East with scrupulous observance of neutrality
within the Holy City.

45. That is what has happened with the white colonialist oligarchy in a country which is our neighbour; it
claims to be European and pure but it is actually making
martyrs of its own people, it mocks the United Nations
and has always mocked and continues to mock Bolivia,
because it keeps us locked in while maintaining that it has
no “other business” to settle with my country.
46. Peoples are always innocent. They are more often
victims of the excesses of oligarchies, of plutocracies and
vertical autocracies which profit by perpetuating underdevelopment through a dual action, both external and
internal, in which colonialism has always been the evil
driving force. Long-lasting dictatorships exhaust the people. They care little for justice or progress; they do not
believe in maternity wards or in hospitals, but want to
maintain the sruru~ quo. They laugh at the population
explosion that has so frightened the Club of Rome, the
Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Professor
Meadows with his computers.

51. The delegation of Bolivia will support any proposal
aimed at preserving Jerusalem as the common heritage
of mankind and prohibiting settlements detrimental to
the rights of the Palestinian people, without prejudice, of
course, to our advocacy of reciprocal practical guarantees for the peaceful national evolution of the people of
Israel.
52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

47. We have reasons for being deeply concerned over
injustice and territorial
occupation anywhere in the
world, for we lost our outlet to the sea a century ago. It is
with profound serenity and deep conviction that we reject
the old, outmoded procedures,and we want to contribute
to the enormous effort to eradicate them begun 34 years
ago when we all agreed “to reafftrm faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, in the equal rights of men and women and of
nations large and small”.

53. Mr. EL-CHOUFI
(Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, I should like to extend to you my delegation’s
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council and our wishes for your success in the fulfiiment of your responsibilities in the service of international peace and security. I should also like to salute the
good ties between our two countries and express the hope
that our friendly relations will continue to progress in the
years to come.
54. Our expressions of esteem andappreciation
also go
to Ambassador Abdalla Bishara of Kuwait for his skilful
and judicious performance as President of the Council
last month.

48. It is no less true, just because it is a popular saying,
that one values health only when one becomes ill. One
must be walled in in order to value an open view. And,
similarly, one must have suffered from war more than
once and know that it makes peoples poorer and more
wretched to appreciate what peace means. One must have
suffered from racism and colonialism to know how
demeaning and disturbing they are, subjects which were
movingly treated by the great humanist Fanon in his
book The Wretched of the Earth.l My people will be
among the wretched of the earth until it regains its outlet
to the sea. We too are struggling for justice, freedom,
equality among ail human beings, peace and understanding everywhere in the world.

55. No one in the Council is a stranger to the item
before us today. Press coverage on the subject has been
fairly consistent; it has been the object of numerous
studies by independent bodies; the same subject has filled
hundreds of pages of United Nations documents, Yet, in
spite of all these testimonies, irrefutable documentation
and expos6s on the unjust and inhumane situation in the
occupied Arab territories, the Council finds itself still
seized of the same problem. What is more alarming is the
fact that, after all these years, the same problem confronts us today in even greater proportions, for the injustice has not been put to an end but continues unabated,
the inhumane policies and practices against the Arab
populations by the occupying Power have not been mitigated but escalated and the threat posed to world peace
in general by the explosive situation in these occupied
territories has never been so imminent or more real.

49. The settlements in more than 125 Arab areas which
have been denounced and the territorial occupation and
other excesses so frequently mentioned here in detail are
actions which my delegation can only rejecf purely on the
basis of principle, to begin with. Hence, we-are opposed
to the settlements which have been established to the
detriment of the people of Palestine and we call for
immediate action by the Security Council to spare
Jerusalem from the devastations which are detrimental to
the traditions of communities worthy of respect such as the
Islamic and Christian-Catholic
communities as well as the
Jewish community itself.
2 New

York,

Grove

Press, Inc.,

56. My brother and colleague Ambassador
Hazem
Nuseibeh of Jordan has exposed in detail the grave situation which has resulted from the settlements in the West
Bank and Gaza. Other speakers have elaborated on the
Israeli settlements in other areas [2123rdmeeting]. Needless to say, the fate of the Golan Heights under the

1966.
6

oonressive and heavv-handed occuoation of IsraeI has
been no different from that which has been described in
other Israeli-occupied areas,

their implantation of settlements in that area. That lame
argument, that hideous attempt to cover up Israel’s
expansionist ambitions is, however, thoroughly exposed
by its incursion into the Golan Heights, which at the time
of the occupation was clearly and undeniably, by all
standards of international law, within Syrian sovereign
territory.

57. There are to date 27 Israeli settlements which have
been installed in the Golan Heights, as is clearly illustrated in the map annexed to the report of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories.’ Sixteen of these settlements have been installed in
Syrian villages, after the Israeli aggressors expelled their
inhabitants, bulldozed their homes and usurped their
land. These settlements, which have sprouted like mushrooms in sovereign Arab territory, did not arise overnight. They have been created; politically encouraged
and logistically supported by the Zionist entity of Israel.
The growth of settlements is part of a preconceived plan
actively and systematically
pursued by the Israeli
Government as an intrinsic part of the Zionist ambition
of expansion and annexation.
58. On 30 November
stated:

62. Much has been said about the historical and religious
significance of the Holy City of Jerusalem to many peoples
of many faiths. From this has emanated a loud round of
condemnation of Israel’s occupation of Jerusalem and its
illegal measures to alter Jerusalem’s legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition. We indeed associate ourselves with this international sentiment. At the
same time, while we do not claim any religious significance
for the Golan Heights, we cannot but condemn the Israeli
aggressors to no less a degree for their occupation of the
Golan Heights. For us, the sons and daughters of Syria,
every inch of Syrian territory is sacred. For here we speak of
the very essence of the sacred right of the Syrian people to
national sovereignty and territorial integrity. And for that
reason we shall spare nothing finally to liberate the Golan
Heights from the oppressive occupation by Israel. And
should the United Nations fail to exert its authority to end
that occupation, it will have become an unwitting accomplice in this Zionist scheme of expansion and annexation, in
flagrant violation of one of the Organization’s founding
principles-that
is, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
the territory of others by force.

1978 the Israeli newspaper Hu’urerz

“The Special Planning Section of Galilee, which is
part of the International Jewish Agency, has made
plans to settle 44,000 people in the Golan over the next
five years. The plan included the establishment of 33
agricultural settlements.”
59. The Israeli Government is just as active as the International Jewish Agency. The Israeli newspaper Davur
reported on 16 November 1978 that:

63. The Zionists have skilfully fabricated many other
lame excuses to justify their implanting of settlements in
Arab territory. They have claimed for themselves a right to
a “homeland”,
forgetting that their “homeland”
was
created at the cost of making another people stateless; they
have cried for the right to protect this “homeland” and to
“secure its borders” by implanting settlements which could
function as “security outposts” against their “unfriendly”
Arab neighbours. That is a shameless distortion of facts.
Israel, with its unprecedented record of aggression and
expansion, has no right to speak of the security of borders
when it has been the consistent violator of every international boundary and armistice line in the region in the last
three decades of its existence. How can these Zionists speak
of the security of borders when their representatives make
statements like that of Golda Meir, who in 1969 arrogantly
declared that “wherever we settle, that is where our borders
will be”.

“A ministerial committee composed of the Prime
Minister, the Finance Minister and the Minister of
Agriculture
has decided to increase by 160 million
Israeli pounds the budget allocated for development of
the settlements in the Golan.”
That article stated that this increase was necessary “to
: increase the Jewish settlers in the Golan to a total of
10,000 Jews within the succeeding two to three years”.
60. As recently as 25 January 1979, the Governmentowned Israeli TV claimed that “the inhabitants of the
occupied Golan are requesting Israeli citizenship” and
alleged that those inhabitants were “asking that the territory be formally annexed, under Israeli rule”. Through
lies and vicious propaganda the occupying forces already
seem to be making their first attempt-a
vain attemptto justify what seems to be the imminent formal annexation of the Golan Heights.

64. They have also tried, in vain, to justify their aggressive
and expansionist conduct by seeking legality from the
infamous Balfour Declaration, the Declaration which has
been so aptly described as “the promise by him who
does not own to him who does not deserve” and which by i
now has been successfully challenged by many authorities :
on international law. It is ludicrous to cite this Declaration
as legal justification for Zionist expansionism. In fact, it
would be rather interesting to hear what possible justification the Zionists might have for their incursion in the
Golan; for nowhere is it stated in this Balfour Declaration
that the Golan also was mandated to the Zionists by either
God or some colonial country that had accorded to itself
the role of a generous donor. It is clear that the Zionists were

61. In trying to cover up Israel’s premeditated schemes
of expansion and annexation, the Zionist representatives
have tried to deflect the authority of article 49 of the
Geneva Convention, which states that
“The occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its civilian population into the territory it
*
occupies”.
They argue that since the West Bank was under “ilIega1”
Jordanian rule, article 49 cannot apply, thereby justifying
3 A/33/356.
9

not satisfied with what they had underservedly gained from
the Balfour Declaration. The conspiracy at Base1 was to
repeat itself, and the plot to acquire more and more Arab
land was to be actively pursued.
65. But what accounts for this Zionist madness in the
Middle East? How can one explain the Zionists’ frenzied
implantation of settlements, towards eventual annexation,
and their insatiable appetite for more and more of the
territories of other Arab peoples? Why have they, in spite of
international condemnation, continued, and in fact escalated, their forms and methods of repression and suppression in the occupied Arab territories? It is high time that this
seeming aberration on the part of Israel in its desire for
more territory be defined in its real terms. The Zionist entity
of Israel would not persist in its conduct if there were no
actual interests of foreseen gains involved here. And the key
factor lies in Israel’s economic interests, which it has accrued
out of its occupation of Arab lands. As Defence Minister
Moshe Dayan stated in 1972:
“Economics is the fly-wheel
[occupied] areas connected”.

that keeps Israel and the

66. This parasitic economic desire of Israel for the occupied
territories was also revealed by lXe Jerusalem Post when it
stated in 1973 that Israel’s economic growth “is now vitally
dependent on the productive resources of the territories”
and that “restoration of the former borders would harm the
economies of both Israel and the occupied territories”.
67. As early as 1972 the United Nations Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories accurately described the economic relationship between Israel
and the occupied territories as a “classic pattern of colonial
economic dominance and exploitation”.4
68. It is well known that the contradictions inherent in
the Israeli economy have ripened and become acute in the
last decade. Faced with a crisis of overproduction,
a
severe lack of vital natural resources and a need for more
industrial workers, Israel has been driven to expand and
acquire more territory in search of captive markets as a
dumping ground for its surplus of finished goods, in
search of vital natural resources, such as water sources,
for the irrigation of the agricultural estates expropriated,
and in search of sources of cheap labour which it could
obtain from the dispossessed population of the territories
occupied.
69. The report of the National Lawyers Guild of the
United States on the “Treatment
of Palestinians in
Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza” describes Israel’s
interest in the West Bank and Gaza as that of a captive
market for their surplus goods-and
I now quote from
that report:
“The West Bank and Gaza obtain 90 per cent of their
imports from Israel.. . Since the start of the occupation, Israel has increased sixfold its exports to the West
Bank and Gaza, making those territories
Israel’s
second largest export market, second only to the Uni’ A/8828,

para.

77.

ted States. Israel’s trade surplus with the‘west 3ank
and Gaza is tremendous-$513
million from 1967 to
1974.”
70. In order to establish their parasitic hold on the
occupied territories, it becomes necessary for the Zionist
occupiers to penetrate and disrupt the existing native
economies in those territories by first depriving the people of their land ownership, thereby depriving them of
their traditional means of livelihood. The dispossessed
population is then left with no other choice but to seek
employment in the industries of Israel, thus fulfilling
Israel’s labour needs. They are then channelled to the
lowest paid jobs or to jobs for which there are not enough
Israelis, or which Israelis are unwilling to fill. The Guild’s
report states:
“From the West Bank and Gaza, Israel has succeeded
in providing itself with a large force of Palestinian
labour. The total number of West Bank and Gaza
Palestinians working in Israel jumped from 9,000 in
1969 to 70,000 in 1974. Of the total number of Palestinian wage workers (119,000), fully 50 per cent worked
inside Israel.”
71. Leaving only the most undesirable jobs for them, and
deliberately placing them within the most unstable sector of
the labour force, the Zionists have forced Palestinians to
work under substandard or even slave-like conditions, discriminated against in job benefits such as vacations and
medical insurance, subjected to onerous tax regulations and
deprived of labour rights. In periods of economic downturn, the workers from the occupied territories suffer the
most, for, being the most unstable and the least protected,
they are also the most dispensable sector of the labour force.
They are, as it has been described by economists, the last
hired and the first tired. And as for those who are not drawn
into the industries in Israel, they are left with no choice but
to seek employment in the Israeli-installed agricultural
economies that are thriving on the richness of the land
which once was theirs.
72. It is here that the full dimensions of the inhumanity
and the magnitude of the injustice of Israeli occupation are
most clearly seen. It is this occupation, motivated by avaricious desires for economic exploitation, which constitutes
the most brutal violation of the human rights of the population of the occupied territories. And it is these immense
economic gains, not some religious quest to fulfil some
biblical mandate, that explain the Zionists’ drive for annexation and expansion and their belligerent opposition to
giving up these occupied areas.
73. Hence the many abuses and brutalities, the massive
denial of democratic rights and the systematic use of torture
on Palestinian political prisoners by the Israeli occupying
forces are but the top of the iceberg. For the Zionists have
no choice. If they are to accomplish their goal of occupation
for economic exploitation, they have no choice but to rule
by repression and enforced submission. They are therefore
forced to resort to campaigns aimed at crushing the native
population’s will and obliterating its national consciousness.

74. However, repression does not necessarily lead to submission. On the contrary, it breeds the opposite-that
is,
resistance. And this is exactly what the Zionists have had to
face in the occupied Arab territories: the continued and
militant resistance of the Palestinian and all Arab peoples.
As a result, Zionist desperation has continued to increase,
and, in turn, the nature and forms of its repression have
become more intensified and more brutal. Like a monster
heaving its dying gasps, it clutches tighter and sinks its fangs
deeper into its prey.

forms and amounts, artificially sustaining the life of this
dying monster which is Zionism.
81. In its desire to conceal this all-out support, the United
States has recently adopted the practice of double-talk. Late
last year, President Carter criticized Israel’s settlement policy, calling it “‘an obstacle to peace”. And, even more
recently, the State Department released its report admitting
Israel’s record of mistreatment and abuse of Palestinian
political prisoners. Yet all these glowing statements pale
before the fact that various forms and huge amounts of
United States economic and military aid continue to flow
into the deadly hands of Zionist Israel. Every year United
States aid to Israel has increased, making it possible for that
State to build up its repressive military machinery and to
stockpile an armoury of the most sophisticated weapons.
This unrestricted supply of military armaments to Israel, as
exposed in the Armed Forces Journal by Anthony Cordesman, assistant to the Deputy Secretary of Defense during
the Ford administration, is aimed at creating an Israel that
could attack Arab armies “before the great Powers could
intervene”.

75. Probably the most dramatic illustration of this Zionist
desperation was their insane destruction of the city of
Quneitra. After the October 1973 war, Israel was compelled
to withdraw from part of the occupied Arab territories.
They withdrew, but not without leaving the imprint of their
racist, aggressive and violent nature. They unleashed their
ferocity by making sure that when they left the city would be
left in rubble. In a wild frenzy, they bulldozed homes,
ravaged crops and property, destroyed buildings, and in a
matter of hours turned the city into a howling wilderness.
What else coud this be, other than the height of mad
desperation?

82. And again, this year, it is expected that a total of $2.3
billion in economic and military aid will be received by
Israel. In addition, Israel hopes to receive the first of three
United States contributions in the amount of %US 1 billion
towards the cost of Israel’s withdrawal-should
this ever
occur-of
its occupation forces in Sinai.

76. Indeed, the Zionists have reason to despair. Their
ideology, which rests of the twin pillars of racism and
colonial expansion, is anachronistic in a world in which
and at a time when these beliefs are considered abhorrent
and unacceptable. Yet they shut their eyes to this inevitability. They wish to turn back the clock and to drive humankind back to the time when invasions, plunder at the looting
of other peoples’ lands was the name of the game.

83. Aside from this unlimited military and logistical support, the United States has also not been wanting in its
political support of Israel. My brother and colleague,
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, the representative of Egypt, has adequately reviewed [ibid.] the many efforts and recapitulated
the stream of resolutions that various bodies of this intemational Organization have passed against Israel’s aggressive
and racist activities. Yet those resolutions have been either
rendered ineffective or, often, completely blocked by a lone
hand raised by the representative of the United States in an
abuse of the veto power and in pathetic patronage of the
most isolated regime in the world today.

77. They have reason to despair because, no matter what
brutalities they continue to impose on the Palestinian and
Arab peoples, the present generation, as well as all future
generations of Palestinian and Arab peoples, will continue
to give their lives to deal the death blow and put zionism to
rest.
78. They have reason to despair, for Zionist ideology,
rotten at its core, and inherently bearing the seal of injustice
and inhumanity, is doomed to fail in a world in which
peoples now desire peace and cherish the ideals of freedom,
independence and national sovereignty.

84. The United Nations cannot allow Israeli intransigence
to continue riding roughshod over the will of the intemational community. Israel’s racist, aggressive and expansionist character stands in direct contravention to the founding
aims and principles of the Organization which the Charter
states are “to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal
rights of. . . nations large and small” and “to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international
law can be maintained”.

79. In asserting the ultimate downfall of Zionism, we cannot also underestimate the actual danger it -still poses to
world peace today. Nor can we put out of our sight the
savage consequences which Zionist aggression continues
daily to inflict on the Palestinian and Arab people. For even
if it faces death, zionism is still very much alive in its violence
and brutality. And this brings up the question: what is it,
then, which enables Zionism to continue with its activities?
Who and what provides Israel with its life-support systems?

85. I must note that, in carrying out these noble purposes,
the Organization has made significant strides in other areas
of the world. Through decisive actions andviable measures,
the Organization has succeeded in living up to its name and
prestige as the guardian of peace and the independence of
peoples. Yet, such decisiveness and steadfast defence of the
Charter’s purposes and principles are clearly lacking in
relation to the Middle East, and as a result the Organization
finds itself still confronted with this same problem, which by

80. The evil and brutal activities of Zionism continue to
this very day only because the major Power which breathes
new life into zionism. By providing Israel with a pipeline of
economic and military aid, the United States of America
continues to isolate itself as an exception to the almost
unanimous condemnation of Zionist Israel. This unrestricted aid has gone on escalating through the years in its
9

now is more than three decades old. Shall we just stay this
way, wringing our hands in anguish, bewailing and condemning the situation, and yet doing nothing beyond
expressing these sentiments in resolutions on paper? I do
not mean here to belittle the import of such resolutions that
have been passed by the United Nations. They represent
significant starting points in resolving the problem. But
what we should like to see is that we move beyond the many
starting points that we have already made. It is high time
that these sentiments, so eloquently expressed on paper, be
translated into a material force capabie of changing the
situation in a clear and unequivocal manner and delivering
justice to the aggressed and applying censure to the
aggressor.
86. We do not lack for positive experiences in adopting
this approach to other similar problems. The General
Assembly, in its resolution 3379 (XXX), rightly equated
zionism with racism. Our clear-cut stand and decisive
moves in confronting the racist, exclusivist, oppressive and
exploitative regime of South Africa have borne their initial
fruits in the within sight liberation of Namibia. Through the
application of sanctions as provided by Chapter VII of the
Charter, the regime in Pretoria has been compelled, however begrudgingly, to comply with the wiil of the intemational community. What then should bar this same Council
from moving with the same decisiveness in applying similar
sanctions on the racist, aggressive, oppressive and exploitative regime at Tel Aviv?
87. The tragic plight of the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples living under Israeli occupation can never become a
belaboured story. The grave threat which the situation in
the Middle East and occupied territories poses to world
peace, in general, cannot be overstated. The serious challenge which Israeli intransigence poses to the aims and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations cannot be
over-emphasized. I should hope that, having been engaged
in this question for the last 32 years, the Organization has
not become numb to the harsh and brutal realities of Israeli
occupation, and that none of us here have forgotten the
*meaning of the simple but profound saying that “justice
delayed is justice denied”.
88. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
89. Mr. SHEMIRANI
(Iran): Mr. President, on behaif of
my delegation 1 should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of this august body. It is
particularly gratifying to see a gifted diplomat who has had
a distinguished record of leadership within various bodies
of the United Nations, guiding the present crucial deliberations. Your predecessor, the representative of Kuwait, must
also be congratulated for the excellent manner in which he
conducted the equally crucial deliberations during last
month’s session.
90. As members of the Council well know, this meeting
marks the first opportunity for the Provisional Revolutionary and Islamic Government of Iran to address itself to vital
issues confronting this world Organization. The Iranian
people have made their voices heard throughout the world,

echoing a steadfast conviction in their faith and their firm
belief in human dignity. it is only ‘fitting, then, that the issue
in question here today be one concerning the status of the
Holy City of Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Arab
and Palestinian territories, for it touches upon the very
essence and spirit of our revolution.
91. Few issues of international concern stir the hearts and
souls of peace-loving and fair-minded men everywhere with
the impact of the question of the illegal Israeli occupation
and colonization of Jerusalem and other Arab and Palestinian territories. This fact is especially true in the case of the
world’s 800 million Muslims, or nearly a third of the
planet’s population, who share a direct and crucial stake in
the outcome of this deteriorating and unbearable situation.
92. A brief and objective survey of the existing situation in
Jerusalem and other occupied territories points quite
clearly to a calculated and systematic process of desecration, emasculation and exploitation of the shrines, legacies
and peoples of these lands by their Israeli occupiers. The
occupied Holy City of Jerusalem has quite accurately been
described as a city having been reduced to a tiny enclave, a
ghetto, by Israeli colonization, accentuated by ever-increas:
ing Israeli settlements that have encircled Jerusalem from
all sides.
93. Furthermore, and much to our profound concern,
Israel has proceeded to deface and demolish Islamic sites
and shrines, with the Al-A&a Mosque and its adjacent
structures representing primary cases in point. The illegal
Israeli colonizers have augmented these actions by a
planned economic exploitation and confinement of the
occupied lands as well. The list of violations against the land
and its inhabitants is both a lengthy and systematic one, as
vividly demonstrated by the representatives of Jordan and
the Palestinian Liberation Organization during the Council’s last meeting, and therefore we shall not dwell upon
them in detail at this point. Suffice it to say that the ensuing
result of the Israeli occupation of Arab and Palestinian
territories has been the demographic,economic and psychological strangulation of the region.
94. My Government finds the. situation as it exists intolerable and an affront to the basic sense of decency of all
peoples, above all to our Moslem brethren. We reiterate the
view put forward earlier by the declaration of the Islamic
States Members of the United Nations on the situation in
Jerusalem and the occupied,Arab territories, to the effect
that Israeli colonization measures constitute a blatant violation of the 1949 Geneva Convention and that they irrevocably run counter to the principles and precepts of intemational law and relevant United Nations resolutions, and,
finally, that no means should be spared in order to “restore,
by all means, the Islamic and Arab status of Jerusalem and
to undo the despoliation which the Israeli occupation has
carried out in the Holy City” [S/23145, annex. para. s].
95. My Government believes that at the heart of any
question dealing with the Middle East, including the deteriorating situation in Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Arab territories, remains the imperative of the restorarion
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and an independent State. The fact that

B8; Such heedless and;inhumane behaviour runs contrary
ro th-e provisions of the charter of the United Nations,
int_e_mat~ionallaw, and the basic principles of human rights.
Certainly Iran will fully co-operate with international
efforts aimed at undoing the violations committed in the
occupied territories and at restoring the human rightsof the
Palestinian people along with the Islamic legacies and character of the presently occupied territories, for Israeli action
aimed at oppression, colonization and domination in the
occupied territories represents an affront to the sense of
fairness, decency and dignity that the Iranian people cherish
and for which they have given their lives.

nearly all issues pertaining to the Middle Eastconflict are
intimately interconnected with, and revolve
around, the
indisputable necessity of Palestinian rights is almost,universally accepted. It is also commonly accepted that failure to
deal with these realities has brought about a situation which
constitutes a grave threat to international peace and
security.
.’

96. The urgency and centrality that the exercise of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people holds for any
meaningful, just and lasting solution to the Middle East
question is now one of the main pillar of Iran’s foreign
policy considerations. This policy is not only predicated on
the religious and cultural affinity Iranians have always had
for their Palestinian brothers, but is also a natural product
of the successful Iranian revolution, whose main objectives
were the elimination of oppression, colonization and imperialism. Our people have spoken with a firm and resounding
voice in favour of human dignity and freedom. And therefore it is natural and fair that we seek for others the same
dignities and freedoms that we have sought for ourselves.

99. My Government wishes to reaffirm its position that
the Palestinian question is a fundamentally political issue
and central to the entire Middle East problem. Full respect
for, and realization of, the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right to
national independence and national sovereignty, are indispensable elements in the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
100. The situation;as it presently exists, represents a grave
threat to international peace and security. We, therefore, inconcert with the other 41 lslamie States Members of the
United Nations, call upon the Security Council to take
prompt and effective action in this regard, including the
application of Chapter VII of the Charter, to ensure compliance with its own Charter and resolutions on this most
grave and crucial issue. It is our sincere and earnest hope
that this body, by dutifully performing its task, will contribute immeasurably to the restoration of peace and dignity to
the region and its peoples.

97. The Palestinian people, who have for too long been
victims of oppression and imperialism, are now-being
afllicted with outright colonization by Israeli forces, a fact
that is well documented by numerous accredited sources.
Gross and systematic violations of Palestinian rights in the
territories illegally occupied by Israel in 1967, compounded
by an Israeli policy aimed at establishing permanent domination over those territories, are amply verified by various
studies and surveys conducted both under and outside the
auspices of the United Nations. One such report, conducted
within the purview of the United Nations, is the report of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, dated 13 November 1978, and transmitted
by the Secretary-General to Members of the General
Assembly. In a detailed and thorough study, it points to the
day-today violation of basic human rights by the Israeli
occupiers as the most stark and evident characteristic of
Israeli practices. The report also points to the fact that
‘I . . . the Government of Israel continues to adopt other
measures that reflect its policy of annexation and settlement of the occupied territories [typified by Israel] expropriation of property by various methods, such as the
arbitrary resort to reasons of military security for the
purposes of the establishment of settlements, as has been
the case in the El-Bireh area and several parts of the
northern West Bank”.s

101. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
102. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): Allow me to thank
the Security Council for giving me the opportunity once
again to explain the well-known positions of my country on
the negative policy and practices of Israel in occupied Arab
territories, which-as
an inseparable part of the Middle
East problem as a whole-constitute
a serious obstacle to
efforts aimed at reaching a just and durable solution and are
a threat to international peace and security in the region and
in the world at large.
103. The problem on the agenda of the Council is not
new. However, with the passage of time, it has acquired new
dimensions and significance, particularly in recent years
ever since the lirst portion of Arab land was occupied. For
more than 30 years, the international community and the
world Organization have been forced to deal with problems
resulting from different forms of internationally prohibited
acts in the occupied territories. At the same time as its
permanent aggression against sovereign and independent
Arab countries and the continued occupation and annexation of Arab territories, Israel continues-through
the
establishment of settlements and other acts of denationalization and the destruction of cultural wealth-to
alter the
geographic, ethnographic, economic, cultural and historical characteristics of the occupied territories. Such flagrant
violation of norms of international law, of the provisions of

The report goes on to point out exploitation of the natural
resources of the occupied territories, such as that of the
petroleum resources of the Sinai and that of the water-table
of the northern West Bank. The letter dated 2 March 1979
from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security Council [S/231&J
is the latest in a series of diverse reports outlining and
documenting unabated Israeii actions aimed at establishing total domination of the occupied territories and thereby
denying Palestinians their inalienable and legitimate rights.
“A/33/356,

para. 131.
11

The Hague Convention of 1907” and of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War-of
which Israel is a signatory-as
well as of
the fundamental principles of the Charter and the decisions
of the United Nations, is continuing parallel with the total
disregard of the demands and appeals of the international
community. That has been clearly and convincingly illustrated by the representative of Jordan, the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization and by other Arab
representatives in their statements.

rights and the wealth of other nations and the violation of
the fundamental principleson which international relations
are based.Such a policy of force, violence and lawlessness
hasbeenrepeatedlycondemnedboth within the framework
of the United Nations and through the actions of nonaligned countries. At the ministerial Conference of nonaligned countriesheld at Belgradelast year the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of non-aligned countries
‘6. . . strongly deplored Israel’sexploitation of the natural
wealth and resourcesin Palestine and other occupied
Arab territories. . . . They calledupon all Statesto take the
necessarymeasuresto prevent any co-operation with
Israel which could pave the way for the illegal exploitation carried out by the Israeli occupation authorities.“’

104. United Nations documents and the numerous studies made by other independent bodies are full of the data
on the serious problem of the uprooting of a whole people
from its native land. Needless to say, such acts and all
other acts perpetrated by the occupier or committed
during the presence of occupying forces in occupied territories are null and void. That is an indisputable and
irrefutable norm of classical and modern international
law. The purpose of such acts is to consolidate occupation in the Middle East, to legalize expansionist objectives and to prevent the Palestinian people from realizing
its right to self-determination
and the establishment of its
own State. In brief, what is involved is an attempt to
confront the international community with a fait accompli and to render a just settlement of theMiddle East crisis
impossible. This is not a new practice. It has been known
since the days of colonization. however, it is also known
that this policy failed in the past and that thereforeail the
protagonists of such a policy should take that fact into
account.

They also
‘6. . . consideredthat the Arab . . . inhabitants in the occupied territories are still deprived of fundamental rights
and freedoms and that religious freedom is exposedto
violations. Israel is strengtheningits colonialist policy by
reinforcing and increasingits settlementsin Palestineand
other occupied Arab territories to consolidate occupation, hinder the establishmentof a just and lastingpeace
in the Middle East and change the natural, political,
cultural, religious and demographic conditions in these
territories.“8
108. There is no doubt that thesemeasureswhich posea
constant chahenge to the international community are
aimed primarily at depriving the Palestinian people of its
national rights. Their persistentimplementation provides
one more proof of the lack of readinesson the part of
Israel to comply with the resolutions of the United
Nations for a peaceful, just and lasting settlement of the
Middle East crisis and postponesindefinitely the elimination of this acute focal point of crisis, thus increasing the
danger of conflict.

105. The indignation of the international community
has been justly aroused by the special measures undertaken
by the Israeli authorities in Jerusaiem, measures taking
the form of attempts by the occupying authorities to
render worthless and to destroy the cultural wealth of the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples, a wealth which at the
same time represents the common cultural heritage of
mankind and is an irreplaceable source of information
about remote civilizations. The purpose of such measures
is to change, by force, the importance of the role played
by Jerusalem in realizing the coexistence of peoples, religions and cultures in this specific, demographic and ethnic environment. The world Organization had precisely
this need in mind when it established, and on several
occasions confirmed, the special international status of
Jerusalem.

109. Yugoslavia hasbeenconstantly exerting efforts for
a peaceful political solution to the crisis in the Middle
East, a solution that would suit the legitimate interestsof
all peoplesand countries of the region on the basisof the
three fundamental principles endorsed by the international community asa whole, namely : first, the complete
withdrawal of Israel from all the territories occupied in
the 1967 war; secondly, the realization of the national
right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination,
including the right to establish its own State, with the
Palestine Liberation Organization as its sole legitimate
representative; and, thirdly, the right of all countries and
peoplesin the region to a secureand independent life and
development.

106. A stop must be put to such Israeli activities if we are
to ensure the prerequisites for just and comprehensive solution to the Middle East crisis, a solution that would take
into account the interests of all the peoples and countries of
the-region. if we fail to do that we wiil become the unwilling
accomplices of the denationalization of the Palestinian
homeland and of the destruction of the culture and traditions of the Palestinian people.

110. In this regard we have always proceeded from the
generally accepted premisethat the Palestinianquestion is
the core of the Middle East crisis and that it cannot be
solved without the Palestinianpeople first reahzing its inalienableright to iive freely in its homeland,a tight enjoyedby
all peoplesof the world. That piatform is gaining an everlarger audiencein the world and there is a growing resist-

107. The international community does not accept the
policy of faits accomplis just as it rejects the use of force in
international relations, the usurpation of the legitimate
ACarnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conand Declarations
of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 19 15).

‘A/33/206, annex I, para. 53.
‘Ibid..
para. 55.

ventions

12

of the United Nations. Oneanda half million Jewsthroughout the world, including some50,000PalestinianJews out
of a total population of about 600,000,fought in the ranks
of the United Nations and helped defeat the Nazi-racist
scourgeand bring this Organization into being.

ante to all attempts to depth peoples-of their right to free
national and socitil developaurt.
1!l. Unity of purpose and concerted action by Arab
countries and peoplesare a precondition for the achievement of this aim. The summit meeting of Arab States held
recently at Baghdad hasshown that this processhas made
good progress-becauseonly in this way can a lasting and
just settlement satisfying the legitimate aspirationsof peoples be achieved and their unhampered and independent
development ensured.
112. To conclude, we consider that the Security Council
shouldtake immediateand resoluteaction againstall activitiesaimed at denationalization and at changingthe cultural,
historical and demographic character of all the occupied
territories, including, of course, and above all, Jerusalem.
First and foremost, we must proclaim all the measures
taken so far to be null and void and prevent any further
measures,begun or intended, in that sense.This action can
be effective only if it is taken within the context of general
efforts to achievea just and lasting settlementof the Middle
East problem basedon the elimination of all the consequences of occupation and aggression.All such measureswill
have our full support.
113. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Israel has
askedto be allowed to speakin exerciseof the right of reply.
I call on him.

117. It is an’utter disgraceto the United Nations and a
grave insult to the memory of the victims of nazism and
fascism-including 6 million of my peopleamong them 1.5
million children-that Nazi terminology should be allowed
to be revived in this building, or for that matter anywherein
our world. It isan utter disgraceto the Charter ofthe United
Nations that those holding suchviews should be allowed to
sit around this chamber table.
118. Not content with accessto the Organization and its
agencies,the contemporary proponents of thesebasetactics
have in recent years exploited the arithmetical majority at
their disposalin the General Assembly. The .terrorist PLO
has not only been granted observer status in the United
Nations despite the obvious danger which it constitutes to
international peaceand security; it hasalso beenaccorded
irregular privileges aswell asopportunities to participate in
the deliberationsof various United Nations organs,in violation of the Charter and of the rules of procedure of the
organs concerned.
119. Not content with all that, the General Assembly has
been induced to create the so-calledPalestineCommittee.g
As is well known, that body functions at the beck and call of
the PLO. Its recommendations, as set out in 1976, are
nothing but a prescription for the dismantlementof Israel in
stages-the PLO design translated into United Nations
jargon, flying in the face of the elementary principles of
international law in generaland of the Charter in particular.

114. Mr. BLUM (Israel): As I said in my statement last
Friday [2123rd meeting],the current debatehasbeendeliberately staged at this time with a view to impeding the
ongoing peaceefforts in the Middle East. For that reasonI
refrained from referring in substanceto the gross distor-’
tions contained in the Jordanian statement. We shallcomment on it and on other statementsmade here at a less
inopportune moment, and we reserveour right to do so in
due course.

120. Still not content with that manipulation of the
United Nations, the Palestine Committee, through yet
another abuseof the meansand machinery of the United
Nations system; steered through the General Assembly
the establishment of a “Special Unit on Palestinian
Rights” in the Secretariat. That Unit has been staffed in a
way which patently vitiates the Secretariat’s integrity.
Under the close supervision of the PalestineCommittee,
it acts in a way’which makes a mockery of the Secretariat’s independence. In the last year it has produced a
seriesof pseudo-scientific studies which are designedto
give wide currency to PLO propaganda under the enblem
of the United Nations.

115. However, permit me to remark briefly here on the
style employed by the Jordanian and other representatives
in their statements.The Jordanian representativesrepeatedly referred to my people as “vampires”, “vultures”,
“malignant, out of control cancerous cells”, “bubonic
plague”, and similar pearlsof languagetaken straight out of
the Nazi vocabulary and disturbingly reminiscent bf the
terminology used in anti-Semitic propaganda throughout
Nazi-infested Europe in the 1930sand 1940s.This is not
particularly surprising-for he and his like, including the
terrorist organization known as the PLO, had as their ideological and political mentor the infamous Haj Amin
el-Husseini,head of the PalestineArab Higher Committee
in the 1920sand 193Os,who usedanti-Jewishincitementasa
weapon in his political arsenal and thus found a common
languagewith the Nazi Fiihrer and hiscohorts. He spentthe
war years iri Nazi Germany, actively collaborated with the
Nazis in the massextermination of European Jewry and was
wanted as a war criminal by the Allies after the Second
World War. Many of his Arab followers openly sympathized with and supported the Nazi war effort during the
Second World War.

121. As though this were not enough, the facilities of
the United Nations were grossly misusedlast November
to house an exhibition mounted by the terrorist PLO
under the auspices of the Palestine Committee. That
exhibition was not merely a vulgar attack on a Member
State; it also vilified the Bible, Judaism and universal
values which have contributed so much to world civilization as a whole.
122. I am bound to sound a solemn note of warning.
Manifestations of this kind are malignant. Their dangers
9Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Palestinian People.

116. By contrast, the Jewish people, one of the prime
targetsand the main victims of nazism, rallied to the cause
13

Rights of the

are incalculable. Mankind has suffered bitterly from
them. In its own interests, the United Nations is in duty
bound to stamp them out-lest
it be turned into an
instrument of the vilest forces known to man.

lesslykilted thousandsof PalestinianArabs, and.then proceededwith a campaigncalculated to crush the Christians
in that country. It hasmercilesslybombarded civilian centres, ‘killing uncounted thousandsof civilians and turning
up to 1 million Lebaneseinto refugees.This is not to mention Syria’s brutal oppressionof its Christian minorities
throughout the years and its unrelenting persecutionof the
4,500 Jewswhom it continuesto hold hostage.indefianceof
world opinion and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Indeed, only on 3 1January, a large group of parliamentarians from the Council of Europe signeda declaration requesting member States to intervene on behalf of
those helplessJews being held in pawn by Syria.

123. It so happens that tonight the Jewish people celebrates the festival of Purim, commemorating the downfall of Haman, who had the dubious distinction of being
the first to plot the genocide of the Jewish people. That
wassome2,500 years ago. The details are recorded in the
book of Esther. Since then there have been numerous
others of his ilk and the Jewish people hasovercome and
outlived them all.
124. It cannot have escaped notice that the Palestine
Committee was represented here by the mouthpiece of
the “Tropical Gulag”, as it was so aptly dubbed in Le
Munde of Paris on 16 February. The representative of
Cuba, that well-known champion of non-intervention in
internal affairs in Africa, Asia and the Middle East, is
scarcely the best quaiified spokesman on conditions in
Judaea, Samaria and the-Gaza district.

131. I wasintrigued to hear the representativeof Pakistan
appearing before the Council asanauthority on what isand
what is not legal. I am certain that the vast majority of
Council memberswould hardly regard amputation, flogging and stoning, all practised inpakistan, asfalling within
the bounds of any enlightened legal system.
132. Since coming to power on 5 July 1977,the military
Government of Pakistanhasmadeincreasinguseof marital
law to curb political opposition. According to Amnesty
International estimates,severalthousandpolitical prisoners
are held in Pakistan. Amnesty’s 1978report statesthat at
least 160of theseprisonershave beenflogged for engaging
in peacefulpolitical activities. On 29June 1978,the International Human Rights Federation in Paris condemned the
use of flogging as a punishment for political offences in
Pakistan. In May 1977,Amnesty International publisheda
special92-pagereport on Pakistan,expressingdeepconcern
at a wide variety of human rights violationsin that country.
The representativeof Pakistan may also wish to enlighten
the Council on the treatment of the Bihari and Baluchi
minorities in his country. He may further wish to enlighten
us on his country’s record in what is now Bangladesh.The
representativeof Bangladeshwill doubtlessbear him out on
that. Thesecredentials,of course,make him extremely well
qualified to pontificate in the Council.

125. The representative of Lebanon also spoke in the
deliberations on Friday last. Propriety would perhapshave
dictated that he should bring the ongoing.occupation of his
own country before the Council before leaping to participate in this debate. Instead of raising his vexatious complaints here,it is a pity that hedid not join the largegroup of
LebaneseChristians who came to pray in Jerusalemlast
Christmas.
126. Today, Iraq, Syria and Pfiistan, among others,
joined the fray-a bizarre assortment and sorry crew, to
say the least, when it comes to international peace and
respect for human rights.
127. Iraq is a leader of the Arab rejectionist Stateswhich
have committed themselvesto doing everything within their
power to subvert the peaceprocessin the Middle East. Let
me quote Iraq’s ambassadorat New Delhi on the eveof the
Baghdad Arab summit which it hosted.As reported by the
Midlle East News Agency on 24 October 1978,he saidthat
“Iraq does not accept the existenceof a Zionist State in
Palestine. . . the only solution is war”.

133. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Jordan, who has asked to speakin exerciseof the right of
reply.
134. Mr. NUSEiBEH (Jordan): I shalltry to beasbrief as
I can. I wish to assurethe membersthat in replying to the
representativeof Israel it is much more out of pity than any
other consideration.The representativeof Israel is trying to
defend the impossible-the unquestionably indefensible,
defiant and lawlesspolicies, practices and designsof ,an
IsraeliGovernment turned berserk and totally oblivious of
the norms and rules of international law, decency, United
Nations resolutionsand conventions, let alone any senseof
proportion, in relating to the fundamental concernsof the
entire world.

128. Intent on translating its aggressiveand unlawful
designsinto practice, lraq has embarked on a course of
intensive rearmament which has already m.adeit the most
heavily armed country in the Middle East. Moreover, it has
also taken the decisionto go nuclear. Given all this, aswell
as the violent record of its regime,it isnow.constituting one
of the most seriousthreats to world peace.
129. Besides,it surely would be more appropriate for Iraq.
to stop the brutal suppressionofthe.Kurdish people, which
has been so well documented by the International League
for Human Rights that it needsno repetition here. That
chilling account of executions, tortures and massforcible
deportations is known to all of us.

135. The representativeof Israel is indeed in a very tight
comer-in an untenable situation-when he attempts by
diversionary and ill-tempered remarksto answerthe crux.of
the complaint before the Council. To begin with, I should
like to dispute the right of the representative of Israel to
speakasa Semite.He is notga Semite. We, the victims, are
the Semites who are being victimized. Secondly, he has

130. And what of Syria? How can Syria be sobrazen asto
appear here today with its recent record in Lebanon?In its
illegal armed intervention in the Lebanesecivil war, it r’uth14

talked about peace. What peace ishetalkingabout
when we
are literally talking about the canni.ba!ization and the very
survival of the Palestinian people, who had been living in
their ancestral homeland for 8,OOOyears? Those Palestinians
are an amalgam of all the Semitic raceswhich have set&d in
our Holy Land. The usurpers came from another continent
and are trying to butcher and erase our existence.

theCou.ncil’s induIgencej Ishail read out what the Patriarch
actually said:
“It is indeed a great sQurce of joy for our delegation to
carry to your conference this message of brotherly love
and our prayers for your success.
“Is not Jerusalem the goal of this long journey on the
path to liberty in which we are all engaged together?

136. The representative of Israel spoke about the great
war effort which his people made. What war effort, may I
ask? 1 remember that in 1943 and 1944they requested the
British Government to form what they cal1ed.a Jewish
brigade. That Jewish brigade had clear instructions to prepare itself for the oncoming onslaught on the totally disarmed Palestinians. When the moment came, they went on
an excursion to Italy just to see what war looked like. They
came back and showed us how it looked.

“Are we not, Moslems and Christians alike, dedicated
to Jerusalem, in hope, determination and sacrifice?
How can we forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, when thou art
humanity’s Mehraje to God, and the symbol of the spiritual values that descended upon us from His holy
inspiration?
“In thee, 0 Jerusalem, Moslems and Christians . . ., in
their cQmmon yearning for eternal peace, find, each
according to this religion, a sacred community in their
obedience to God and their cQncern for man.

137. Everybody knows the efforts made by the Arab peoples during the First World War and the Second World
War. Every family in Palestine had a son working in one of
the British military camps in the war effort. The entire
Jordanian army was in every single spot of Palestine working for the war effort to annihilate the Fascists. Now the
representative of Israel tells us that we did not fight in that
war. We did fight during the First World War and the
Second World War.

“To your esteemed conference we have come from the
ancient churches of the East”-going
back to 2,000
years-prompted
by the spirit of friendship and amity
which has bound us to you, generation after generation.
For, by God’s mercy and providence, there has developped in our countries more than a common humanity:
a oneness that cannot be destroyed. Hence, we are conscious that it is our destiny to carry to the Christian world
abroad the message of Palestine, to kindle its sacred tire
wherever it is fading, voicing this message loudest where
people deafen their ears or close their eyes to its reality
and truth.

138. The third point mentioned by the representative of
Israel was terrorism. Who introduced terrorism in our part
of the world? I have seen it with my own eyes as long ago as
1945. I still remember the mutilated body of a Mr. Walsh,
who was in charge of supplies for the war effort in the entire
Middle East, when the King David Hotel was blown up,
resulting in 120 fatalities-men
and women who were
employees of the Government. I saw his body catapulted
from the King David Hotel to a wall of the YMCA opposite
the street almost 150 metres away. Who was responsible for
that? Begin-his master’s voice. I saw the remnants of the
village of Deir Yassin-a score of little children; 250 men,
women and children were literally butchered in cold blood.
The children paraded in Jaffa Road and Zion Square in
order to show their fellow men and wQmen how brave they
were. We took those shaken children in and house them,
and we knew the gruesome story of the terrorism they had
suffered. I could go on forever mentioning the record of
Israeli terrorism, which uprooted the indigenous Palestinian people from their homeland.

“Whence the great honour that we have asked for: to
speak from the rostrum of this very great conference to
the Christians of the world and to the Moslems as well,
proclaiming that Jerusalem is their pride and glory and
that once delivered by rightful struggle this Holy City Qf
God will be the source of the virtues of the new man who
will, in Qur homeland, stand against the injustices from
which we have all suffered.
“You will allow me at this juncture to salute His Holiness Pope Paul VI for his constant cQncem about Jerusalem, his indefatigable struggle against Judaizatian and his
insistence on its remaining the City of Faith and Peace.
For then will Jerusalem appear again in its glorious light,
giving a new life to the oppressed who, through their
sufferings, have dreamed of it as the unique symbol of
perfection and their ideals-

139. Our part of the world has always been tolerant,
peaceful, just and decent. When I mentioned the fact that
700 to 800 million Moslems had been denied their- inalienable right to pray in Holy Jerusalem, I of course took it for
granted that they are 20 to 30 million Christian Arabs who
are equally denied their right to pray in the churches of our
Holy City. What is the use of these churches and mosques if
they become museums, as the Israelis would have them by
taking a monolithic whole of the Holy City of Jerusalem?

“Need we say how nostalgic we all are for this particular beauty and nobility of Jerusalem, which emanated
from a holiness that no other city has ever had, the
holiness of the Word which was given her and which she
has always sought-a holiness which had been the blessed
custody of her Arab inhabitants*‘-we
are called Palestinian Arabs today, but we are the amalgam ofall the races
that have lived in Palestine from time immemorial“who are now subjected to tyranny and many of whom
have been forced to emigrate from the most beloved
City?‘- and tens of thousands of Christian citizens of
Jerusalem, as well as tens of thousands of Moslems, have
had to leave their Holy City in which they had lived for
literally thousands of years.

140. Last Friday my colleague Ambassador TuCni, for
whom I have the highest respect, read out excerpts from an
address which the Patriarch of the Antioch Orthodox
Church-the
oldest church in the whole of the Middle
East-gave at the Lahore Islamic summit conference. With
15

2,ooO years the temples have derived the substance of
their life from$he very being of the believers who consfitute their human context.

“But let the enemy know: the Arabs are still alive,%
nation determined to fight for its right to return to Jerusalem. This and no other is the sacred right to return: for
then will the Arabs have recovered their spiritual home,
saved their history, And then, and then only, will they be
true to their magnificent civilization, able to fulfil! their
mission to Mankind.
“The continuity of the tradition which the Palestinians
have kept as a cherished trust is an imperativecall-a
call
for a Jerusalem delivered, which will be again the home of
its people. For to us the preservation of stones, be they
sacred shrines, cannot be more important than the living
presence of people”- who constitute Jerusalem, for what
is the use of churches, mosques and synagogues without
the living souls of people who are their constituents?
“Such, in our understanding, is the Palestinian character of Jerusaiem, a human image, both national and
universal, a call upon all believersto meet in the free and
tolerant pursuit of truth.

141. I could go on and on reading this message, but I shall
turn now to the representative of Israel and remind him of
this: never in our history have the Arabs or the Moslems
persecuted the Jews. In fact, when they weie persecuted,
they found their only abode in the Islamic world, as he very
well knows. We gave them respect and equality, because we
regard them as brethren in religion. But when it comes to
the Israelis wanting to snuff out our life, to destroy our
existence in our Holy Land, then we say: no; we shall
continue to struggle until we are able to go back to our
ancestral home.

“To us in particular, the significance of the Holy Places
has acquired its plenitude by the fact that throughout

The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

“It is in this spirit that we understand the historic
encounter, so rich in noble meanings, between the Caliph
Omar and the Patriarch of Jerusalem: an encounter in
friendship and mutual respect.”

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consuit
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIOKS

PCBLJCATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&osltaires
du mondc entier. Informer-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adresser-vous
R Nations Unies. ,Sction
des ventes. New York ou Ceneve.
KAJ~

COMO

~l~.lJ’SJil’b

COSSEGUIR

Ji3,‘4AHJiR

OlTAHH

PJe!BLlCAC~ONES

3AUNJf

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nariones
Unidaa
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulle
Unidas. Serri6n de Ventas. NUC\R York o Ginehra

Lirho in United Nations, New York

00400

OG%E.lJfHEHJfJ~lS

NACIONES

HAUJiR

UNIDAS

en venta en hbrerias
p casas distria so lihrero
o dirijase
a’ Naciones

19-10062-October

1982-2,250
