S/2017/1104

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 December 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 29 December 2016 (S/2016/1129), the Security Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) until 31 December 2019 and requested me to submit a report every six
months on the implementation of its mandate. The present report covers the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2017 and provides an overview of developments and
trends in West Africa and the Sahel. It also outlines the activities of UNOWAS and
progress made in the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel. In addition, it provides an update on the situation in the Lake Chad basin,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2349 (2017).

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
2.
During the reporting period, political tensions relating to constitutional reform
and political dialogue processes in Guinea, Mauritania, the Niger and Togo took
centre stage in those countries. Elections were held in Liberia and Senegal, while
electoral preparations continued in Guinea and Sierra Leone. Some progress was
made in key reform processes in Burkina Faso and the Gambia. Nevertheless, the
security situation in West Africa and the Sahel remained fragile. Terrorist activities
and cross-border crime, including piracy and trafficking in drugs and weapons,
continued to pose threats to the stability of the region. While activities by Boko
Haram surged, a significant number of the group’s fighters surrendered to national
authorities. There were also internal security challenges in Côte d’Ivoire and Nigeria.
Although the humanitarian situation in the region remained dire, West African
economies continued their positive trajectory. Moreover, several countries made
progress in the promotion and protection of human rights.

A.

Political and governance trends
3.
In Burkina Faso, the constitutional reform and national reconciliation processes
continued slowly. Meanwhile, the Speaker of the National Assembly and Chair of the
ruling Mouvement du peuple pour le progrès, Salif Diallo, passed away in France on
19 August. He was replaced by Alassane Bala Sakandé, also a member of the ruling
party, on 8 September. On 10 October, the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Djibril

17-22014 (E)

281217

*1722014*

S/2017/1104

Bassolé, was temporarily released from prison pending trial and placed under house
arrest. He had been imprisoned since September 2015 because of his alleged
involvement in the failed coup attempt of 2015. His release renewed controversy
about the capacity of the judicial authorities to speedily bring to trial individuals
accused of crimes committed under the previous political dispensation.
4.
In Côte d’Ivoire, a government reshuffle was announced on 19 July. The
Minister of the Interior and Security, Hamed Bakayoko, was reassigned to the
Ministry of Defence, while his former post went to the former Mayor of Abidjan,
Sidiki Diakité. Changes also occurred within the ruling Rassemblement des
républicains (RDR), which held its third congress on 9 and 10 September. During the
congress, Henriette Diabaté, who has been Secretary-General of RDR since 1999, was
elected President of the party, while the current Prime Minister, Amadou Gon
Coulibaly, was appointed its First Vice-President.
5.
In the Gambia, the administration of the President, Adama Barrow, launched
reform processes in the areas of security, transitional justice and reconciliation.
Rumours of possible attempts by supporters of the former President, Yahya Jammeh,
to destabilize the country from abroad did not materialize. Political tension remained
localized in the Foni area, a stronghold of the former President. To mitigate the
tension, a dialogue and reconciliation event was organized by the National Council
for Civic Education with residents of the area in June. On 8 September, Fatoumata
Tambajang was appointed Vice-President, following the adoption of a constitutional
amendment raising the age limit for serving as President or Vice-President from 65
to 75 years. She was sworn in on 9 November.
6.
In Guinea, the Independent National Electoral Commission announced that local
elections would be held on 4 February 2018. Meanwhile, the oppositi on continued to
stage demonstrations calling for the full implementation of the political agreement of
12 October 2016 and suspended its participation in the follow-up committee
responsible for overseeing the implementation of the agreement. Protests were also
conducted by citizens in mining communities in the Boké region of the country to
raise complaints about the inadequate provision of social services. In September,
protesters clashed with security forces, which resulted in two deaths and several
injuries.
7.
In Liberia, general elections were held on 10 October. Twenty presidential
candidates and 1,026 legislative candidates participated in the polls, which were
marked by high voter turnout and a peaceful environment. Regional and international
partners, including the African Union and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), deployed electoral observation missions. In the presidential
election, George Weah, of the Coalition for Democratic Change, received 38.4 per
cent of the vote, while the incumbent Vice-President, Joseph Boakai, of the Unity
Party, came in second with 28.8 per cent. A run-off presidential election, initially
scheduled for 7 November, was postponed by the Supreme Court following the filing
of complaints against the National Elections Commission management of the
electoral process by the All Liberia Coalition Party, the Liberty Party and the Unity
Party. On 7 December, the Court dismissed the complaints for lack of evidence and
ordered the National Elections Commission to proceed with scheduling the run-off.
It has now been scheduled for 26 December.
8.
In Mauritania, a constitutional referendum called by the President, Mohamed
Ould Abdel Aziz, was held on 5 August. It approved the abolishment of the Senate
and the establishment of regional councils, in addition to changes to the national flag,
the national anthem and the composition of the Constitutional Court. Several
opposition parties and civil society organizations, which had campaigned for a
boycott of the referendum, rejected its results. They argued that the referendum could
2/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

pave the way for further constitutional changes to extend presidential powers and
remove term limits. The President has repeatedly denied such claims. Following the
referendum, the opposition leader, Mohamed Ould Ghadda, who had been an
outspoken opponent of the referendum, was arrested on allegations of corruption. A
number of senators and journalists were also summoned and interrogated.
9.
In the Niger, tensions between the ruling party and the opposition continued in
the absence of an inclusive dialogue process. A new electoral code, under which a
permanent independent national electoral commission was established, was adopted
on 14 October.
10. Nigeria witnessed renewed secessionist agitation for an independent Biafra
State in the south-eastern part of the country. The agitation exposed persisting ethnic
and religious divisions between mainly Muslim communities in the north and
Christian Igbo communities in the south-east. In what was considered a counter-move
to the agitation, the Arewa Youth Forum, a coalition of youth leaders in northern
Nigeria, issued an ultimatum to all members of the Igbo community residing in the
north to leave the region by 1 October. In response, the then Acting Presi dent, Yemi
Osinbajo, led consultations with political, religious and traditional authorities to
promote national unity. In addition, following his return from medical leave abroad,
the President, Muhammadu Buhari, underscored in a speech on 21 August that the
unity of Nigeria was “not negotiable”. Meanwhile, the Government continued to
pursue its anti-graft campaign. In that regard, the exoneration of the President of the
Senate, Abubakar Bukola Saraki, from charges of fraud prompted civil society
activists to question the independence of the judiciary.
11. In Senegal, legislative elections were held on 30 July. The ruling coalition,
Benno Bokk Yakaar, secured 125 out of the 165 seats in the National Assembly. The
coalition led by the former President, Abdoulaye Wade, came second. Although
elected to the parliament, the Mayor of Dakar, Khalifa Sall, has remained in detention
since March on charges of mismanagement of public funds.
12. In Sierra Leone, preparations continued for the holding of presidential,
legislative and local elections scheduled for 7 March 2018. Violent incidents,
involving party supporters, occurred throughout the reporting period. Meanwhile, the
constitutional referendum, which had been scheduled for September 2017, was not
held.
13. In Togo, a wave of protests was initiated by the opposition Parti national
panafricain on 19 August in Lomé, Sokodé and Kara. The protesters amplified their
long-standing demands for a return to the Constitution of 1992, the introduction of a
two-round voting system for the presidential election and the full implementation of
the comprehensive political agreement of 2006, signed by the Government, the
opposition and other national stakeholders. On 19 September, the National Assembly
adopted a bill to amend the Constitution by reintroducing presidential term limits and
a two-round voting modality for the presidential election. The opposition boycotted
the vote on the bill, as it did not include a provision, similar to that contained in the
Constitution of 1992, stipulating that “under no circumstances” could a person serve
for more than two presidential terms. Consequently, the parliamentary vote did not
attain the four-fifths majority required to amend the Constitution and the bill was
deferred, to be voted on through a referendum that has yet to be held. Regional leaders
have since taken the lead in efforts to assist national stakeholders in peacefully
resolving the crisis.

17-22014

3/16

S/2017/1104

B.

Security trends
14. The security situation in West Africa and the Sahel continued to be marked by
asymmetrical and terrorist attacks against security forces and civilians. Some
countries in the region faced several internal security challenges. In addition,
maritime piracy, drug trafficking and transnational organized crime continue d to
affect the security situation.
15. In Burkina Faso, a terrorist attack in Ouagadougou, carried out on 13 August,
resulted in 18 casualties. The northern province of Soum witnessed frequent attacks
on military and civilian targets, leading to, among o ther things, the closure of many
schools in the area. Meanwhile, militant activities, including those carried out by the
home-grown Ansar al-Islam movement, gradually spread to the north-western part of
the country.
16. In Côte d’Ivoire, the reporting period was marked by clashes relating to land in
the cocoa belt, attacks against security facilities, a wave of jailbreaks and continuing
protests by former elements of the Forces nouvelles who had been demobilized
following the post-electoral crisis. On 7 September, the Minister of the Interior and
Security announced that 35 people had been arrested following investigations into the
attacks on security installations. On 9 November, the Chief of Protocol of the Speaker
of the National Assembly, Souleymane Kamaraté Koné, was arrested following an
investigation into a cache of weapons that had been discovered in Bouaké in May.
17. In Mali, the security situation was characterized by asymmetrical attacks against
security forces and humanitarian actors as well as by fighting between parties
signatory to the peace agreement. As a result, the anticipated reinstatement of State
services faced challenges, while some local communities resorted to aligning
themselves with militant groups for protection.
18. In the Niger, multiple attacks in the Tillabéri region resulted in the deaths of
several security personnel, including members of a mixed patrol of special forces of
the Niger and the United States of America, on 4 October. However, the number of
violent incidents declined significantly in the Diffa region, on the border with north eastern Nigeria.
19. Nigeria continued to face multiple security challenges. Security forces clashed
with members of the secessionist Indigenous People of Biafra movement in Abia State
in September. In addition, there were violent confrontations between farmers and
herders in the Middle Belt and other regions, leading to increased intercommunal
tensions. Some 100 people died as a result of two incidents that occurred in July, in
Kaduna and Benue States. On 16 October, 29 people were killed while seeking shelter
in a school in Plateau State. The level of armed violence in the Delta area remained
low owing to the reinstated amnesty programme, new deployments of troops in six
Delta states and peace initiatives by local, regional, and national leaders.
20. According to the International Maritime Bureau, the number of incidents of
maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea fell slightly during the reporting period.
Between January and September, the Bureau registered 31 actual and attempted
attacks on vessels in the larger Gulf of Guinea area, compared with 46 incidents
during the same period in 2016, accounting for one quarter of such incidents reported
by the Bureau worldwide. The majority of the incid ents occurred in Nigerian waters.
21. Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime remained a source of
instability. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
several seizures of drugs were reported, including a number of cocaine shipments that
were confiscated between Mali and the Niger in September. In Mauritania on
24 September, security forces arrested smugglers carrying drugs, weapons and

4/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

communications equipment. In Nigeria, the authorities reported the seizure of sever al
container-loads of weapons being smuggled into the country.
Boko Haram
22. National and international efforts notwithstanding, attacks by Boko Haram
surged during the reporting period, especially in Nigeria. Of the 156 suspected Boko
Haram attacks carried out in July, August and September, 100 took place in Nigeria
and 5 in the Niger. Overall, 295 fatalities were recorded between June and September
in the two countries, exceeding figures for the first six months of the year. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram continued to conduct raids and incursions, often using suicide bombers,
usually women and girls, and improvised explosive devices targeting crowded places.
Security forces were also targeted, as illustrated by the raid on a military base
conducted in the town of Marte, Borno State, on 13 October and the attack on a
military convoy carried out near Damboa, Borno State, on 18 October. Eleven cases
of abduction by Boko Haram were also recorded during the reporting period. Of the
approximately 32 people abducted, 19 were reportedly minors, including 13 girls.
Meanwhile, significant numbers of Boko Haram fighters surrendered to national
authorities.
23. The withdrawal of Chadian troops from the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Niger, which was completed in September, had an impact on the response effort
of the Force. In addition, allegations of human rights violations by security personnel
undermined cooperation with affected communities and intelligence -gathering.
24. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union visited the Lake Chad
basin from 27 to 31 July. It subsequently adopted a decision, on 28 September, in
which it expressed concern about the resource challenges facing the Multinational
Joint Task Force, reaffirmed the need for a comprehensive approach in efforts to
combat Boko Haram and called for a dedicated summit of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and ECOWAS to be held to develop a strategy for
the promotion of peace, security and development in the Lake Chad basin.
25. From 2 to 4 November, the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission
convened a regional stabilization conference in N’Djamena on supporting the
development of a framework for a regional stabilization strategy for areas affected by
Boko Haram. Conference participants recommended the establishment of a task force
for the development of a comprehensive strategy for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration activities in the areas affected by Boko Haram.
Sahel/Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
26. Following the adoption by the Security Council of its resolut ion 2359 (2017) on
the deployment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G -5 Sahel), a
delegation from the Council visited Burkina Faso, Mali and Mauritania from 19 to
22 October. Subsequently, on 30 October, the Council convened a ministerial meeting
on the Force, during which I gave a briefing on the status of its operationalization. I
reaffirmed the need for the Force to have sound mechanisms for the protection of
civilians. I also reaffirmed the necessity of a comprehensive approach to addressing
the root causes of the situation in the Sahel.
27. On 8 December, the Security Council adopted resolution 2391 (2017), in which
it set out the modalities for United Nations support to the Force. I was requested to
conclude a technical agreement among the States members of the G -5 Sahel, the
European Union and the United Nations for the provision of operational and logistical
support to the Force through the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.

17-22014

5/16

S/2017/1104

28. On 13 July, the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, the Chancellor of
Germany, Angela Merkel, and the European Union announced the launch of the
Alliance for the Sahel, intended to ensure security and stability in the short term and
development in the long term in the region. The initiative involves other States
members of the European Union, the World Bank Group, the African Development
Bank and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and is intended to
fast track the provision of assistance, including the mobilization of resources for the
Joint Force. On 13 December, the President of France convened a high -level meeting
with the States members of the G-5 Sahel and their partners in Paris to mobilize
support for the Force.

C.

Socioeconomic trends
29. West African economies continued their positive trajectory. Economic growth
rates of 2.5 per cent in 2017 and 4 per cent in 2018 have been forecast by the African
Development Bank for West Africa, owing mainly to improvements in oil production
in Nigeria and rising global commodity prices. According to the International
Monetary Fund, the economies of Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal are expected to expand
in 2017 by 7.6 per cent and 6.8 per cent, respectively, driven mostly by agriculture
and investments in the private and public sectors. Ghana is also registering its best
performance in three years, while recovery is slower in Liberia and Mauritania, at
2.6 per cent and 3.8 per cent, respectively.

D.

Humanitarian trends
30. Widespread food insecurity, forced displacement, climate change, chronic
vulnerability and susceptibility to epidemics continued to affect populations in West
Africa and the Sahel. More than 5,300 cases of cholera were registered in the north eastern part of Nigeria and some 2,035 cases of hepatitis E in the Diffa region of the
Niger. Across the subregion, some 30 million people remain food -insecure and
4.7 million children under 5 years of age are acutely malnourished. The number of
people classified as severely food-insecure has risen by 500,000 in the Lake Chad
basin since the beginning of the year, owing mainly to the Boko Haram crisis. In Mali,
the number of persons requiring immediate food assistance increased by 350,000
between March and August. In north-eastern Nigeria, increased international and
government relief assistance has helped to avert the threat of famine. Food security
is expected to slightly improve in the coming months, owing in part to an increase in
agricultural production and a reduction in food prices.
31. The number of people suffering from the consequences of forced displacement
as a result of conflict and insecurity rose to 5.2 million from 4.9 million at the
beginning of the year. More than 2.4 million persons remain displaced in the Lake
Chad basin area owing to Boko Haram activities, including nearly 1.7 million in
Nigeria. More than 208,400 Nigerian refugees are displaced in neighbouring
Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, which also host sizeable populations of internally
displaced persons. Insecurity in the Diffa region of the Niger led to cross-border
movements of several thousand persons to Chad. In Mali, continuing violence in the
Ségou, Kidal, Mopti, Timbuktu and Ménaka regions led to a slight increase in the
number of internally displaced persons (from 52,000 in May to 58,600 in September).
Some 142,386 Malian refugees remain dispersed in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the
Niger, while growing insecurity in the border areas of Burkina Faso and the Niger has
reduced absorption capacity for refugees from Mali. The insecurity in northern Mali
and north-eastern Nigeria has limited humanitarian access and led to a suspension of
lifesaving humanitarian deliveries to those areas. Moreover, in Togo, following raids

6/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

and arrests reportedly conducted by national securit y forces in the aftermath of the
opposition’s demonstrations, some 500 persons from Mango, in the Savanes region,
reportedly crossed over into the villages of Chereponi and Zabzugu in the Northern
region of Ghana.
32. During the reporting period, severe cases of flooding resulted in loss of life,
destruction of infrastructure and population displacement in several countries in the
region. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as at
mid-October, some 11,000 people were affected in Mali, 11,800 in Ghana, 30,000 in
Burkina Faso, 100,000 in Nigeria and 200,000 in the Niger. In Sierra Leone, a
landslide and floods claimed the lives of more than 600 people and displaced more
than 6,000.
33. The humanitarian response to the Lake Chad basin crisis, scaled up further in
2017, has reached more than 5 million people. Needs, however, are likely to remain
acute into 2018 and beyond, and sustained aid and recovery efforts will be required.
By September, of the $1.5 billion required to addr ess humanitarian needs in the Lake
Chad basin for 2017, only 54 per cent had been received. United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations are still seeking $661 million to address the most
urgent needs until the end of the year.

E.

Trends on human rights
34. Some progress was made in strengthening legal, policy and institutional
frameworks to protect and promote international human rights standards in some
countries in the region. In September, the President of the Gambia signed the Seco nd
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming
at the abolition of the death penalty. Moreover, a technical committee for the
establishment of a truth, reconciliation and reparations commission launched
countrywide consultations. The Commission of Inquiry, established to track assets
held by the former President, Yahya Jammeh, also began its work. Meanwhile,
national and international civil society groups announced in October an international
campaign to seek justice for victims of the former regime.
35. In Nigeria, the Government took specific steps to ensure accountability for
crimes committed by Boko Haram, by initiating the trial of alleged perpetrators. The
Government reported that 45 of the some 1,700 accused had been sentenced, while
468 had been ordered to undergo deradicalization programmes. Moreover, in response
to reports alleging human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions and
torture by the security forces, Nigeria established a judicial commission to review the
compliance of its armed forces with international human rights and humanitarian law
in the fight against extremism.
36. In Burkina Faso on 27 July, the President, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré,
promulgated a law establishing measures for the protection of human rights
defenders. On 25 October, the trial of alleged perpetrators of the failed coup of
September 2015 began.
37. In Côte d’Ivoire, perceptions of impunity for crimes committed during the post electoral crisis of 2010 and 2011, in addition to intercommunal clashes linked to
access to land, undermined social cohesion and national reconciliation. In Guinea,
human rights and civil society organizations welcomed the announcement by the
Minister of Justice on 8 November that investigations into the stadium massacre of
September 2009 had been concluded. The Minister, however, stated that the beginning
of the trial on the massacre might be delayed owing to a lack of funds.

17-22014

7/16

S/2017/1104

38. In Togo, at least 14 people died during clashes with security forces.
Confrontations between civilians and security agencies also claimed casualties in
Guinea, where at least 4 civilians were killed and 77 other people, including security
forces, were wounded. In Nigeria, human rights organizations condemned the a lleged
arbitrary arrest and torture by the military of people affiliated with the Indigenous
People of Biafra movement engaged in secessionist protests.
39. Recent media reports on trafficking in persons in Libya linked to illegal
migration, including from the region of West Africa and the Sahel, sparked
international outrage. In my statement of 20 November, I urged the international
community to unite in fighting that scourge. I also discussed the issue with
international partners on the margins of the Fifth African Union-European Union
Summit, held in Abidjan on 29 and 30 November. At the summit, the two
organizations adopted a joint statement on the migrant situation in Libya, in which
they condemned the inhumane treatment of African migrants and refugees by criminal
groups. The African Union, the European Union and the United Nations also agreed
to put in place a joint task force, aimed at saving and protecting the lives of migrants
and refugees along the routes, in particular inside Libya.

F.

Trends on gender issues
40. During the reporting period, the number of women in senior government
positions decreased in Guinea, the Niger and Sierra Leone. On 6 October in the Niger,
the first ladies of the States members of ECOWAS called for an end to female genital
mutilation in the subregion. ECOWAS, together with its partners, developed a
regional action plan for the integration of a gender and youth dimension into efforts
to combat money-laundering, the financing of terrorism and related crimes. In
Nigeria, a national conference was held in September to build momentum for the
implementation of the country’s second national action plan on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women, youth and peace and
security.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments by my Special Representative
41. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel continued to support
efforts to sustain peace in the region, in collaboration with regional and international
partners, by promoting and supporting inclusive national political dialogues,
constitutional and democratic reforms, and transparent and peaceful electoral
processes.
42. My Special Representative held extensive consultations with national
stakeholders, regional institutions and leaders in support of a peaceful resolution of
the political crisis in Togo. From 6 to 8 September, he undertook a mission to Lomé,
during which he met the President, Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, government
officials, leaders of the opposition, representatives of civil society and the media and
representatives of the international community. He appealed for restraint and urged
political stakeholders to resolve their differences peacefully. Furthermore, he
collaborated with the African Union and ECOWAS on the issuance of two joint
communiqués in which the parties were encouraged to engage in dialogue. He also
held consultations with the President of Ghana, Nana Akuffo -Addo, and the Ghanaian

8/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

mediation team in the lead-up to the preliminary talks for the Togolese dialogue
process, which began in Lomé on 27 November.
43. In line with Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), UNOWAS continued its
efforts to help to sustain peace in Burkina Faso and the Gambia. Following a meeting
with the President of Burkina Faso on 3 May, my Special Representative dispatched
two support teams to Ouagadougou, in July and August, to enhance coordination with
the United Nations country team. He returned to Ouagadougou on 31 August to
discuss United Nations support for the organization of a nationa l security forum,
which was held in October and was attended by my Special Representative and the
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burkina Faso. Within the framework of the
sustaining peace initiative, the United Nations deployed senior rule of law e xperts to
provide technical assistance to the High Council for Reconciliation and National
Unity, as well as advice to national authorities on justice and security sector reforms.
The United Nations also facilitated consultations between the High Council a nd
national stakeholders. The first meeting was held on 23 November in Ouagadougou,
with the support of the Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations country
team. Participants included representatives of political parties, civil society
organizations, victims and think tanks, as well as members of the defence and security
forces.
44. In the Gambia on 12 September, on the margins of the launch of the security
sector reform process, my Special Representative discussed United Nations support
for the country with the President. His visit was followed by a UNOWAS technical
team mission to Banjul from 13 to 15 September, which was focused on coordinating
sustaining peace initiatives with the United Nations country team. Throughout the
reporting period, support provided by the senior communication adviser deployed by
the Department of Political Affairs helped to enhance the Government’s
communication to the public at a time when expectations for democratic dividends
and increased transparency were rising in the country.
45. My Special Representative met the President of the Niger, Mahamadou
Issoufou, on 29 August and called for an inclusive political dialogue with the
opposition. As a follow-up to the visit, my Special Representative dispatched a
multidisciplinary team to the Niger from 2 to 10 October. In Guinea, he continued to
work with national, regional and international partners to advocate the
implementation of the political agreement of 12 October 2016. He held informal
consultations with Guinean government officials and international partners in the
country on the margins of a workshop on lessons learned from the 2015/16 elections
in West Africa, held in Conakry on 25 and 26 July 2017.
46. My Special Representative dispatched two UNOWAS missions to Mauritania to
engage with national stakeholders on the constitutional process. He continued
consultations with the President, including on the margins of the General Assembly.
47. Following the closure of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire in June,
my Special Representative visited Côte d’Ivoire from 18 to 20 July to hold
consultations with national and international stakeholders. He also dispatched an
integrated mission from UNOWAS in October to provide support to the United
Nations Resident Coordinator.
48. My Special Representative visited Freetown following the mudslide disaster of
14 August. In anticipation of the elections to be held in Sierra Leone in March 2018,
he conducted another mission to the country, from 19 to 23 November, wit h the
President of the ECOWAS Commission, Marcel de Souza, and the Commissioner for
Political Affairs of the African Union, Minata Samate Cessouma.

17-22014

9/16

S/2017/1104

49. My Special Representative conducted a mission to Liberia from 8 to 12 October
to hold consultations with my Special Representative for Liberia and Head of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), on transition arrangements following
the closure of UNMIL. He also interacted with presidential candidates and electoral
observation missions, and discussed subregional issues with the President, Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf. The mission was preceded by a UNOWAS multidisciplinary
technical mission that identified areas of cooperation with the United Nations country
team in Liberia. The technical mission also particip ated in a workshop for national
stakeholders, jointly organized by ECOWAS and the Mano River Union and entitled
“Partnering for peaceful elections in Liberia”.
50. In his capacity as my High-level Representative for Nigeria, my Special
Representative undertook a mission to the country from 30 October to 9 November.
He continued consultations with the President, state governors and key national
stakeholders to promote the establishment of a consensual national peace architecture.
He also underscored the importance of the unity of Nigeria and called for timely
preparations for the general elections scheduled for February 2019. On 8 November
in Abuja, he, together with ECOWAS, launched a study on pastoralism, security and
sustainable livelihoods in West Africa.

B.

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
51. Insecurity in areas affected by Boko Haram continued to hinder the activities of
the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission. Tensions in the Bakassi area were swiftly
resolved with the support of the Commission. Nevertheless, as reported in my letter
to the Security Council on progress made by the Commission ( S/2017/78), increased
agitation in English-speaking areas of Cameroon continued to generate concern.
52. On 14 and 15 September, my Special Representative, who also serves as Chair
of the Commission, facilitated a meeting in Abuja between Cameroonian and Nigerian
delegations, who agreed on an agenda for resolving security concerns and outstanding
areas of disagreement. The meeting was preceded, from 24 to 28 August in Geneva,
by deliberations of the Subcommission on Demarcation, whose report was adopted
by the two parties. Overall, the parties reaffirmed their commitment to implementing
the judgment of the International Court of Justice of October 2002 and to fully
demarcating the land and maritime boundaries shared by the two countries.
Meanwhile, procurement and related activities were completed for the resumption of
pillar construction and emplacement in December.

C.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
Enhancing subregional capacities
53. UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
supported the organization of an interregional workshop on best practices for the
ECOWAS Commission and the ECCAS general secretariat, held in Abuja from 11 to
13 September. During the workshop, the two organizations agreed to sign a
memorandum of understanding to broaden and institutionalize their cooperation,
including through interregional meetings and joint planning. UNOWAS participated
in a joint retreat of the African Union, ECCAS and ECOWAS on early warning
systems, held in Dakar from 16 to 20 October. UNOWAS also participated in a
workshop, held in Dakar from 30 October to 3 November, on the revision of the
indicators of the ECOWAS early warning system against the background of emerging
peace and security challenges in the subregion.

10/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

Security sector reform
54. UNOWAS continued to engage with ECOWAS in support of the
operationalization of its framework on security sector reform and governance. In May,
ECOWAS, the European Union and UNOWAS conducted a joint security sector
reform mission to the Gambia. Following the mission, an office of national security
was established and a national security adviser was appointed. Meanwhile, senior
members of the military command were replaced and several soldiers were detained
or dismissed over allegations that they had attempted to destabilize the country. On
12 September, my Special Representative attended the official launch of the security
sector reform process chaired by the President.
55. In Burkina Faso, the Senior Security Sector Reform Adviser deployed by the
United Nations supported a needs assessment of the security sector, promoted
synergies between defence and security forces and advocated the streamlining of rule
of law and democratic governance procedures. On 24 October, my Special
Representative participated in the opening of a three-day national security forum,
organized with the support of UNOWAS and the United Nations country team, at
which key elements of a new national security policy were identified. The forum was
preceded by regional consultations and the deployment of a multidisciplinary team
from UNDP and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to ensure an inclusive
and participatory process.
56. In Guinea, the United Nations security sector support project was harmonized
with initiatives being carried out in the police and justice sectors.
Boko Haram
57. My Special Representative continued to support diplomatic, security and
humanitarian responses to the violence perpetrated by Boko Haram. During the
reporting period, he promoted a joint initiative by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and UNODC to assist States members of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission in prosecuting, rehabilitating and reintegrating persons associated with
Boko Haram. Activities under the initiative have begun in Nigeria, as have
preparations in other countries of the Lake Chad basin. With the support of the
European Union, the Executive Directorate and UNODC also assisted Nigerian
authorities in strengthening criminal justice responses to terrorism, including by
facilitating inter-agency coordination and cooperation in investigations and
prosecutions. Under the overall coordination of the Nigerian office of the National
Security Adviser, the Executive Directorate, UNODC, the European Union and the
International Organization for Migration conducted a joint planning mission to
Maiduguri, Nigeria, from 18 to 22 September.
58. On 6 October, my Special Representatives for West Africa and the Sahel and for
Central Africa convened a joint meeting of UNOWAS and UNOCA in Dakar to
discuss ways to enhance coordination and support for regional partners. Discussions
were focused on joint support for the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the efforts to
combat Boko Haram, in addition to other areas of cooperation, including maritime
security. As part of his tour to Nigeria from 30 October to 9 November, my Special
Representative stressed the need for regional and international partners to assi st
Nigeria in combating Boko Haram.
Strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
59. On 11 and 12 July, UNOWAS met the secretariat of the Mano River Union in
Freetown to discuss ways to reinforce cooperation. They agreed to step up
engagement with UNDP and UNMIL ahead of the Mission’s drawdown. On

17-22014

11/16

S/2017/1104

24 August, my Special Representative met with the Secretary-General of the Mano
River Union in Freetown to discuss steps needed to formalize a joint cooperation
framework.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
60. During the reporting period, the Interregional Coordination Centre in Yaoundé
became operational. At a meeting held in Yaoundé on 16 and 17 August, UNOCA and
UNOWAS contributed to an evaluation of the implementation of the Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa. In September, UNOWAS held
consultations with the Centre’s leadership during a meeting of the chiefs of navies of
Central and West Africa convened in Dakar. My Special Representative also
continued his advocacy to enhance coordination and information -sharing, and urged
Member States to deploy permanent staff to the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in West Africa, based in Abidjan. From 16 to 20 October, within the
framework of the “Africa-China-United States Consultation for Peace” facilitated by
the Carter Center, my Special Representative led a delegation, including the Director
of the Interregional Coordination Centre and the Secretary-General of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, to Beijing to foster cooperation with Chinese counterparts.
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
61. My Special Representative chaired a meeting of the West Africa Coast Initiative
Policy Committee, held in Abidjan on 5 December. At the meeting, the Ministers of
Security and Justice of Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone
discussed ways to enhance the operations and financial sustainability of the
transnational organized crime units within the framework of the implementation of
the ECOWAS action plan on illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse
for the period 2016–2020. In addition, UNOWAS engaged in close liaison with
UNODC with regard to the implementation of several current projects, including the
development of curricula on organized crime and efforts to combat corruption for
police, gendarmerie and judicial training schools; the establishment of joint airport
interdiction task forces in Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau and Nigeria; and support for
courts in francophone countries in the launch of the Global Judicial Integrity Network
in 2018.

D.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel and support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel
62. UNOWAS continued to advance the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel through a whole-of-system approach. Progress was
made on a more effective division of labour, reduction in duplications and cooperation
between the field and Headquarters.
63. On 7 July, the Executive Committee working group on the Sahel, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General, held its inaugural meeting. On 11 August, it endorsed an
action plan for the implementation of the strategy, established a clear division of roles
and responsibilities between United Nations entities, agreed on a timeline of action
and emphasized the need to strengthen collaboration with all regional partners. It also
conducted a mapping of activities by the United Nations and international partners in
the Sahel, which revealed that only 30 per cent of planned resources were available
for the implementation of the strategy, highlighted the challenges linked to the limited
absorption capacity of targeted countries and coordination challenges among partners.

12/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

It recommended, among other things, that strategic coordination should be improved,
the Sustainable Development Goals mainstreamed, public trust in the State enhanced
and governance and human rights strengthened.
64. A meeting of the steering committee for the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, convened and chaired by UNOWAS and attended by the Deputy
Secretary-General, was held on 27 October in Dakar, bringing together United
Nations entities. The participants reiterated the need to ensure that interventions under
the strategy were aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals and complemented
the priorities of the region.
65. The Deputy Secretary-General strengthened coordination and cooperation with
France and Germany under the framework of the Alliance for the Sahel, which
recognized the strategy as overarching framework for the international response to
the issues affecting the Sahel. UNOWAS continued to support th e Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel chaired by Chad. In that regard, it facilitated
discussions between the President of Chad and United Nations regional entities to
ensure alignment of the Platform’s thematic groups on security, governance,
development and resilience with the strategy’s working groups. UNOWAS also
supported visits to all G-5 Sahel countries by the President of Chad and the African
Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel to help to increase coordination. From 9 to
11 October, the Chadian and Mission delegations, accompanied by UNOWAS, met
the G-5 Sahel secretariat in Nouakchott.
66. UNOWAS also continued to support the G-5 Sahel in building regional security
cooperation mechanisms. In that regard, a feasibility study was concluded with
respect to the establishment of a Sahelian threat analysis and early warning centre,
which is expected to be established in 2018 in Mauritania. UNOWAS, the Department
of Political Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) also participated in a United Nations scoping mission, led
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operation from 20 to 24 September, to all G -5
Sahel countries on the operationalization of the Joint Force. The mission facilitated
the gathering of information on progress made in establishing the Force. The findings
of the scoping mission informed my report to the Security Council on the Force
(S/2017/869).
67. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2195 (2014) and the statement
by the President of the Security Council of 8 December 2015 ( S/PRST/2015/24), the
Office of Counter-Terrorism continues its efforts to provide capacity-building
assistance to the States members of the G-5 Sahel through the regional Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative, the priority areas of which are aligned
with a need assessment conducted by United Nations entities and approved by the
G-5 Sahel countries. Priorities include the prevention of violent extremism; border
management and cross-border cooperation; the rule of law and criminal justice; and
coordination.
68. A regional workshop on border security management for the countries of the
G-5 Sahel was held under the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
Initiative framework in Niamey from 5 to 8 September. It was organized in
collaboration with the permanent secretariat of the G -5 Sahel and the liaison cell of
UNOWAS. Attended by senior practitioners from the G-5 Sahel countries, it was
focused on strengthening intra- and inter-agency cooperation, with a view to
countering terrorism and stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters in the region.

17-22014

13/16

S/2017/1104

E.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
69. On 25 and 26 July in Conakry, UNOWAS conducted a workshop on lessons
learned from the 2015/16 elections in West Africa. More than 50 representatives of
electoral management bodies and other stakeholders, including United Nations
entities from the subregion, exchanged views on how to enhance the quality of
upcoming electoral processes in West Africa. Participants emphasized the need for
inclusive political dialogue and for the establishment of reliable civil registries to
permit the regular updating of electoral registers.
70. From 28 October to 4 November, UNOWAS participated in the sixty-first
ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, held in
Banjul. It supported the forum of non-governmental organizations accompanying the
session and co-chaired two panels on human rights issues in West Africa and the
Sahel.
71. UNOWAS continued to promote the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women, youth and peace and
security. At a conference on peace education held in Accra o n 27 and 28 July,
UNOWAS advocated the regular holding of national conferences to disseminate and
implement resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security. UNOWAS also
contributed to an international youth forum on peace, security and irregular migration,
held in Niamey on 9 and 10 August under the patronage of the President. At the event,
participants from 25 countries, mostly in West Africa, recommended the creation of
an enabling environment for youth entrepreneurship and the involvement of youth
leaders in conflict management. On 29 August, UNOWAS hosted an exchange session
on the role of youth in the prevention of violent extremism in West Africa and the
Sahel, organized by the Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security in West
Africa and the Sahel. On 15 November, my Special Representative addressed youth
leaders in Ghana on the theme “Equipping the youth to renegotiate Africa’s position
in the era of Africa’s rising”.
72. UNOWAS undertook joint missions with representatives of the ECOWAS
Gender Development Centre, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, OHCHR and the Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace
and Security in West Africa and the Sahel, to Cotonou, Praia and N’Djamena to
advocate the adoption of national action plans as called for in Security Council
resolutions on women, youth and peace and security. On the International Day of
Peace, 21 September, UNOWAS organized a conference in partnership with the
Senegalese section of the Working Group, bringing together more than 100 women
and youth leaders to discuss migration, statelessness and other challenges. In addition,
UNOWAS provided technical and financial support for the establishment of the
Senegal-Gambia-Guinea-Bissau Women’s Forum.

IV. Observations and recommendations
73. There were several positive developments in West Africa and the Sahel during
the reporting period, notably progress made by some countries in carrying out
political, constitutional and security sector reforms.
74. I commend the authorities in Burkina Faso and the Gambia for the progress
achieved in reforming their security sectors. I also welcome continuing efforts by the
authorities in Côte d’Ivoire to fully reform its security sector, and encourage them to
remain focused on advancing national reconciliation and social cohesion, including
by addressing issues relating to land ownership and citizenship.
14/16

17-22014

S/2017/1104

75. I commend the people of Liberia for their peaceful participation in the
legislative elections and in the first round of the run -off. I call upon national actors to
ensure the peaceful holding of the run-off. I reaffirm the commitment of the United
Nations to continuing to assist the authorities in consolidating pea ce and promoting
sustainable and inclusive development. Following the closure of UNMIL in March
2018, UNOWAS will continue to follow developments in Liberia in the context of its
regional mandate.
76. I urge national stakeholders in Sierra Leone to work t ogether to ensure a level
playing field for all candidates ahead of the country’s first elections without the
presence of a United Nations mission.
77. I welcome the continuing regional efforts aimed at assisting national
stakeholders in Togo to overcome their differences peacefully through dialogue and
in line with the democratic aspirations of the Togolese people.
78. I remain worried by the prevalence of terrorist and violent extremist threats in
the region and the linkages with transnational organized crime. I note with concern
the continued armed attacks by militant and extremist groups on civilian targets. I am
particularly concerned about the related closure of schools in affected areas in
Burkina Faso and Mali, which is depriving the younger genera tion of their right to
education. I congratulate the Government of Nigeria on conducting trials of Boko
Haram suspects, and urge it to ensure due process and transparency by granting access
to human rights observers. I also welcome the establishment by Nig eria of a judicial
commission to uphold compliance by its armed forces with national laws and
international human rights standards.
79. I commend the efforts of the countries participating in the Multinational Joint
Task Force, which have reduced the operational capacities and geographical reach of
Boko Haram. Nevertheless, persistent attacks are hampering resettlement and
rehabilitation efforts and provide a breeding ground for extremism. I reiterate my call
for stronger partnership among the affected countries, as well as with regional
organizations, including the African Union, and underscore the need for all counter insurgency efforts to be carried out in full compliance with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. I reiterate my call upon the international
community to increase its political, humanitarian, early recovery, logistical and
financial assistance to the affected countries and to the Task Force and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission.
80. I encourage countries of the Lake Chad basin to continue their efforts to
reintegrate Boko Haram victims and other categories of individuals associated with
Boko Haram, and urge the international community to assist them in that endeavour.
I reiterate my call for a regional strategy for addressin g the root causes of the crisis
in the basin. In that regard, I welcome the holding of the first regional stabilization
conference in the basin region and hope that the conference will be the first step
towards the development of such a strategy.
81. I urge national authorities not to relent in their efforts to provide critical
humanitarian assistance to vulnerable communities and to advocate the disbursement
of outstanding funds pledged at the Oslo Humanitarian Conference for Nigeria and
the Lake Chad Region, held in February 2017.
82. I welcome the support that regional and international partners continue to
provide to the countries and people of the Sahel and urge them to join their efforts
and increase their contributions in line with the growing needs in the region and in
alignment with national and regional priorities. It is important to ensure that all efforts
are well coordinated and complementary. The challenges in the Sahel are complex
and multidimensional and require a sustained and holistic appr oach. In that regard, I
17-22014

15/16

S/2017/1104

welcome the collegial efforts made by the entire United Nations system under the
leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General towards recalibrating the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and further boosting its implemen tation through a
more integrated, cross-pillar approach. These efforts will contribute to mobilizing
additional resources for the Sahel and ensure that adequate support is provided and
that the aid of the international community is well coordinated, comple mentary and
in support of the countries of the Sahel.
83. I urge the international community to complement the security and military
response to the Sahel crisis with development programmes to address the root causes
of conflict, prevent tensions and violence, tackle exclusion and poverty, strengthen
the resilience of institutions and communities and build peaceful and inclusive
societies.
84. I commend the States members of the G-5 Sahel for their continued dedicated
efforts to operationalize the Joint Force, as well as the strengthening of development
aspects. I also extend my appreciation to the members of the Security Council for
their support for that initiative. I reaffirm the urgent need for the establishment of an
institutional, human rights and compliance framework for the Joint Force. These
mechanisms are critical to ensure that its operations are aligned with and contribute
to broader regional initiatives and do not harm the very populations whom the Force
is intended to serve and contribute to strengthening their resilience to conflict.
85. I urge the international community to unite in fighting the scourge of trafficking
in persons and to address migration flows in a comprehensive and human manner. A
comprehensive regional approach to migration focusing on the protection of the rights
of migrants, addressing the socioeconomic drivers of migration and promoting safe,
regular and orderly migration is needed.
86. I note with concern the decline in the number of women in senior government
positions in West Africa and the Sahel and urge countries in the subre gion to take
specific measures, in accordance with national and regional commitments, to enhance
the empowerment of and political opportunities for women and promote inclusive
development.
87. I welcome the commitment expressed by the Governments of Camer oon and
Nigeria to completing the demarcation of the land and maritime boundaries shared by
the two countries. I call upon partners to further support the Cameroon -Nigeria Mixed
Commission to allow for the completion of its mandate and to give effect to th e
judgment of the International Court of Justice of 10 October 2002.
88. I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of West Africa and the
Sahel region, the African Union, ECOWAS, the G-5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission for their continued
cooperation with UNOWAS. I also extend my appreciation to the United Nations
system in West Africa and the Sahel, civil society organizations and other institutions
for their close partnership with UNOWAS in the implementation of its mandate. I
should like to express particular appreciation to my Special Representative, as well
as the staff of UNOWAS and the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, for their
continuing efforts to help to advance peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

16/16

17-22014
