S/2020/755

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2020
Original: English

Developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2512
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until the closure of the mission
on 31 December 2020. The report provides updates on key political, security, human
rights, gender and socioeconomic developments in Guinea-Bissau since my report of
6 February 2020 (S/2020/105). It also provides updates on the status of
implementation of the UNIOGBIS mandate, as well as on progress in the United
Nations transition process ahead of the drawdown and closure of the mission.

II. Major developments
2.
Since my previous report, Guinea-Bissau has witnessed a protracted electoral
dispute, including a legal challenge that was submitted to the Supreme Court over the
results of the run-off presidential election of 29 December 2019. While the
intervention of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
facilitated the resolution of the political impasse, the functioning of State institutions
was considerably hampered. The security and human rights situation deteriorated
owing to the involvement of the military in the political crisis. There were reports of
arbitrary acts of detention, intimidation and threats against perceived opponents,
including journalists. Fears of a resurgence in drug trafficking emerged, including in
response to the reported return of indicted trafficking suspects and the replacement of
officials of anti-trafficking agencies. The outbreak of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the restrictions imposed to curtail its spread have added
to the fragile socioeconomic conditions. At the same time, UNIOGBIS continued with
the implementation of the United Nations transition plan, with the exit of the mission
envisaged by 31 December 2020.

20-10005 (E)

040820

*2010005*

S/2020/755

A.

Political situation
3.
Following the announcement by the National Electoral Commission declaring
Umaro Sissoco Embaló, the candidate of the Movement for Democratic Change
(MADEM-G15), the winner of the presidential election, Domingos Simões Pereira,
the candidate of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cabo
Verde (PAIGC), lodged a complaint with the Supreme Court questioning the
methodology used to tabulate the votes. An ensuing stand-off between the Supreme
Court and the Commission over the correct procedure was resolved on 25 February
2020, when the Commission complied with the Court’s order, repeated the tabulation
exercise and submitted its plenary report to the Court, still confirming Mr. Embaló as
the winner. That prompted Mr. Pereira to file another legal challenge.
4.
On 27 February, before the Supreme Court could issue its decision on the
complaint, Mr. Embaló proceeded with his self-investiture as President. The
ceremony was presided over by the Vice-President of the People’s National Assembly
and leader of the United People’s Assembly – Democratic Party of Guinea Bissau
(APU-PDGB), Nuno Gomes Nabiam, with security provided by the Presidential
Guard of the outgoing President, José Mário Vaz. Meanwhile, the armed forces took
physical control of all State institutions, including the Supreme Court.
5.
On 28 February, Mr. Embaló issued two decrees, one to dismiss the Prime
Minister, Aristides Gomes, and his cabinet and the other to appoint Mr. Nabiam in his
place. Mr. Gomes described Mr. Embaló’s self-investiture as illegal. He appealed to
the international community for a return to constitutional order. Other national actors
also expressed concerns that the country was heading towards political paralysis.
ECOWAS, in its communiqués issued on 28 February and 1 March, expressed serious
concern about the political developments, deplored the military’s interference in
politics and called for the immediate cessation of activities that threatened peace. It
warned that perpetrators could face sanctions.
6.
Also on 28 February, the PAIGC-led coalition in the People’s National
Assembly swore in the Speaker of the Assembly, Cipriano Cassamá, as interim
President. The coalition cited constitutional provisions following the departure of
Mr. Vaz as President. However, on 1 March, Mr. Cassamá announced his resignation,
citing security concerns. He resumed his function as Speaker.
7.
On 29 February, Mr. Embaló proceeded to swear in Mr. Nabiam as Prime
Minister. The ceremony was attended by the Attorney-General, leaders of the
opposition coalition and the military hierarchy, including the Chief of General Staff
of the Armed Forces, General Biaguê Na N’Tam.
8.
On 2 March, Mr. Embaló swore in a new 32-member Government led by
Mr. Nabiam, including 19 ministers and 13 secretaries of State. Three ministers and
four secretaries of State were women. The new Government included representatives
of MADEM-G15, the Social Renewal Party (PRS), APU-PDGB and allies close to
other independent presidential candidates who had supported Mr. Embaló during the
run-off.
9.
On 3 March, Mr. Gomes issued a communiqué in which he denounced the
takeover of national institutions by the military. He highlighted the need to uphold
the safety and security of government officials and appealed to all civil servants to
remain at home until the situation had normalized. On the same day, the Association
of Journalists of Guinea-Bissau called for the immediate reopening of the country’s
public television and radio stations, which subsequently resumed broadcasting on
4 March.

2/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

10. Also on 3 March, the Nabiam-led Government held its first Council of Ministers
meeting, following which it issued a communiqué in which it stated that the military
forces that were guarding national institutions were following legitimate orders from
the authorities. It was also stated that the challenge to the election results lodged by
PAIGC was a fabrication. In a separate communiqué on the same day, the Government
instructed all public officials to resume work.
11. On 4 March, Mr. Embaló presided over another meeting of the Council of
Ministers, at which measures to resolve public service strikes, among other things,
were discussed. Speaking to journalists after the meeting, he noted that the
Constitution was at the root of the recurrent political crises and highlighted
constitutional reform as a necessity.
12. On 5 March, General N’Tam issued a press statement in which he highlighted
that the military presence in certain parts of the capital, especially at the presi dential
swearing-in ceremony, comprised officers belonging to the battalion of the
Presidency, a unit under the direct command of the President. On 7 March, the
dismissed Prime Minister, Mr. Gomes, addressed a letter to General N’Tam to request
the restoration of order. He also requested the army to collaborate with the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) to normalize the situation.
13. On 8 March, APU-PDGB convened an extraordinary meeting of its Political
Commission, chaired by Mr. Nabiam, in an attempt to address competing claims by
political parties over who held the majority alliance in the People’s National
Assembly. At the meeting, 93 of the Commission’s 133 members voted to revoke the
parliamentary agreement with PAIGC and sign a new pact with PRS and MADEMG15. However, most of the party’s senior leadership, including the Secretary-General
and the Deputy Secretary-General, as well as the party’s four other Members of
Parliament, were absent. On 31 March, members of the parliamentary majority
alliance issued a declaration in which they upheld the parliamentary agreement signed
by PAIGC, APU-PDGB, the New Democracy Party (PND) and the Union for Change
(UM) following the legislative elections of March 2019.
14. On 10 March, ECOMIB withdrew its personnel to their cantonment, at the
request of Mr. Embaló. On 12 March, following a Council of Ministers meeting, a
communiqué was issued in which the national defence forces were commended for
submitting to political authority. The security forces and ECOMIB were commended
for the maintenance of peace and security, and allegations of intimidation and threats
against members of the Gomes-led Government were rejected. It was clarified that
the order for ECOMIB to withdraw to its barracks was part of the measures adopted
ahead of the expiration of its mandate and indicated that the national security forces
would assume responsibility for guarding national institutions. The mandate of
ECOMIB was due to expire on 31 March. However, ECOWAS reported that it had
been extended to 30 June to allow the Mission to remain in Bissau until the staff had
been repatriated, given the travel restrictions related to the COVID -19 pandemic.
15. On 12 March, the Movement of Conscious and Nonconformist Citizens
addressed an open letter to me, in which it deplored the self-investiture of Mr. Embaló
as President, the fact that ECOMIB had reneged on guaranteeing the security of the
legitimate Government and the failure of ECOWAS to help to consolidate
constitutional order. The Movement expressed concerns about the risk of civil unrest.
16. The PAIGC-led alliance continued to denounce the self-investiture of
Mr. Embaló as a coup d’état and appealed to the international community to intervene
to protect the legitimate Government formed after the legislative elections of March
2019. Meanwhile, the new authorities continued to consolidate power by replacing
high-level officials, including the head of the Judicial Police, the Director of the
National Guard and the National Commissioner of the Public Order Police.
20-10005

3/17

S/2020/755

17. On 18 March, following the global outbreak of COVID-19, Mr. Embaló issued
a decree to close the country’s borders and airspace, as a precautionary measure. On
27 March, through another decree, he declared a state of emergency, which after six
extensions was, at the time of writing, in place until 25 July, in an effort to curb the
spread of the pandemic. In a national broadcast on 11 April, he explained that the state
of emergency, inter alia, suspended the rights to freedom of movement and assembly.
The Council of Ministers also issued several decrees in April and May and on 9 July
regulating the restrictive protocols. Meanwhile, the borders remained closed.
18. On 22 April, with the Supreme Court unable to rule on the legal challenge over
the run-off presidential election, ECOWAS issued a communiqué in which it outlined
a way forward to resolve the political and institutional crisis. It stated that, following
its thorough analysis of the political situation and on the basis of the final results
announced by the National Electoral Commission, the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS had decided to recognize Mr. Embaló as the winner of the
run-off. ECOWAS called for the appointment of a Prime Minister and the formation
of a new Government by 22 May, in accordance with the Constitution. It also stressed
the need to expedite a review of the Constitution, subject to a referendum within six
months, to ensure national stability. The African Union, the European Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and my Executive Office issued
statements in which they took note of the ECOWAS decision. On 1 July, the Security
Council issued a press statement, also taking note of the ECOWAS decision; it
expressed concern about the events that had resulted in the unfolding political and
institutional crisis and strongly urged the population to respect the decision of
ECOWAS and to work together to implement it without further delay. The Council
also called upon the defence and security forces of Guinea-Bissau not to interfere in
the political process.
19. Reacting to the ECOWAS decision, the Office of the Speaker of the People ’s
National Assembly, in a press release issued on 24 April, argued that the resolution of
the legal challenge over the run-off was exclusively under the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, the highest institution of the State. It was also noted that the validity
of any post-electoral action must conform to the Constitution. The Permanent
Commission of PAIGC, the party’s leadership body, also criticized ECOWAS. It
stated that Mr. Embaló’s self-investiture was a coup intended to prevent the Court
from ruling on the electoral dispute. It demanded recognition of the Government
formed as a result of the legislative elections of March 2019, with a programme
approved by the People’s National Assembly.
20. On 27 April, a faction of the APU-PDGB party leadership issued a communiqué
in which it reiterated its support for the PAIGC parliamentary alliance and
commended its parliamentarians for upholding the agreement. They expressed their
disagreement with the party leader, Mr. Nabiam, for associating with an illegal
Government.
21. On 28 April, pursuant to the ECOWAS decision, Mr. Embaló held individual
meetings with the group of five international partners represented in Guinea-Bissau
(the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations). He informed them of his intention to hold
consultations with political parties represented in the People’s National Assembly, as
well as other national stakeholders, to reach consensus on the nomination of a Prime
Minister and the formation of a national unity Government. On 29 April and 19 and
25 May, he also met separately with PAIGC, MADEM-G15, PRS, APU-PDGB, and
PND, as well as the Speaker of the Assembly. UM declined the invitation.
22. On 7 May, ahead of a planned meeting of the PAIGC-led parliamentary majority
alliance at the People’s National Assembly, security forces blocked access to and
4/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

occupied the building. They prevented Members of Parliament and parliamentary
officials from entering the building, citing “orders from above”. Hours later, the
security forces left the building without incident. Later that day, the PAIGC -led
alliance issued a communiqué in which it reiterated that a Government was already
in place on the basis of the outcome of the legislative elections of 2019 with an
approved programme. The alliance expressed openness to finding ways to restore
constitutional order but with a defined road map to implement the ECOWAS decision
in its entirety.
23. On 10 May, the Political Concertation Forum – PAIGC, APU-PDGB, PND, UM,
the National Unity Party and the Democratic Convergence Party – wrote to the
President of the ECOWAS Commission, requesting ECOWAS to ensure the
implementation of and respect for its decision of 22 April by all political actors in the
country. The group recalled that the results of the legislative elections of 2019 had
determined the composition of the current People’s National Assembly and, as the
Constitution required, the Government, which was the emanation of the balance of
power decided by the voters.
24. On 17 May, Mr. Embaló met the President of the Niger, Mahamadou Issoufou,
in the latter’s capacity as Chair of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and
Government, and the President of Nigeria, Muhammadu Buhari, in their capitals. He
stated that his objective was to consult on the way forward, including with respect to
forging a Government of national unity.
25. On 21 May, PAIGC held separate meetings with political parties with
parliamentary representation to seek consensus for a broad-based Government to be
led by PAIGC and propose the establishment of a memorandum of understanding.
MADEM-G15, PRS and APU-PDGB refused to sign the memorandum, stressing that,
as a new majority in the People’s National Assembly, they should lead the
Government. They nonetheless expressed readiness to engage in a search for a
solution.
26. On 25 May, following a failed attempt to reach consensus on the nomination of
a Prime Minister and the formation of a unity Government, Mr. Embaló requested the
Speaker of the People’s National Assembly to facilitate stakeholder consultations in
order to reach a common position by 18 June, for his consideration and decision by
19 June. Addressing the press, he said that all options remained open, including
dissolving the Assembly in the absence of an agreement.
27. On 28 May, the Speaker of the People’s National Assembly launched
consultations with stakeholders. However, following inconclusive talks and a meeting
with Mr. Embaló, he announced that a plenary session of the Assembly would be held
on 29 June to establish whether the PAIGC-led coalition or the coalition led by
MADEM-G15 held the majority, which would qualify that bloc to appoint the Prime
Minister and lead the formation of the Government. Mr. Embaló made public
statements indicating that he would await the outcome of the session before deciding
on the dissolution of the Assembly. Meanwhile, the ECOWAS deadline of 22 May
elapsed and was informally extended to 22 June to allow Mr. Embaló to continue his
political consultations, in the light of the COVID-19 movement restrictions.
28. On 28 June, Mr. Embaló issued a decree to dismiss five ministers in the Nabiamled Government. The ministers, all Members of Parliament from MADEM-G15 and
PRS, had not yet been replaced in the People’s National Assembly following their
appointment to the new Government. The Constitution does not allow for ministers
to also retain their parliamentary seats. The move allowed the dismissed ministers to
resume their role in the Assembly as Members of Parliament, thereby boosting the
numbers of the MADEM-G15 alliance in the anticipated tight vote the next day to

20-10005

5/17

S/2020/755

determine which of the two rival alliances (PAIGC or the Movement for Democratic
Change) held the parliamentary majority.
29. On 29 June, the ordinary session of the People’s National Assembly was held.
There were 27 Members of Parliament from MADEM-G15, 21 from PRS, 1 from
APU-PDGB and the sole Member of Parliament from PND participating in the
session. In disregard of their party’s call for a boycott, six PAIGC parliamentarians
also participated, including the Speaker. That brought the total number of participants
to 56 (out of 102), meeting the quorum of at least 52 Members of Parliament. With
55 votes in favour and 1 against, the Assembly approved an amended agenda to
consider the Nabiam-led Government’s programme, and subsequently voted to
approve the programme.
30. It should be noted that the initial appointment of Mr. Nabiam on 29 February as
Prime Minister had not been preceded by consultation with the political parties
represented in the People’s National Assembly, as required by the Constitution.
However, on 29 June, the Assembly’s majority vote and approval of his Government’s
programme conferred on his Government the parliamentary approval required by the
Constitution.
31. Parallel to the unfolding People’s National Assembly session on 29 June,
PAIGC held a press conference to explain that the party had decided to boycott the
session on account of poor security conditions and public health concerns related to
the COVID-19 restrictive protocols. The party also cited irregularities regarding the
composition of the presiding bench of the session.
32. On 1 July, the People’s National Assembly session continued with the
participation of the PAIGC Members of Parliament who had hitherto boycotted it. The
leader of the PAIGC parliamentary group, Califa Seidi, reiterated allegations that
irregularities had occurred at the meeting of 29 June, stating that the party would
challenge in court the approval by the Assembly of the Nabiam-led Government’s
programme. On 3 July, the ministers dismissed on 28 June from the initial Nabiamled Government were reinstated.
33. On 13 July, the President of the Niger, in his capacity as Chair of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government, congratulated Mr. Embaló on the
approval of the Nabiam-led Government’s programme. He urged him to unite the
population to ensure peace and stability and to comply with the ECOWAS road map
in order to resolve the recurrent political and institutional crisis. He assured
Mr. Embaló that ECOWAS would provide support for completion of the
constitutional review under way in order to end the chronic instability.

B.

Security situation
34. The security situation remained stable, but uncertain, especially given the
visible role of the military in the political crisis. In the wake of the COVID-19 health
emergency, there were reports of instances of excessive use of force by security forces
to enforce lockdown measures, such as restrictions on movement and public
gatherings. However, no major incidents were reported.

C.

Human rights situation
35. Human rights violations increased. There were reports of excessive use of force,
threats and intimidation against political opponents, human rights defenders and
journalists. The state of emergency, while deemed necessary to curb the spread of
COVID-19, constrained and restricted civil liberties and provided an enabling

6/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

environment for abuses. Although hate speech declined following the declaration of
the state of emergency, inflammatory remarks against the international community,
including the United Nations and its staff, increased.
36. Between 4 and 10 March, threats and abuses were reported against the Speaker
of the People’s National Assembly, the dismissed Prime Minister and members of his
Government. The withdrawal of ECOMIB from the guard duty of State institutions
and residences of government officials generated fear and panic, making perceived
opponents of the new authorities vulnerable to intimidation and other abuses. On
24 March and 8 April, four Supreme Court judges reported acts of intimidation and
threats that impaired the functioning of the Court.
37. Following the dismissal of the Gomes-led Government and the closure of media
stations by the military, many journalists were threatened, particularly those active on
social media. On 12 March, the Guinean Human Rights League condemned those
threats in a press release. On 25 March, the Executive Board of Radio Capital FM
wrote to General N’Tam to denounce persecution and attacks against a journalist by
members of the military.
38. On 6 April, the Secretary of State for Public Order apologized to the population
for the excessive use of force and inhumane treatment by security elements in
enforcing lockdown measures. On 18 and 19 April, the Human Rights Defenders
Network reported the arrest of 300 and 200 persons, respectively, including women
and children, in attempts to enforce the lockdown. Additional cases of beatings of
women by police officers were reported on 1 May in Mansôa (Oio Region) and on
13 May in Bissau, with a victim in Bissau hospitalized for physical injuries. No
perpetrators were identified and no investigations carried out.
39. On 22 May, in Bissau, unknown armed individuals kidnapped the Member of
Parliament and leader of the APU-PDGB parliamentary bench, Marciano Indi. He was
released the same day, following an intervention by the Speaker of the People ’s
National Assembly. He is one of the four parliamentarians from APU-PDGB who
support the continuation of the APU-PDGB parliamentary agreement signed with
PAIGC in March 2019. Also, on 20 June, a member of the PAIGC Permanent
Commission, Armando Dias, was arrested and detained by police officers for
allegedly being in possession of weapons found in a vehicle in which he was
travelling with two other individuals. On the same day, the Nabiam-led Government
issued a statement in which it acknowledged serious threats made against
parliamentarians. The Government recalled that threats against and harassment of
parliamentarians for opinions rendered in the exercise of their mandate were
punishable by law. On 21 June, the PAIGC Permanent Commission issued a statement
in which it detailed a series of events and acts of intimidation, including the arrest
and detention of Mr. Dias. It claimed that, although Mr. Dias was in the company of
two other individuals and was not the owner of the vehicle in which the weapons were
allegedly found, he was the only person arrested. PAIGC further stated that the
communiqué issued by the Government was “steeped in falsehoods”, called upon
ECOWAS and the international community to take note of the deterioration of
political freedoms in the country and appealed to them to take measures to address it.
40. The conditions of detainees worsened owing to inadequate resources.
Mr. Embaló pardoned nine male prisoners on 8 May, and other measures to reduce
overcrowding in prisons were implemented, although the prison in Bissau remained
at full capacity with 54 male prisoners. As a result, the observance of COVID -19
physical distancing protocols for detainees was affected.

20-10005

7/17

S/2020/755

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
41. The group of five international partners represented in Guinea-Bissau, the
United Nations Resident Coordinator and the representatives of the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the World Bank adopted a common approach to support the
country’s contingency plan to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. The group issued a
joint statement on 27 March to shore up international support and ensure a collective
intervention.
42. The Resident Coordinator, as well as the representatives of WHO and the World
Bank, initiated dialogue with the new national authorities on humanitarian grounds to
agree on the criteria for partner support. WHO continued to work with the Public
Health Emergency Operation Centre, which was set up by an interministerial
committee to define and implement COVID-19 related priorities. The changes in the
leadership structure of the Ministry of Public Health, amid the pandemic, deepened
existing coordination challenges within the fragile health system.
43. The European Union provided €1.3 million to WHO and €230,000 to
non-governmental organizations for much-needed interventions. The World Bank also
allocated $6.5 million from its Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement
project funds and pledged an additional $6 million from its COVID-19 Fast-Track
Facility. Both the International Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank
are preparing projects to support the country’s COVID-19 response and recovery
plan. United Nations agencies have also mobilized funds to extend support.
44. WHO, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Food
Programme (WFP), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) reprogrammed their support to focus
on preparedness and the response to the pandemic. The Public Health Emergency
Operation Centre was revamped under WHO leadership and supported by UNICEF,
WFP, UNDP and IOM. Surveillance at points of entry was strengthened, risk
communication strategies were initiated, a national contingency plan was developed,
funding mobilization strategies were put in place, the Centre’s logistic accountability
was enhanced and the National Hospital Simão Mendes is being refurbished for case
management. To ensure the coordination of risk communication interventions, a
United Nations COVID-19 communication task force, led by UNICEF, was
established in March.
45. Following confirmation of the first two COVID-19 cases in Bissau on 24 March,
7 of the 11 health regions in the country registered cases, reaching over 1,949
confirmed cases, with 803 recoveries and 26 deaths as at 18 July. However, case
management centres for isolation and quarantine have not been fully utilized, given
that, in most confirmed cases, the individuals remain with their families.
46. Measures taken by the national authorities to curb COVID-19 have had
socioeconomic consequences for the poor, especially those at risk of malnutrition and
food insecurity. In addition to women bearing the burden of care, their food intake,
nutritional status and ability to gain access to health-care services have been
disproportionately affected and could lead to increased morbidity and mortality
related to other underlying conditions.
47. A WFP assessment, conducted from 29 April to 11 May, illustrated that the food
security situation deteriorated following the lockdown measures, leading to some
households’ reducing their food intake or borrowing food. About 63 per cent of
households reported food shortages and 68 per cent reported not having stocked food ,
while 80 per cent faced challenges in gaining access to markets owing to curfews,
lack of transportation or fear of infection. The assessment also revealed reductions in

8/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

cashew nut sales, with only half of the farmers able to sell or exchange part of the ir
harvest at much reduced prices. WFP nutritional support is helping to mitigate
malnutrition and its related health effects, including in the Bafatá, Gabú and Oio
Regions. However, an inability to monitor patients regularly and difficulties in
referring at-risk cases and in providing nutritional counselling to mothers remain
challenges.
48. School closures created an additional burden for children in rural households,
as 180,000 children were unable to receive WFP school meals. To support children
and families, WFP distributed 197 tons of food to 45,000 children in 540 schools
between 19 and 27 May. The exercise is to be repeated using food grown locally by
women and youth smallholder farmers. The risk remains high of leaving behind
vulnerable groups, such as women and girls who are victims of unreported cases of
gender-based violence, persons deprived of liberty and persons with disabilities.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
49. There was marginal progress in the implementation of the UNIOGBIS mandate.
The protracted electoral dispute, coupled with COVID-19, demanded attention from
national stakeholders and affected the mission’s ability to engage on critical
peacebuilding priorities. The situation hampered the political engagement of the
United Nations with the authorities on the transition; nonetheless, UNIOGBIS made
considerable progress in the transition planning process and drawdown plans for its
eventual closure by 31 December 2020.
50. The mission, in consultation with the United Nations Country Team, developed
a series of documents outlining peacebuilding priorities and entry points. They
include inclusive political dialogue and reform of the political system; State-building
and strengthening of institutions; combating of drug trafficking and organized crime;
strengthening of judicial capacity and human rights; and empowerment, participation
and full representation of women in all processes. The documents were further
reviewed during a retreat held on 2 and 3 March for UNIOGBIS and the Country
Team.

A.

Implementation of the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation
of the Economic Community of West African States Road Map for
the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau and the
Economic Community of West African States road map
51. UNIOGBIS continued its engagement with national and international partners
to maintain the momentum in political dialogue and lay the groundwork for the
implementation of the critical institutional reforms outlined in the Conakry
Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic Community of West African
States Road Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea -Bissau. My
Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau encouraged national stakeholders to
implement critical peacebuilding priorities necessary for stability. However, the
protracted electoral dispute has stalled progress in that regard, including the proposal
to create a high-level platform for extending strategic support to the national
authorities in the implementation of the reform agenda. Consequently, my Special
Representative has focused on supporting inclusive dialogue and confidence-building

20-10005

9/17

S/2020/755

measures, including by advocating that political stakeholders focus on dialogue and
overcome the prevailing mistrust affecting the country’s stability.
52. On 3 March, with support from UNIOGBIS and the Peacebuilding Fund, the
network of civil society organizations published its first report on the reform process,
covering the outcomes of workshops held in May and June 2019 on electoral and
political party law, public administration, justice and security sector reform and the
annotated version of the Constitution. The report contributed to the development of
technical documents for academic and civil society participation in future
consultations on the reform agenda.
53. The activities of the organizing commission of the national conference towards
the consolidation of peace and development in Guinea-Bissau, supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund, were limited owing to the political crisis and the stat e of
emergency. Consequently, with UNIOGBIS support, efforts were refocused on
awareness-raising tools, such as billboards displaying messages on reconciliation in
Bissau and the regions. The mission, however, produced a video and a photographic
exhibition of the history of Guinea-Bissau in preparation for the conference. A
website was also created to enhance the visibility of the conference.

B.

Review of the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau
54. Through my Special Representative’s engagement, national stakeholders
confirmed their support for a constitutional review and a comprehensive reform
agenda. The United Nations system consistently reiterated its readiness to support the
process. However, since the previous report (S/2020/105), the uncertainties in the
political environment have hampered the effective functioning of the People’s
National Assembly and its ad hoc commission for the review of the Constitution.
55. Against that background, on 11 May, the President issued a decree to establish
a technical commission for the review of the Constitution with a three-month mandate
to present a draft. On 12 and 14 May, respectively, he appointed and swore in the
Commission’s five members and four experts. Meanwhile, on 12 May, the Guinean
Human Rights League expressed concern about the establishment of the Commission,
describing it as a serious violation of the Constitution, on the grounds that
constitutional review is the prerogative of the People’s National Assembly. On
14 May, the National Civil Society Movement for Peace, Democracy and
Development issued a communiqué in which it noted with concern the creation of the
Commission during a state of emergency to undertake a legislative task. It appealed
to all political actors to engage in dialogue to build consensus and for the Assembly
to accelerate the constitutional review under way.

C.

Promotion and protection of human rights
56. As part of efforts to build national human rights capacities, UNIOGBIS trained
30 members, including 11 women, of the Federation of Associations for the Defence
and Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Bubaque, Bolama region.
57. UNIOGBIS monitored high-profile cases, including the case of the Deputy
Director of the State Intelligence Service, arbitrarily detained on 5 February at the
Military Airbase barracks in Bissau, and advocated his release after a writ of habeas
corpus was submitted on 22 February. In addition, the mission successfully advocated
the eventual release of five detainees held in prolonged detention. It also monitored
the case of the Minister of Justice under the Gomes-led Government, Ruth Monteiro,
who was questioned and charged on 8 April with, among other things, possession of

10/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

a State vehicle. The charges and the restrictions on her movement were lifted on
23 April, whereupon she left the country on 28 April.
58. UNIOGBIS advocated the mainstreaming of human rights in COVID-19
response efforts and enhanced its collaboration with the Human Rights Defenders
Network on early warning of and advocacy against human rights violations.

D.

Combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
59. UNIOGBIS facilitated strategic coordination to enhance the capacity of law
enforcement and justice institutions to combat drug trafficking and organized crime.
Support was provided to operationalize the case management database that had been
validated in December 2019. As a result, the database was populated with information
to track and help to analyse drug trafficking and organized crime cases for high -level
decision-making purposes.
60. UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) also
assisted the national law enforcement and judicial authorities with the investigation,
prosecution and adjudication of drug trafficking cases, including the “Navara trial”
in relation to the seizure of 1,869 kg of cocaine in September 2019. The ruling resulted
in sentences of from 4 to 16 years’ imprisonment for the 12 accused (2 in absentia)
and the confiscation of their assets. The defendants appealed to the Supreme Court
on 8 April. Similarly, support was provided for the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) in Bissau to conduct random inspections of major hotels
to search for international criminals listed in the INTERPOL intelligence database,
resulting in 13 suspects being detected and 1 arrested.
61. UNIOGBIS facilitated sessions on internal security for heads of security
through the Policing and Internal Security Coordination Group to enhance the
coordination and effective utilization of the Community Policing Forum. Sessions
were held in Bissau and in the Buba regional model police station, with the latter
resulting in the arrest of 11 suspects for illegal possession of cannabis in the Quinara
Region. The seizure reinforced community confidence in the police. Furthermore, the
Peacebuilding Fund approved a new project to address the destabilizing effects of
drug trafficking and organized crime in Guinea-Bissau.
62. On 14 March, a Portuguese national was arrested by the Judicial Police at the
Osvaldo Vieira International Airport with 83 capsules of cocaine, but was then
released by officers of the National Guard. UNIOGBIS, in coordination with
UNODC, is providing technical guidance to the Judicial Police on the investigation
relating to that incident. Preliminary findings reveal that the suspect has since
returned to Portugal. Furthermore, following the alleged entry into the country of
suspected drug traffickers, UNIOGBIS and UNODC are monitoring the ongoing
investigation and verification with INTERPOL in Portugal of the aircraft’s passenger
manifest.

E.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding
63. UNIOGBIS organized several meetings with women leaders on promoting
social cohesion, including a retreat in Djalikunda, Oio Region, from 21 to
23 February. Fifty participants, drawn from the major political parties and civil
society, discussed ways to build consensus and underscored the urgent need for
dialogue among political leaders. However, follow-up actions were hindered by the
political and institutional crisis, which created rifts within the group and challenges
for women’s mobilization.

20-10005

11/17

S/2020/755

64. In that context, UNIOGBIS engaged the Guinea-Bissau Women’s Council to
explore mediation options. However, the COVID-19 pandemic stalled efforts in that
regard. Consequently, the mission calibrated its support to assist women’s groups
with advocacy, monitoring, reporting and coordination to ensure gender sensitivity in
the COVID-19 response. UNIOGBIS also coordinated advocacy by the United
Nations Gender Thematic Working Group for mainstreaming gender in the COVID 19 response and recovery effort.
65. Between 12 April and 3 May, UNIOGBIS, in coordination with UNICEF and
national partners, provided technical and financial support for the Network on Peace
and Security for Women in the ECOWAS Region. The support facilitated the
Network’s dialogue with the municipal authorities in Bissau for the preparation and
management of a new market space created by the authorities to decongest the Bissau
central market, where the sellers are predominantly women. Protective masks
produced by an association of women with disabilities were provided. The market is
managed by women and youth volunteers. The Network, local women and youth
partners are exploring the possibility of setting up additional markets.

F.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of
international assistance
66. In the light of the protracted electoral crisis, UNIOGBIS has intensified its
engagement with international partners to harmonize strategies and common
messaging to reinforce the ECOWAS-led mediation efforts. The group of five
international partners has coordinated efforts to defuse tensions and advocate urgent
investment in long-term stability.
67. My Special Representative has advocated the creation of a platform for reforms,
with a similar format to the High-level Steering Committee on the Elections. It is
envisaged that the platform will provide support for the country in its reforms, keep
partners and relevant stakeholders abreast of the reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau and place the country high on the international
community’s agenda. On 24 February and 25 June, my Special Representative briefed
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission on recent
developments and explored avenues for the Commission to provide furt her support
during the transition, as well as contribute to the coordination and coherence of
peacebuilding efforts.
68. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel continued to provide
regional support for the good offices efforts of my Special Representative for GuineaBissau by engaging with regional stakeholders, in coordination with the ECOWAS
Commission and within the framework of the group of five, to address political
challenges.

IV. Transition plan and drawdown arrangements
69. The planning and implementation for the transition and closure of UNIOGBIS
by 31 December 2020 continued. The United Nations presence identified its
peacebuilding priorities, including those tasks currently implemented by UNIOGBIS
for which the United Nations Country Team or the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) would assume responsibility after the closure of the
mission. The staff drawdown and liquidation plans were prepared, a Country Team
capacity assessment was initiated and a broader capacity assessment of national,
regional and international actors was to be conducted by September. A conflict
analysis was completed and the drafting of the common country assessment is on
12/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

track. The completion of the assessment is a necessary step towards formulating the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for the period
2021–2025. A resource mobilization strategy in support of the Cooperation
Framework is to be prepared upon the completion of the comprehensive capacity
assessment and the common country assessment. The Cooperation Framework, once
finalized, will ensure the consolidation of the peacebuilding gains achieved by
UNIOGBIS and allow for continued United Nations support for national development
priorities consistent with the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda.
The transition calendar timelines for some of the milestones were slightly adjusted
owing to the political crisis and the outbreak of COVID-19.
70. Regular meetings of the United Nations Integrated Transition Task Team,
comprising UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Country Team and UNOWAS, were held.
The discussions focused, inter alia, on assessing progress made in the implementation
of transition activities and on reinforcing the United Nations footprint following the
UNIOGBIS closure, including through the development of related projects on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace to be funded by the Peacebuilding Fund.
71. On 26 March, a lessons-learned virtual meeting between UNIOGBIS,
UNOWAS and the United Nations resident coordinators in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire
was held. The exercise was instrumental to gaining knowledge and understanding of
best practices and lessons learned to ensure a smooth transition process.
72. In order to preserve institutional memory and support the continuation of United
Nations interventions in the country, UNIOGBIS prepared a set of background
documents on achievements and lessons learned. A shared online repository of
documents related to the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in GuineaBissau was also created.
73. To support the effective engagement of the United Nations Country Team in the
transition, an interim transition adviser was seconded from United Nations
Headquarters in February. The adviser is supporting the completion of the common
country assessment, a review of the United Nations Partnership Assistance
Framework 2020 workplan to incorporate the identified residual peacebuilding
priorities and the Country Team capacity assessment to enable effective planning of
the United Nations reconfiguration. The recruitment of a peace and development
adviser to support political and peacebuilding analysis, as well as the recruitment of
a long-term transition specialist and full staffing of the Resident Coordinator’s Office,
is ongoing.
74. A communication strategy for the mission’s closure was developed by
UNIOGBIS, in coordination with the United Nations Country Team, targeting internal
and external audiences. Internal town hall meetings were held and broadcast messages
were sent regularly to update staff on the implementation of the drawdown plan.
External United Nations communication has focused on reporting on Security Council
resolution 2512 (2020) confirming the mission’s closure, as well as providing updates
on efforts to implement the drawdown and the transfer of residual peacebuilding
priorities to the Country Team, UNOWAS and other partners. UNIOGBIS plans to
work with the United Nations Communication Group, which it transferred to the
Country Team in January, to launch the joint United Nations Guinea-Bissau website.
The United Nations Population Fund will provide resources to the Communication
Group to produce the United Nations radio programme and newsletter.
75. The mission’s phased staff drawdown and liquidation are guided by the
drawdown and closure plan. Phased in conjunction with the transition timelines for
the transfer of residual tasks and functions, which was agreed upon in consu ltation
with the United Nations Country Team and UNOWAS, the plan ensures a gradual
descaling of resources. Emphasis is placed on the disposal of assets, site handover,
20-10005

13/17

S/2020/755

archiving and records management, staff drawdown and environmental restoration.
Staff members have been notified of their termination dates. Of the current 121 staff,
93 will be separated by 31 December, while 28 will remain for the mission ’s
liquidation.
76. The progress in transition planning and programming notwithstanding, the
political crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic had a severe impact on United Nations
engagement with the national authorities, posing challenges for the effective
implementation of the transition. It is envisaged that the validation of the
peacebuilding priorities by the authorities and the completion of a comprehensive
capacity assessment will resume following the approval by the People’s National
Assembly of the Nabiam-led Government’s programme. The United Nations will
engage with the new Government to ensure full involvement, participation and
ownership of the transition process by the national authorities and will advance efforts
towards producing a national development vision to formulate the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework in support of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda.

V. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
77. On 2 and 3 March, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Country Team held a
retreat to foster a common vision and shared approach for the transition process, as
well as to identify challenges and opportunities. The Strategic Policy Group,
composed of the heads of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
UNIOGBIS leadership, agreed on a common strategy and modalities to advance the
transition. The Integrated Transition Task Team continued with transition activities,
which included the formulation of the transition calendar, the drawdown plan, the
transfer of residual mandated tasks and peacebuilding priorities and the development
of related projects to be funded by the Peacebuilding Fund.
78. The programme management team, established in mid-December 2019, under
the leadership of my Deputy Special Representative and Resident Coordinator,
continued to strengthen United Nations integrated planning and coordination for the
development of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework for the period 2021–2025, which will provide support for the residual
peacebuilding priorities, following the drawdown of UNIOGBIS.
79. UNIOGBIS and UNOWAS further enhanced their cooperation in undertaking
combined good offices efforts in support of the reform agenda. Together with
ECOWAS, they launched a tripartite integrated cooperation and coordination
mechanism for the UNIOGBIS transition on 3 June to increase coordination and
ensure a seamless transfer of peacebuilding priorities from the mission to other
stakeholders. It will meet monthly at the technical and principal levels until
December. On 23 June, the President of the ECOWAS Commission, my Special
Representative for Guinea-Bissau and my Special Representative for West Africa and
the Sahel held their first tripartite meeting and agreed to intensify joint action to
support national efforts to resolve the political crisis and ensure a seamless United
Nations transition.

B.

Public information
80. UNIOGBIS produced five radio programmes that were broadcast on 28 local
radio stations to raise awareness about peace and reconciliation, the mission ’s

14/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

mandate and COVID-19 preventive measures. Over 100,000 people were reached. In
addition, eight press releases were issued on political and mandate -related activities,
including the United Nations transition.
81. Through funding from the Peacebuilding Fund, UNIOGBIS supported a youth
group to set up a fact-checking team to trace and verify fake news about COVID-19
that was impeding the country’s response, increasing mistrust and potentially
triggering social unrest. The mission also supported the United Nations COVID -19
Communication Task Force in implementing the national contingency plan against
COVID-19, including the training of 34 journalists, of whom 14 were women.
82. Similarly, with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund, UNIOGBIS extended its
support to the journalists’ union by assisting journalists in their career paths and
supported the publication of the work of nine investigative journalists on various
topics. In line with the transition plan, the UNIOGBIS Public Information Unit is
continuing its efforts to develop a mission legacy report.

C.

Staff safety and security
83. The overall security situation for United Nations personnel remained stable.
While there were some minor road traffic accidents, the most significant incident was
a burglary at the residence of an international staff member, resulting in the theft of
personal belongings and United Nations assets. However, threats were made on social
media against UNIOGBIS and UNDP staff members who were involved in
monitoring and advocating the protection of the human rights of the Minister of
Justice in the Government led by Aristides Gomes.
84. To ensure business continuity during the pandemic, the United Nations security
management system deployed measures for the continuation of critical United
Nations-mandated activities, conducted a risk assessment and put in place mitigation
measures. Regular security broadcasts were issued advising personnel of the security
situation, as well as reporting on national security measures regarding the state of
emergency and curfew.

VI. Observations and recommendations
85. In the context of a protracted political and institutional crisis, exacerbated by
the outbreak of COVID-19, I acknowledge the mediation efforts led by ECOWAS and
supported by international partners, including the group of five, which allowed for a
political solution to help to stabilize the situation. Deep-seated mistrust continues to
exacerbate divisions among political actors, and concerted actions are required of all
national stakeholders, with the support of the international community, to further
stabilize the fragile governance system, ensure the effective functioning of State
institutions and address other pressing political and socioeconomic challenges.
86. I took note of the ECOWAS decision of 22 April by which it recognized
Mr. Embaló as the winner of the run-off presidential election of 29 December 2019.
I note that the ordinary session of the People’s National Assembly began on 29 June,
at which the Assembly approved the Nabiam-led Government’s programme. I urge
all political parties to engage in inclusive and genuine dialogue to reach consensus on
outstanding issues. I stress the urgent need for inclusive and participatory governance
that will bring stability and create momentum for institutional reforms. The reform
agenda remains critical to the stability of Guinea-Bissau. I further urge the President,
the Government, parliamentarians and all political stakeholders to work
collaboratively to enact the critical reforms envisaged in the ECOWAS road map, the
20-10005

15/17

S/2020/755

Conakry Agreement and the Stability Pact. Renewed efforts should focus on the
implementation of the reform agenda in line with the ECOWAS decision of 22 April,
in which the need to accelerate the constitutional review was stressed.
87. I urge the international community to continue to support national efforts
towards the implementation of the reform agenda. I also encourage the international
community to help to generate new momentum for inclusive collaboration with
national stakeholders, building on the work already initiated, with particular emphasis
on the review of the Constitution and electoral law and reforms of the security and
judicial institutions. In that respect, I welcome my Special Representative ’s proposal
to establish a high-level platform comprising national and international stakeholders
to accompany the reform agenda. It is envisaged that the platform, when established,
will help to build consensus among international and national actors and help to
coordinate support to advance critical reforms.
88. The promotion and protection of human rights and respect for the rule of law
are essential for peace, security and political stabilization. I strongly urge the defence
and security forces to refrain from all interference in the political process, as that risks
undermining peace and stability. I call upon the State authorities to ensure
accountability for those engaging in acts of intimidation, including threats to life, hate
speech and incitement to violence. I also encourage all stakeholders to help to create
an environment conducive to respect for human rights and the rule of law, in particular
for women and for perceived opposition representatives, and to refrain from actions
that might fuel mistrust, fear or hatred among the population. Within the framework
of the United Nations transition, the establishment of an independent national human
rights institution, compliant with the principles relating to the status of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles),
remains a critical peacebuilding priority.
89. The political environment, coupled with a prolonged state of emergency,
appears to be creating an enabling environment for drug trafficking and organized
crime networks to regroup and resume their operations. The circumstance s of the
removal and replacement of heads of national security institutions, as well as security
officers at the airport and border posts, may have had a negative impact on the
effective functioning of those institutions. It is critical that the national a uthorities
swiftly demonstrate their commitment to combating drug trafficking, including by
supporting the full implementation of the national strategic action plan validated in
December 2019. I also encourage the international community to continue to sup port
the country in addressing the scourges of drug trafficking and organized crime.
UNODC and UNIOGBIS will continue to closely monitor and report on the impact
of the new political dynamics and the pandemic on drug trafficking and organized
crime, with a view to helping to prevent traffickers from exploiting the current
situation.
90. Guinea-Bissau has been particularly hard hit by the COVID-19 pandemic, given
the poor state of its health infrastructure and public administration. I appreciate the
support of the European Union and the World Bank, and the efforts made by United
Nations agencies, to mitigate the health and socioeconomic fallout. I further appeal
to the international community to extend additional support to help to build national
capacity in the public administration. Targeted interventions in key areas such as basic
services and economic recovery will be crucial to address the growing socioeconomic
needs.
91. Despite the political challenges, there was progress towards the drawdown and
closure of UNIOGBIS by 31 December 2020, including the identification of
peacebuilding priorities to be continued by UNOWAS and the United Nations
Country Team in particular. To further bolster integrated transition planning,
16/17

20-10005

S/2020/755

UNIOGBIS is to expedite the completion of the comprehensive capacity mapping,
which is vital for finalizing the resource mobilization strategy and subsequently
mobilizing the requisite resources to avert a financial cliff.
92. UNIOGBIS will continue to implement its drawdown plan in collaboration with
the United Nations Country Team and UNOWAS, while remaining flexible and
adaptive to the changing operational realities resulting from COVID -19. It will also
ensure that the drawdown, closure and liquidation are undertaken with full regard for
the environmental impact. Furthermore, the mission will work with the new
Government to ensure national buy-in and ownership of the transition process and
milestones.
93. I commend the ECOWAS leaders, particularly the President of the Niger, in his
capacity as Chair of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government, and
all international partners for their tireless efforts towards long-term peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau. Sustained international engagement remains crucial for
peacebuilding and reforms following the exit of UNIOGBIS. In this respect, I
welcome the ECOWAS, UNIOGBIS and UNOWAS tripartite Integrated Cooperation
and Coordination Mechanism to support the political and United Nations transition
processes. I also commend the group of five international partners for the long standing commitment to peace and stability.
94. Last, I wish to express my appreciation to regional and international partners in
Guinea-Bissau for their continued cooperation with the mission. I also extend my
sincere appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Country Team,
under the leadership of my Special Representative, for their commitment and hard
work. I commend the continued close collaboration between UNIOGBIS and
UNOWAS on the political and transition processes, which is critical for ensuring a
seamless United Nations transition.

20-10005

17/17
