S/2006/362

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 June 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 2 June 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Further to a request from the Security Council, please find attached a copy of
the letter dated 21 May 2006 addressed to me by Sir Elihu Lauterpacht providing a
report on the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission’s meeting of 17 May 2006 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-37496 (E) 090606

*0637496*

S/2006/362

Annex
Letter dated 21 May 2006 from the President of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission addressed to the
Secretary-General
Although the next quarterly report of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
Commission is not due until the end of May, in view of the present concern of the
Security Council with the problem of the demarcation of the boundary between
Eritrea and Ethiopia, I wish to report without delay on the meeting that the
Boundary Commission held with the parties in London on 17 May 2006.
The meeting was a follow-up to the previous meeting with the parties held on
10 March 2006. At that earlier meeting, the Boundary Commission emphasized to
the parties that the demarcation process which the Commission had been obliged to
suspend in late 2003 had to be resumed and completed without further delay. In
stating this, the Boundary Commission was reflecting the concern shown by the
Security Council, the African Union and other interested States at the possible
deterioration in the situation due to the Boundary Commission being prevented from
proceeding with the demarcation.
At those two meetings, the Boundary Commission proceeded on the basis that
both parties were committed without condition or qualification to the full
implementation of the Boundary Commission’s delimitation decision of 13 April
2002. Neither party has disputed this.
At the meeting on 17 May 2006, the Boundary Commission informed the
parties of its intention, as a first step in the resumption of the demarcation process,
to proceed immediately to reopen the Boundary Commission’s field offices in Addis
Ababa and Asmara. Neither party expressed any disagreement with this step. Taken
by itself, however, this step is only of formal significance. The offices have to be
staffed, the surveyors have to be re-employed and contracts have to be concluded,
initially with the companies that will prepare the boundary pillar sites and, without
the same need for urgency, construct the boundary pillars themselves.
I wrote to you on 14 March and 4 May 2006 seeking your assistance in
speeding up the process of making these employment and service contracts. On
18 April 2006 you told me that every effort would be made with United Nations
procurement regulations to expedite the solicitation of a suitable contractor.
However, there has been little, if any, improvement in the situation. Because of the
procedures that some apparently believe must still be followed, it will not be
possible to put surveyors in place for many weeks and the same is true for the
contracts with the construction companies.
There are two further factors that impede progress. One is the re-establishment
of arrangements to ensure security of the Boundary Commission’s field personnel,
its surveyors and the contractors. Without satisfactory safety arrangements, no one
will work in the area. Both parties accept that the primary obligation to ensure the
safety of personnel rests on them in respect of the areas in which each has control.
Eritrea submitted a security plan as long ago as 14 October 2003, but it assumed that
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) was operating
normally and effectively, which, of course, is currently not so. Ethiopia has not yet
submitted a plan, saying that it cannot do so until it knows what role UNMEE will

2

S/2006/362

be able to play. The Boundary Commission, at the 17 May 2006 meeting, reiterated
its request that Ethiopia produce by 19 May 2006 a security plan based on the
assumption that UNMEE will be able to continue to play its part in the demarcation
process on the same basis as it has hitherto.
In the period prior to the suspension of demarcation operations, UNMEE had
played an essential role. The full resumption of this role as before is essential to the
continuation of the demarcation. It includes the provision of the following services:
the use of its helicopters for carrying surveyors to various parts of the boundary;
likewise, its MEDIVAC helicopters must be available should medical assistance
become necessary. Also, its forces must be available to supplement the protection
afforded by the parties themselves and this requires freedom of movement on the
ground. Mine clearance takes place under the UNMEE umbrella and once a pillar
site has been cleared of mines, UNMEE must guard the site to ensure that it is not
re-mined. The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea has also provided
accommodation for the field offices. The Boundary Commission has been advised
that any significant reduction in the size of UNMEE will seriously impair its ability
to provide these essential services. In the discussion of these matters, the parties did
not express any disagreement with this assessment of the role of and need for
UNMEE. The representative of Eritrea said that she hoped that initially Eritrea
would be able to withdraw those restrictions on UNMEE that bear on the work of
the Boundary Commission and that subsequently it would be possible to deal with
other items affecting UNMEE. She was asked to seek a decision from her
Government by 22 May 2006.
At the meeting there was also some discussion of the extent to which any
adjustment of the line of delimitation set out in the delimitation decision of 13 April
2002 could be made in the course of demarcation. The legal position as repeatedly
stated by the Boundary Commission since the promulgation of its decision, is that
there is no scope for adjustment of the line save in those few situations specifically
mentioned in the decision and also in cases of “manifest impracticability”. The
Boundary Commission has made it plain that this expression relates to physical
impracticability and does not cover situations where, for instance, the boundary
divides a village. There is nothing exceptional or unprecedented in the division of
villages by an international boundary.
Ethiopia, while accepting the Boundary Commission’s April 2002 decision as
final and binding, appeared to take the position that if, in the process of demarcating
the delimitation line, difficulties were to arise they could only be resolved by
negotiations between the parties. The implication of this position could be that any
decision of the Boundary Commission on demarcation with which Ethiopia does not
agree may not be treated by it as binding.
In paragraph 16 of article 4 of the Algiers Agreement, the parties requested the
United Nations to facilitate resolution of problems that may arise from the transfer
of territorial control. Such problems in the Boundary Commission’s view may
include the consequences of division of villages by the delimitation decision. The
parties are of course also free to resolve these problems at the political level, but in
any case they fall outside the scope of the Boundary Commission’s jurisdiction.
The Boundary Commission has had the assistance of a special consultant and
may possibly appoint an additional one. Draft terms of reference for the special
consultants include the procedure to be followed in their work. These terms of

3

S/2006/362

reference were presented to the parties and were the subject of discussion. The
Boundary Commission requested the parties to submit in writing their comments on
the draft terms of reference and may amend them in the light of such comments.
The second factor that must be borne in mind is the need for assurances
regarding the funding of the operation. The costs of demarcation must be met out of
the United Nations Trust Fund. At present, the Trust Fund totals approximately $3.3
million. To complete the operation at least $10 million is required. In the absence of
assurances that this sum will be available, the contractors will be unwilling to
conclude agreements.
The net result of the meeting is that demarcation will resume as soon as:
(a) The Commission can be assured that UNMEE will be retained in the area
at a level sufficient to enable it to continue to provide the services to the field staff
on at least the same scale that it has hitherto;
(b) The parties can provide or, if already provided, confirm their proposed
security arrangements;
(c) Contracts can be concluded with the surveyors and the on-site
contractors;
(d) And, most important of all, both the parties should cooperate fully with
the Boundary Commission’s representatives in the field. Lest there be any
misunderstanding, it must be said that, as yet, it is not clear that the parties are
prepared to do this.
(e) The Boundary Commission has set 15 June 2006 for a further meeting
with the parties in the hope that this will help to develop the momentum.
(Signed) Sir Elihu Lauterpacht

4
