S/PV.8381

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8381st meeting

Wednesday, 24 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar
Letter dated 16 October 2018 from the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, France,
Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/926)
Letter dated 18 October 2018 from the Permanent Representatives of Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), China, Equatorial Guinea and the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/938)
.
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-33774 (E)
*1833774*

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of China has asked for the floor.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
On 18 October, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
China, the Russian Federation and Equatorial Guinea
sent a letter to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/938) expressing their opposition to holding this
Council meeting to hear a briefing by the Chairperson
of the independent international fact-finding mission
on Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly defines
the responsibilities of the principal United Nations
organs and the division of labour between them. The
primary responsibility of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
should not get involved in country-specific human rights
issues. The fact-finding mission on Myanmar is a special
mechanism of the Human Rights Council and does not
have a mandate to brief the Security Council. Nor is
there a precedent for the Security Council to receive
a briefing from a country-specific special mechanism
of the Human Rights Council. By receiving a briefing
from the Fact-Finding Mission, the Security Council
will encroach on the mandates of the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, violate provisions of
the Charter and weaken the responsibilities and roles of
various United Nations bodies, thereby leading to grave
negative consequences.When it comes to the issue of
Rakhine state, the Security Council should play a
constructive role, and any action it takes should help to
resolve the issue. Pushing for a briefing by the Human
Rights Council’s fact-finding mission in the Security
Council will disrupt and undermine the ongoing
dialogue process. It does not help to resolve the issue
of Rakhine state but will rather further complicate it,
running counter to the process of finding a settlement.
That is why we are opposed to having this meeting and
hearing this briefing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I understand that
the Russian Ambassador may also want to speak, so I
am happy for him to proceed, if he would like to. I shall
speak after him.
2/27

24/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wanted to explain our position regarding
the proposal of some Council members to hear a
briefing to the Security Council on the report of the
Chairperson of the independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64). We
believe that this decision would be a mistake and would
create a negative precedent for the future work of the
Security Council.
As for the joint letter to the President of the Security
Council from nine Member States (S/2018/926)
requesting the holding of this briefing, in our view its
very form is what might be termed an innovation in
the work of the Security Council. To say it like it is,
this is nothing but arm-twisting, in which the authors
of the letter show the rest of us that the potential result
of a procedural vote on it is for all practical purposes
predetermined. We believe that the delegations that
signed the letter are consciously torpedoing the
possibility of consensus in the Security Council.
The value of the Council’s collective work lies in the
unanimity of its decisions. Instead of undertaking a
joint quest to find a long-term solution to the problem
of the Rohingya refugees, therefore, these members are
forcing the Council to engage in loudspeaker diplomacy.
The United States delegation, which actively
supported the holding of today’s briefing by issuing
an invitation to the Human Rights Council briefer,
recently announced that it was leaving the Human
Rights Council and accompanied the announcement
with a good deal of criticism of it. But now it turns out
that the Human Rights Council is useful after all. Is this
not clearly a double standard?
We believe that the work of the fact-finding mission
on Myanmar is harmful and counterproductive. It does
not have reliable information on what is going on with
the Rohingya, as our and other experts said yesterday
in a dialogue with the fact-finding mission in the Third
Committee. In view of the foregoing, therefore, we
believe that the report of the Mission is underprepared
and one-sided, and the notion of chucking its socalled conclusions at the Security Council is overtly
pernicious. Furthermore, since the report has already
been discussed both in the Human Rights Council
and the Third Committee, we see no added value in
considering it here in the Security Council. That is, if
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

we want to avoid the duplication of the efforts of the
principal organs of the United Nations in deeds rather
than words. We also believe that discussing the report in
the Council could cast doubt on the remit of the Human
Rights Council, to which the Mission is accountable.
We would once again like to stress that the key
to resolving the problem of the Rohingya refugees
is in bilateral cooperation between Myanmar and
Bangladesh. The role of the international community
consists in providing assistance to Naypyidaw and
Dhaka in implementing the existing agreements.
In the light of this, we will vote against holding
the proposed briefing to discuss the conclusions of the
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, and we call on other
delegations to do the same.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
make a statement on behalf of the United Kingdom,
Côte d’Ivoire, France, Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden and the United States of America.
Mr. President, we have read carefully the letter
that you and other colleagues sent on 18 October
(S/2018/938). We have requested the Chair of the
United Nations fact-finding mission on Myanmar
to brief us today. The report produced by the
Mission (A/HRC/39/64) is the most authoritative and
comprehensive account of the human rights violations
that have occurred in the country since 2011. It details
in particular the events that took place in Rakhine state
on and around 25 August 2017 and led to the forcible
displacement of more than 725,000 refugees across an
international border into Bangladesh.
As we will hear, the Fact-Finding Mission’s
findings are of the gravest nature. The report concludes
that “gross human rights violations” and “serious
violations of international humanitarian law” have
been committed in Myanmar since 2011 and that many
of these violations “undoubtedly amount to the gravest
crimes under international law”.
It makes a specific recommendation to the Security
Council to ensure accountability for crimes under
international law committed in Myanmar. Ensuring
the prevention of such crimes — genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity — is one of the reasons
why the United Nations and the Security Council
were established in the first place. As members of the
Security Council, we are today faced with a situation

S/PV. 8381

that clearly endangers international peace and security,
and also a specific request for the Council to act.
It is therefore absolutely without doubt the Security
Council’s responsibility to hear the allegations
concerning the gravest crimes under international
law related to the situation and to deliberate on how
to proceed, and so we vote in favour of holding
this meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2018/926,
which contains a letter dated 16 October 2018 from
the Representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, France, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2018/938, which contains a letter dated
18 October 2018 from the Permanent Representatives
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, China, Equatorial
Guinea and the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
In the light of the views expressed in documents
S/2018/926 and S/2018/938 and the comments made by
members of the Security Council, I intend to put the
provisional agenda to the vote.
Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Côte d’Ivoire, France, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Plurinational State of Bolivia, China, Russian
Federation
Abstaining:
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan
The President (spoke in Spanish): The provisional
agenda received 9 votes in favour, 3 votes against and 3
abstentions. The provisional agenda has been adopted.
I now give the floor to members wishing to make
statements following the voting.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

18-337743/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

Bolivia voted against the holding of this meeting
because there is no precedent of a special mechanism
of the Human Rights Council on a specific country
reporting to the Security Council on its activities
without mentioning the fact that such report is not part
of the mandate of the fact-finding mission in question.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly
establishes the functions of and the division of labour
among all the principal organs of our Organization. It
is therefore important to respect the mandates of each
organ in order to avoid any overlapping, duplication,
interference with or weakening of the work being done
in these bodies, be it the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council, the Economic and Social Council or
the Security Council. With that understanding, the
Charter establishes in unequivocal terms that the
primary responsibility of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
therefore not the place to deal with human rights issues,
as such issues have their own space for debate, study
and discussion within the relevant specialized body,
the Human Rights Council. This does not in any way
detract from the seriousness of the issue at stake or the
importance of dealing with it in the appropriate forums.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
As the provisional agenda has been adopted, I
will now suspend the meeting for a brief recess, after
which we will continue our consideration of the item on
our agenda.
The meeting was suspended at 3.20 p.m. and
resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh
and Myanmar to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Marzuki
Darusman, Chairperson of the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, to participate in
this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
4/27

24/10/2018

I now give the floor to Mr. Darusman.
Mr. Darusman: On behalf of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar, I thank
you, Mr. President, for this timely opportunity to brief
the Security Council.
The Council is aware of our recent report to the
Human Rights Council (A/HRC/39/64), including our
detailed findings of 444 pages, establishing the facts
and circumstances of recent alleged human rights
violations and abuses in Myanmar, which are based on an
investigation that scrupulously adhered to international
best practices on human rights fact-finding. We worked
for over a year to collect and corroborate information,
weighing its validity and analysing it against applicable
law in a spirit of objectivity and impartiality. We invite
anyone who claims that our report is one-sided or based
on a single source to read its 444 pages, including a full
account of our methodology.
Our report characterizes the recent events in
Rakhine state as a human rights catastrophe that was
foreseeable and planned. It will have a severe impact
for many generations to come, if not forever. The report
describes in detail the Tatmadaw’s so-called clearance
operations in six villages, marked by large-scale
massacres and other killings of civilians, including
women, children and the elderly, as well as mass gangrape, burning and looting.
The Mission verified similar operations in
54 separate locations across northern Rakhine state.
Over 725,000 Rohingya fled. At least 392 villages
were partially or totally destroyed. Estimates of 10,000
Rohingya deaths are conservative. Those attacks were
widespread and systematic, their modus operandi
across northern Rakhine state strikingly similar. While
the attacks of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
contributed to the escalation and must be condemned,
the operations of the security forces were brutal and
utterly disproportionate. They were conducted in total
disregard for human life and dignity, in violation of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
That occurred against a backdrop of State
policies and practices implemented over decades,
steadily marginalizing and dehumanizing the
Rohingya — resulting in a State-sanctioned and
institutionalized system of oppression affecting the
lives of Rohingya from birth to death. Similar clearance
operations, albeit on a smaller scale, began in October
2016, with complete impunity. The following months
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

were marked by increased intimidation of the Rohingya,
a surge in hate speech, instilling fear into other ethnic
communities, and the mobilization of troops and other
military assets into northern Rakhine state. The nature,
scale and organization of those events demonstrate
preparation and planning.
The mass displacement of the Rohingya and the
burning of villages were followed by the appropriation of
vacated lands. Entire villages were flattened and erased,
along with every trace of the Rohingya communities.
New structures were built for other communities, while
the root causes of the exodus, including the oppression
and exclusionary rhetoric, are being denied and continue
unabated. The remaining Rohingya in Rakhine state are
at grave risk, and conditions are not in place for a safe,
dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingya in
Bangladesh. Their return in this situation is tantamount
to condemning them to life as subhumans and further
mass killing.
Although horrific and intense, the situation of the
Rohingya must not be seen in isolation. The Mission
found similar patterns of serious human rights
violations elsewhere in Myanmar, notably in Kachin
and Shan states. They were predominantly committed
by the Myanmar military following the same policies,
tactics and conduct. In those conflict areas, we also
found patterns of deliberate targeting of civilians,
unlawful killings, torture, rape and sexual violence,
arbitrary deprivation of liberty, forced labour and
forced displacement.
Many of the serious violations described in our
report undoubtedly amount to the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community, which
threaten the peace, security and well-being of the world.
War crimes and crimes against humanity have been
committed in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states. The
mission also found sufficient information to warrant
the investigation and prosecution of senior officials in
the Tatmadaw on charges of genocide. That means that
we consider that genocidal intent — meaning the intent
to destroy the Rohingya in whole or in part — can be
reasonably inferred.
At the core of this situation sits the Myanmar
military, which has pursued these strategies and tactics
for decades. The Tatmadaw, consistently and as a
matter of policy and tactics, targets civilians and rapes
women and girls. It actively pursues an exclusionary
and discriminatory vision for the country. It has a clear

S/PV. 8381

chain of command, with those in leadership positions
in effective control of its operations. It acts with total
impunity. The contempt shown by the Tatmadaw for
human life, integrity and freedom, and for international
law generally, has had a devastating impact on the
human rights, security and development of everyone in
Myanmar. It is also a threat to regional stability and
international peace and security.
The Security Council holds the power to break that
cycle. The key is a sharp focus on accountability. Apart
from accountability for atrocity crimes being a legal
and moral obligation, we submit that there are at least
three other compelling reasons for such a focus.
First, effective prevention is premised on
accountability. A history of atrocity crimes combined
with impunity and weak State institutions is a core
risk factor for further violations. Sadly, that toxic mix
has persisted in Myanmar for a long time. Impunity
for gross human rights violations has demonstrably
contributed to the validation of deeply oppressive
and discriminatory conduct, enabled the recurrence
of atrocity crimes, emboldened the perpetrators and
silenced the victims. Unless that impunity is addressed,
violence and associated atrocity crimes will continue
and recur.
Secondly, without accountability there can be no
sustainable, safe and dignified return of the Rohingya
to Myanmar. How can the Rohingya be expected to
return to Myanmar, where their suffering is denied
and the perpetrators enjoy complete impunity? Can
we reasonably expect them to rely for their protection
on the same unaccountable security forces who killed,
raped and devastated their communities?
Thirdly, there can be no just and lasting
reconciliation without accountability. The complex
issues of citizenship, deep-rooted discrimination,
oppression and distrust between communities cannot
be overcome without a human rights and rule-of-lawbased approach. Impunity is the antithesis of that. We
firmly believe that accountability will pave the way
towards stability, development and peace and security
for all in Myanmar.
Unfortunately, accountability in Myanmar must
come from the international community. Impunity is
deeply entrenched in Myanmar’s political and legal
system, effectively placing the Tatmadaw above the
law. Myanmar’s internal inquiries have proven to be
ineffective failures, with no reason to consider that that

18-337745/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

will change in the foreseeable future. Even if domestic
leaders were well-intentioned, accountability at the
national level is currently unattainable. The Security
Council must refer the situation in Myanmar to the
International Criminal Court or another international
ad hoc tribunal.
The Council and its individual members should
also impose targeted individual sanctions against those
most responsible for serious crimes under international
law. In our report, we identified six of the Tatmadaw’s
most senior generals with command responsibility for
the clearance operations in Rakhine state, starting
with the Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Armed
Forces, Senior General Min Aung Hlaing. They
must cease to benefit from all international support,
both institutionally and personally. That includes an
arms embargo on Myanmar and a prohibition of all
transactions with Tatmadaw-affiliated enterprises.
We also call for the Council’s support for a
comprehensive independent inquiry into the United
Nations involvement in Myanmar since 2011. No
organization involved in a catastrophe of these
proportions should fail to review its engagement and
learn lessons for future prevention. The review should
include the performance of United Nations organs,
agencies, departments, funds and programmes under
all three pillars — development, human rights and
peace and security. In addressing and preventing human
rights violations, the United Nations succeeds or fails
in relation to all of those three pillars collectively.
If anyone were to seek to deliberately foment conflict
and extremism, the events in Myanmar could serve as
a step-by-step manual. Dehumanizing a population,
calling them all terrorists, depriving them of all rights,
segregating and attacking them, raping and killing
them, crowding them into internally displaced persons
camps or driving them out and protecting the killers
from justice — those steps can be, and almost certainly
will be, learned and deployed in other countries against
other populations.
The international community must be gravely
concerned. Myanmar presents precisely the kind
of threat to peace and security that the United
Nations — particularly the Council — was created to
address. We urge the Council to take action. Decisive
action is needed to halt the destructive dynamics in
Myanmar and prevent the further fomenting of hatred,
hostility, discrimination and extremism that will
6/27

24/10/2018

inevitably lead to further devastation. Impunity must
not be excused and continue to embolden the Tatmadaw
in its promotion of Bamar-Buddhist supremacy.
National sovereignty is not a license to commit crimes
against humanity or genocide.
There can be no moving on from this crisis without
addressing its root causes, all of which continue to exist
today, and primarily the presence of an unaccountable
military that acts with complete impunity. The
Rohingya and all of Myanmar’s people — in fact the
entire world — is looking to the Council to take action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Darusman for the information he provided.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Chairperson of the independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar for that compelling,
shocking and moving briefing.
As I said on behalf of the nine Council members
that called for this meeting, the briefing we heard today
concerns allegations of the gravest crimes against
international law: genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. On this day in 1945, the United
Nations came into being. We agree with the Chairperson:
What is the United Nations for, and what is the Security
Council for, if they cannot deal with some of the worst
things that a Government can do to its own people?
The Security Council has a solemn responsibility to
consider those matters and decide how to proceed.
Despite the objections of some Council members today,
we believe that it is right that this meeting is taking
place, and I will include in my remarks what should
happen, in our view, after this meeting. I want to draw
out two points in the mission’s report (A/HRC/39/64)
and Mr. Darusman’s briefing today.
First, I will address the situation in Rakhine, which
is an enduring catastrophe. Human rights violations
against the people of Rakhine, ethnic Rakhine as
well as Rohingya, continue to this day. The Rohingya
in particular continue to face daily intimidation;
restrictions on their freedom of movement, access
to markets, education and health care; continued
discrimination; and denial of their right to citizenship.
As the Chairperson said, the Rohingya Muslims
who are left behind in Rakhine are not safe, and cannot
be safe. And the Rohingya who are in the camps
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

in Bangladesh cannot go home until those matters
are addressed. Although the Burmese authorities
have previously claimed that 81 out of the 88
recommendations of the Annan Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State have been implemented, there is very
little evidence that sincere efforts have been made to
address the acute deprivation of human rights, which
lies at the root cause of that crisis.
Although we previously welcomed the signing of the
memorandum of understanding among the Government,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme, those United Nations agencies continue
to be denied access to large parts of Rakhine. The
conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified
repatriation are manifestly not in place. Any calls for
immediate repatriation in the current circumstances are
deeply irresponsible. We first need to see the Burmese
Government cooperate fully with the United Nations
and make genuine progress to change the situation, in
line with the Annan Commission recommendations.
In the meantime, the United Kingdom commends
the Government and the people of Bangladesh for
continuing to show great generosity, host the refugee
population and cooperate in good faith with the Burmese
Government. The needs of the refugees continue to be
great, including protection, legal status and assistance,
and we call on the international community to intensify
its support for the United Nations joint response plan.
Secondly, Rakhine is the most egregious example
of the conduct of the Burmese military, but it is not
the only one. The report makes clear that the Burmese
military is conducting human rights violations across
the country against other ethnic communities, most
notably in Kachin and Shan states. Accountability is
vital to get justice for the Rohingya and others who
have suffered. It is necessary to give the Rohingya
confidence that they can return to Myanmar/Burma.
But, fundamentally, it is necessary in order to prevent
the Burmese military from committing those same
crimes again and again against the people of Myanmar.
It is vital that the Council act to uphold the Charter
of the United Nations, and I take very seriously what
the Chairperson said about the need to send a signal
from the Council to other countries around the world,
the Governments of which may be tempted to take a
leaf out of the Burmese military’s horrific playbook
and execute such crimes on their own people.

S/PV. 8381

Myanmar/Burma has established a domestic
commission of inquiry. We note the Fact-Finding
Mission’s conclusion that that commission cannot
provide a real avenue for accountability. We note also the
six generals, whom the report mentions, with command
responsibility, starting with the Senior General. We
note, too, that previous commissions of inquiries
have been whitewashed and they have preserved the
military’s long-standing impunity. The Government
has repeatedly denied the crimes described to us today,
and it has locked up journalists who have exposed
Government wrongdoing, most notably the two Reuters
journalists, Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo. I repeat the
United Kingdom’s call for their immediate release.
If there is to be any faith in this commission of
inquiry — this latest commission of inquiry — it should
be independent, report transparently on its progress,
operate according to international standards, as the
fact-finding mission itself did, and cooperate with other
bodies gathering evidence, such as the fact-finding
mission and the ongoing independent mechanism
that the Human Rights Council voted earlier this
month to establish. We have repeatedly asked the
Burmese Government to work closely with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the findings of
the commission of inquiry should lead to an independent
judicial process, where all, including the military, are
equal before the law. Otherwise, if there is not going to
be domestic accountability in Burma, then the United
Kingdom believes that we must consider all options,
including a referral to the International Criminal Court
or an ad hoc tribunal.
I never thought. in my diplomatic career, that
I would hear a briefing to the Security Council as
compelling, but detailing such awful treatment of
a people, as we have heard today. The crimes that
we have heard echo those committed in Rwanda and
Srebrenica approximately 20 years ago. The Security
Council acted in those two situations. It acted too late
to prevent them, which is to our lasting shame, but it
did act to ensure that accountability was brought to
bear on those responsible.
As the Chairperson said, national sovereignty is not
a license to commit crimes against humanity. It is not a
license to wreak such havoc on the livelihoods and lives
of one’s own people. The United Kingdom now plans to
work with our partners to press for progress in creating
the conditions so that the refugees can return, but also
so that we can have accountability that genuinely ends

18-337747/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

the Burmese military’s impunity. In the face of the
acts we heard described today, we believe that this is
a responsibility that the Security Council owes not just
to the Rohingya or the peoples of Burma, but to people
everywhere around the world.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands):
“I was eight months pregnant. They stomped me
and kicked my stomach with their boots, and then
they stripped me naked. I was blindfolded and hung
by my wrists from a tree. I was raped nine times,
and they left me tied to the tree.
That is but one of the many horrendous accounts of
Rohingya survivors, as reported by the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar. Those
stories shock our collective conscience and implore us
to act.
Let me take this opportunity to thank Mr. Darusman
for his impressing and sobering briefing to us today,
as well as for his efforts in delivering a substantive
report. It is important that the Council hear directly
from relevant human rights bodies, as the Security
Council has the authority to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court. Many issues deserve our
urgent attention, such as the lack of access to Rakhine
state, the need to create an environment conducive
to repatriation through the implementation of the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, formerly led by Kofi Annan, and the
fate of the detained Reuters journalists.
Today, however, I will focus on accountability
and make three points: first, on the findings of the
independent international fact-finding mission on
Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council;
secondly, on the road to accountability; and, thirdly,
onthe urgent need to respond.
The report of the fact-finding mission
(A/HRC/39/64) is deeply worrying. It has based its
findings on 875 in-depth interviews with victims
and eyewitnesses that show the same clear pattern
of conduct by the military, border guard police and
vigilantes. Its analysis shows convincingly that the
gravest crimes under international law have been
committed in Rakhine state. The mission furthermore
concludes that, on reasonable grounds, the factors
allowing the inference of genocidal intent are present
and that the crimes committed against the Rohingya
may even amount to genocide. The report stresses the
8/27

24/10/2018

need for a competent court of law to determine whether
specific individuals are guilty of those crimes. Those
findings cannot simply be taken note of and then set
aside. They implore the international community to act.
That brings me to my second point — the need
to ensure accountability for those crimes. The factfinding mission’s report highlights the urgent need for
prosecutions for the gravest crimes under international
law and to hold those responsible to account. Justice
for the victims is an end in and of itself, but it is also
an essential prerequisite to prevent it from happening
again. Decades of discrimination against the Rohingya,
followed by complete inaction, have brought us to
this point. We cannot afford to respond with inaction
once again and allow the repetition of those gruesome
acts, either in Rakhine state or across other parts of
Myanmar where the same perpetrators are targeting
other minorities. We can see that happening now in
Kachin and Shan states.
A meaningful effort towards ensuring accountability
can also be a means to ensure that the Rohingya feel safe
enough to voluntarily return to their places of origin in
Myanmar. We would like to be hopeful about the national
commission of inquiry. The Myanmar Government,
however, in the past has repeatedly failed to genuinely
prosecute the perpetrators of human right violations.
We recall the fact-finding mission’s conclusion that
it is unlikely that Myanmar’s judiciary can deliver
on a fair and independent trial. In order to make that
happen, we need to step up international involvement.
The creation of the independent mechanism by the
Human Rights Council is a crucial first step to enable
future prosecutions. Preserving evidence is key, and
we strongly urge the Myanmar authorities to cooperate
with the independent mechanism and all other human
rights mechanisms. Still, holding the perpetrators
accountable for the most serious crimes is beyond their
mandate. The International Criminal Court was created
exactly for that purpose.
That brings me to my final point — the urgent
need to respond. Coordinated action by the Security
Council, including through presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22 of November 2017 and our visit to
Myanmar and Bangladesh in April, have resulted in
incremental change for the better. However, the pace
has been slow. The Council has engaged constructively
with the Myanmar Government but needs to conclude
that this approach has yielded minimal results. We
cannot allow Myanmar to play for time while the fate
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

of the Rohingya remains unchanged. The international
community cannot rely on the generous hospitality of
Bangladesh forever.
The findings of the fact-finding mission demand
action not only from the Human Rights Council, the
General Assembly or the Special Envoy. It is time that
the Council shoulder its responsibility. We need to refer
the situation in Myanmar to the International Criminal
Court and use all tools available to us to create
meaningful change on the ground, including targeted
sanctions and an arms embargo. Much remains to be
done to ensure that the Rohingya can safely return to
their country and continue to live their lives in safety
and freedom in Myanmar, as they deserve. Myanmar
needs to show progress. The time to act is now.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want
to especially thank Mr. Darusman, Chairperson of
the independent international fact-finding mission on
myanmar established by the Human Rights Council. It
is critically important that he be with us in the Security
Council today for this briefing. One question that I
would like to ask him at some point — or when we can
get an answer — is: What is the status of the quality of
life for the Rohingya who remain in Burma? What is
the Government doing to protect them to make sure that
this does not happen to them, as well?
United States President John Adams famously said
that facts are stubborn things. Nowhere is this more
true than the facts of the atrocities committed by the
Burmese security forces against Rohingya children,
women and men. The last time that the Security Council
met to consider the situation in Burma (see S/PV.8333),
I discussed the United States State Department’s report
on the ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya at the hands of
these security forces. The accounts were first-hand and
the details were stomach-turning, including women and
girls raped, villages razed and babies tossed into fires.
Today, the source of the information is the United
Nations fact-finding mission. The Government of Burma
unfortunately refused to cooperate with the mission.
The events reported by the fact-finding mission parallel
those of the United States State Department report.
Once again, we are hearing about torture, mutilation,
repeated massacres, gang rapes and the obliteration of
entire villages — all perpetrated against the Rohingya
minority by the Burmese security forces. And once
again, there are those in this Chamber who have
repeatedly attempted to block the Security Council and

S/PV. 8381

the world from hearing about what is happening to the
Rohingya in Burma. But facts are stubborn things, and,
despite the best efforts of the Burmese Government and
its allies, the awful facts of the atrocities against the
Rohingya cannot be avoided by those who deny them.
I want to thank the members of the Security
Council that voted for this briefing and this meeting
to be transparent. I also want to address the concerns
of some members of the Security Council that feel that
transparency about the crimes detailed in the report
(A/HRC/39/64) will somehow set back the cause of
peace in Burma. They argue that being open and
honest about the vicious treatment of the Rohingya
will increase the Burmese people’s resentment of them.
They argue that what is needed in Burma is time and
space. We do not accept this logic. In fact, not only is
it wrong, but its backward. Time and space alone will
not heal the wounds that have been opened in Burma,
and covering up the crimes of the Burmese military
and security forces will not allow that country to move
forward. Only accountability for the crimes against the
Rohingya will serve the cause of peace and Burma.
This is not about finger-pointing. It is about
accepting the realities of what happened so that healing
and accountability can occur. We have all heard the
excuses offered by those who have fought this briefing.
They argued that the Security Council is not the
appropriate place to discuss those atrocities. Our work,
they say, is peace and security, not human rights, but the
forcible movement of more than 700,000 people across
borders is undeniably a matter of international peace
and security. — just ask the Bangladeshi Government
or the Rohingya themselves.
We are grateful to the Government of Bangladesh
for its generosity hosting a total of more than 1 million
Rohingya refugees, but this is not just Bangladesh’s
problem. This is the region’s problem. This is our
problem. All of us — the United States, the United
Kingdom, France, Côte d’Ivoire, Kuwait, the
Netherlands, Peru, Poland and Sweden — have worked
closely to keep the Security Council’s continued
spotlight on the horrible atrocities in Burma. We will
work to hold the Burmese security forces accountable.
Now is the time to move on from focusing on the abuses
to focusing on the abused.
Despite the security forces’ claims to be acting
against “terrorists”, the root cause of the crisis is
the second-class status of the Rohingya in Burma.

18-337749/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

In addition to the atrocities they have suffered, the
fact-finding mission’s report details the systematic
repression of the Rohingya by the Government of
Burma. As noted during the briefing, security forces
have detained Rohingya men and abducted Rohingya
women. The Rohingya were subject to especially
tight restrictions on freedom of movement, as well as
freedom of religion. Some refugees have reported that
the military threatened those who prayed — even at
home — with beatings, arrests and death. They also
detailed cases of the military’s desecration of sacred
texts, and some saw soldiers burning and urinating on
copies of the Qur’an. It is the Burmese Government that
has both the power and the moral obligation to end that.
The burden falls on it. Restrictions imposed upon
the Rohingya, including on freedom of movement and
religion, must end. The Burmese Government must
create a direct and credible path to obtaining citizenship
for ethnic Rohingya. The Burmese military must accept
civilian rule. Its refusal to do so puts Burma at further
risk of conflict and stunts its growth as a modern
nation. As the world rightly condemns the murder of a
journalist in Turkey, we must not forget the outrageous
imprisonment of the Reuters journalists in Burma. The
United States continues to call for their immediate
release. There must be accountability for the crimes
of the Burmese military and security forces — crimes
that have been thoroughly and credibly documented.
And the same energy that has been put into fearing and
isolating the Rohingya should be put towards educating
and training them so that they can lead productive lives,
for their families and for the future of Burma.
Thanks to the work of the fact-finding mission, we
all know what was done to the Rohingya and we know
who is responsible. We must now take the next steps
to ensure that this never happens again. Justice is due
for the people who fled Burma in fear. Justice is due
for those whose lives have been forever transformed by
violence. Justice — not vengeance, not payback — is
necessary for Burma to heal. The United States will
continue to issue the call for justice, here and elsewhere,
until all of the people of Burma are able to live in safety
and dignity in their own country. That is the case for
justice in Burma.
Before I end my remarks, I would like to say a final
thing about how we do our jobs here at United Nations.
There are many ways we can choose to make our
arguments to each other and the world. We can be civil
or we can be uncivil. We can choose to make a scene
10/27

24/10/2018

or we can choose to treat the issues we care about with
dignity and respect. We are all aware — and none more
so than you, Mr. President — of the way discussions
of justice and human rights have been conducted in
recent days, and especially your behaviour, that of your
mission and of the Cuban mission. It was a very poor
reflection on the President of the Security Council.
We are grateful that this afternoon, at least, you have
chosen the path of civility and respect.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Mr. Marzuki
Darusman, Chairperson of the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, for his chilling and
insightful briefing and more broadly for the outstanding
work that his team has carried out, professionally
and independently, in difficult conditions. The 875
interviews conducted, along with the variety of
information sources used, attest to the solidity of the
work that he has done. Let me also take the opportunity
to emphasize the importance for the Security Council
to continue to rely upon the work of the instruments
established by the Human Rights Council in order to
fully carry out its mandate to maintain international
peace and security.
Since the violence of August 2017, France has
consistently underlined its concern and called for the
mobilization of the Security Council in response to what
President Macron, echoing the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, has described since September 2017
as “ethnic cleansing”. France is extremely concerned
about the findings of the fact-finding mission’s report
(A/HRC/39/64), according to which charges of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes — committed
in particular against the Rohingya in Rakhine state but
also in Kachin and Shan states — could be brought
against the Burmese army and security forces. The factfinding mission’s report concludes in paragraph 85 that
on the basis of “reasonable inference”, there are factors
“that have allowed genocidal intent to be established ”.
It also notes that attacks and sexual violence committed
by the Burmese army in villages, including against
children, constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law that may constitute war crimes.
Establishing the facts is essential if justice is to one
day be done and to enabling genuine reconciliation.
And the facts that have been presented to us, along with
their merciless premeditation, amount to the highest
level of severity within the scale of international
crimes. The Security Council cannot turn a blind
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

eye to those facts, unless it relinquishes its own
responsibilities and renounces its very raison d’être. If
the Security Council feels that such a situation does not
concern it, what situation would? Let us also be aware
that our action or inaction in response to the tragedy is
being closely watched by all those who could commit
comparable atrocities. This means that our collective
responsibility is imperative, now and in the future. May
Mr. Darusman’s message and warning be clearly heard
by all.
The sentencing on 3 September of two Reuters
journalists to seven years in prison by the Burmese
courts, while they were preparing a report on the
serious allegations of human rights violations in the
Rakhine state, is the latest example of the climate of
fear that hinders the investigative efforts on the ground.
It constitutes a serious violation of the freedom of the
press. On behalf of France, I reiterate the call for the
release of those two journalists.
In that context, and in accordance with the
presidential statement adopted by the Council almost a
year ago (S/PRST/2017/22), we must remain mobilized
around three main and complementary priorities.
The first is humanitarian support for the Rohingyas
who remain in Rakhine state and to refugees in the
camps in Bangladesh. In Burma, the tripartite agreement
concluded in June by the Burmese authorities, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme
was an important step, but its implementation by the
Burmese authorities must be significantly accelerated.
The restoration of unhindered humanitarian access to
all affected villages in Rakhine state is urgent to meet
the needs of the population. It is also urgent for the
displaced Rohingya people in Rakhine state to regain
full freedom of movement and access to basic services.
In Bangladesh, we reiterate our appreciation for the
exceptional generosity of the authorities and the people,
and for the outstanding work being carried out by United
Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations. As
long as the conditions for their voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return are not met, international assistance
will remain essential to supporting Rohingya refugees
living in extremely precarious conditions.
The second priority is the effective implementation
of the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, formerly led by Kofi Annan, for
which we have been calling for more than a year. The

S/PV. 8381

Commission proposed a road map, which the Burmese
Government has accepted and the Security Council has
endorsed, to enable all the people of Rakhine state to
live together in peace. France reiterates in particular
the importance of the recommendations on the question
of citizenship and the revision of the 1982 law, as well
as equal rights, including the right of access to public
services, health care and education for all persons
belonging to the Rohingya community.
The report contains other very relevant
recommendations on the freedom of movement, the
socioeconomic development of the Arakan and the
fight against discrimination against all minorities
that, if effectively implemented, would constitute
important confidence-building measures allowing for
the voluntary return of refugees in accordance with
international law. Through that, what is at stake is the
possibility of a stable, inclusive and democratic rule
of law in Burma, governed by a civilian power and
based on the equal recognition and citizenship of all,
without distinction.
Finally, the third priority, which is inseparable
from the first two, is the fight against impunity. We
call on the international community to identify all the
consequences of the conclusions of the fact-finding
mission. The decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on 6 September,
which concluded that the Court has jurisdiction over
the alleged deportation of Rohingya from Burma to
Bangladesh, is an important step in the fight against
impunity. We welcome the decision of the Court’s
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to open a preliminary
review of the allegations and reiterate our full support
for the Prosecutor and the ICC in their ongoing work.
The decision of the Human Rights Council to
establish an independent and permanent investigative
mechanism is also a very important step. France calls
on all States and regional and international bodies to
support the rapid operationalization of that mechanism,
which will allow for the collection and preservation of
evidence concerning all allegations of crimes committed
in Burma. We call on all States to cooperate with the
ICC and the mechanism. The evidence collected will
be used in proceedings before competent national
or international jurisdictions. Finally, we call on the
Burmese commission of inquiry to cooperate with all
United Nations bodies and mandate-holders.

18-3377411/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

The situation of extreme distress of the Rohingya
population is a crushing blow to the human conscience
and violates all the norms and values that inspire and
form the basis of the United Nations. That is why we
must step up our efforts and our collective commitment
to shedding light on the crimes that have been committed
in order for justice to be done and for the Rohingyas
who wish to return to Burma to do so in dignified,
safe and sustainable conditions. The United Nations
has a vital role to play, and we recall in that regard our
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
France will continue to be actively engaged with
respect to this major crisis and stands ready to consider
all the options available to the Council to contribute to
a lasting solution.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our appreciation
and thanks to the Chairperson of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar,
Mr. Marzuki Darusman, for attending this meeting
and for his comprehensive briefing. The efforts of
the fact-finding mission are indeed appreciated. We
thank him for his honesty in presenting the facts to the
international community.
What we have listened to today in the briefing of the
fact-finding mission reaffirms the conclusions of the
international community on the crimes that have been
committed. The briefing was totally consistent with
what we witnessed during the Security Council visit
to Rakhine state and what we heard from eyewitnesses
to those crimes during our meetings with the Rohingya
refugees at the Cox’s Bazar camps. While we strongly
condemn the acts witnessed in Rakhine state, which run
counter to international norms and laws, we reaffirm
the need for the Government of Myanmar to assume its
primary responsibility to protect its citizens and ensure
that military force will not be used against them.
More than 14 months have elapsed since violence
erupted in Rakhine state. Those acts of violence led to
the displacement of more than 720,000 people to Cox’s
Bazar in Bangladesh. It is truly regrettable that after all
this time the displacement continues to this day. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees confirms the displacement of an additional
168 people from Myanmar to Bangladesh by the end
of September. We express our concern over such
displacement. That reflects the continued deterioration
of the situation in Rakhine state in particular, and other
states of Myanmar in general.
12/27

24/10/2018

My delegation did not ask for this meeting to be
convened to blame the Government of Myanmar for what
happened. Instead, we asked because of our principled
and firm position in favour of resolving conflicts by
peaceful means, and our belief in preventive diplomacy.
We welcome the efforts of States of the region to resolve
this humanitarian crisis. However, the steps taken by
Myanmar until now have been insufficient, and most
have not been translated into reality on the ground.
The Government of Myanmar has yet to implement
all the steps and demands laid out by the Security
Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
or the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State with respect to addressing the root
causes of the crisis, the suffering of the refugees and
ensuring their voluntary return in safety and dignity to
their homes in Myanmar.
The return of the Rohingya minority to their homes
can begin only when a series of measures is taken to
build trust and ensure that their return is both safe and
dignified. That includes conducting independent and
transparent investigations into the crimes and violations
committed against the rights of the Rohingya minority
in Rakhine state. Other measures include ending
violence and ethnic discrimination and immediately
closing all camps for internally displaced persons. It
is also imperative to allow United Nations agencies
and other partners access to all affected regions in
Myanmar. All residents of Rakhine state should enjoy
and unrestructed safe freedom of movement.
We firmly believe that addressing the root causes
of the Rohingya minority crisis requires the prompt
handling of two essential issues. The first concerns the
need for the authorities of Myanmar to deal with the
Rohingya minority without discrimination, regardless
of ethnicity or religion, and to grant them their inherent
right to citizenship. The second is the need to guarantee
the right to accountability through transparent and fair
investigations based on the collection of all proofs
and evidences so as to ensure a fair prosecution
of the perpetrators of such inhumane crimes. We
welcome Human Rights Council resolution 39/2 and
the recommendations of the fact-finding mission that
the Security Council should ensure accountability
for crimes in Myanmar, particular because the report
concludes that some serious human rights violations in
Rakhine state constitute the most serious crimes under
international law.
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms the need
for the Security Council to address this humanitarian
crisis with the greatest degree of diplomatic flexibility.
The Council must speak in one voice in order to obtain
the necessary results. When the number of displaced
persons reaches 720,000, this proves that there is a
real crisis impacting international peace and security.
When 53 per cent ofthe displaced are children, that
makes us certain that there is a real catastrophe. When
the percentage of children and women combined hits
80 per cent of the displaced, that confirms the existence
of a humanitarian crisis that must be addressed.
The reality on the ground in Cox’s Bazar and
Rakhine state requires us, as members of the Security
Council, to take specific measures that would serve as
a road map that has been long awaited by a minority
that has suffered from the scourges of war, violence and
acts of killing. That minority is still seeking to exercise
its rights and to hold accountable all those who have
violated the most basic human rights and perpetrated
crimes with the intent of forever erasing the identity of
that minority.
Respect for the rule of law, the defence of human
rights, dialogue and resort to peaceful ways to settle
disputes are among the main principles that the State of
Kuwait defends in all forums.
Cases such as those in Myanmar cannot be ignored
by the Security Council. That is especially true for the
refugee issue, which seems to have last a long time,
until a just and final solution can be found, allowing the
Rohingya minority to enjoy all its rights.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Darusman for his
informative briefing. We really commend the dedicated
and meticulous work of the independent international
fact-finding mission in Myanmar, and we believe it was
important that his report, establishing the facts and
circumstances of the crisis, in particular Rakhine state,
could be presented to the Security Council today.
We have been actively seized with the situation in
Myanmar since we joined the Council in January 2017.
In the beginning, our engagement was in a preventive
spirit, including to support the Secretary-General. There
were worrying reports and the situation grew worse. I
want to quote from the report of the fact-finding mission:
“What happened on 25 August 2017 and the following
days and weeks was the realization of a disaster long
in the making.” (A/HRC/39/64, para. 31). Despite these
early warning signals, there was resistance, and too

S/PV. 8381

little was done too late to prevent this crisis of immense
proportions from evolving. There should be important
lessons to draw from this for the Council.
Since the peak of crisis in August last year, the
Council has succeeded in taking some small, but
important, steps. In November, we unanimously adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, setting out a
road map to address the crisis, and in April the Council
undertook an unprecedented visit to Bangladesh and
Myanmar to follow up on the implementation of the road
map. However, as all previous speakers have underlined
today, too little real progress has been achieved on the
ground. While some rudimentary architecture for the
repatriation of refugees has been put in place, the security
and human rights situation in Rakhine is still far from
being adequately addressed. More than 100,000 people
have been confined in camps for internally displaced
persons since 2012, and the Government has failed to
close the camps in a sustainable manner. Freedom of
movement is still restricted and media is not allowed
access. Rohingya continue to flee to Bangladesh in the
hundreds every month.
The Myanmar Government claims that it has
implemented most of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, formerly led
by the late Kofi Annan. Some steps have indeed been
taken, but what is absolutely clear is that the vision
set out in this important report remains distant. Most
importantly, a genuine process towards resolving
the issue of citizenship in a way that fully satisfies
legitimate rights is still absent. Continued action by the
Council with regard to the crisis in Rakhine is therefore
needed, and I would like to highlight four areas.
First, the United Nations and humanitarian partners
must be allowed full and unhindered access to Rakhine
state. While some limited access has been granted,
including to carry out assessments in a few villages,
broader access for assessment and protection is urgently
needed. The memorandum of understanding with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme must be fully implemented.
Secondly, conditions must be created to ensure that
all those who have fled can return to their places of
origin in a safe, voluntary and sustainable manner. For
this to take place, refugees need dignified conditions to
return to, where they can begin to rebuild their lives, free
from fear and with confidence in the future. This will

18-3377413/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

require real change on the ground. We need a new deal
in Rakhine, as the late Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stated at the Arria formula meeting in October last year.
The Annan Commission report provides the framework
for such a new deal. The genuine implementation of its
recommendations is urgent.
Thirdly, all avenues must be pursued to ensure
effective accountability for the crimes committed.
Today’s presentation by the United Nations-mandated
fact-finding mission has provided the Council with
solid and credible evidence. The Rohingya population
and other groups in Rakhine state have been subjected
to systematic and widespread human rights violations.
Many of these violations undoubtedly amount to the
gravest crimes under international law. We note in
particular that the fact-finding mission report includes
crimes against humanity and even genocide.
The report presented to the Council today should
be a turning point. The Council must now take
meaningful action on accountability. We should pursue
consultations on a Security Council draft resolution,
including a referral of the situation to the International
Criminal Court. It is for these kinds of situations that
the Council has been given the authority to make
referrals to the Court.
Fourthly, the refugee camps outside Cox’s Bazar in
Bangladesh need continued and enhanced support. More
funding is urgent. Only less than half of the response
plan has so far been covered, seriously hampering
humanitarian efforts. Protection in the refugee camps
must be improved, not least for the most vulnerable.
Particular attention should be given to survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence — women and men,
girls and boys.
The fact-finding mission report also sheds important
light on the violations of international humanitarian
law and violations and abuses of human rights law
that are being perpetrated by the Myanmar military in
other parts of the country, most notably in Kachin and
Shan states. Indiscriminate air strikes, mortar shelling
and the use of land mines have a devastating impact
on civilians in these regions, and humanitarian access
continues to be limited.
These conflicts are among the longest ongoing
armed conflicts in the world and are at risk of further
escalation. To stay true to our commitments to
preventing and sustaining peace, we should be actively
addressing these situations with a more proactive
14/27

24/10/2018

United Nations engagement. The military and the
Government must redouble their efforts to advance the
peace process. Such a process needs to be inclusive,
with the meaningful participation of women. To
achieve lasting peace, a political solution is needed
that addresses the aspirations and grievances of all
Myanmar’s ethnic minorities and ends the culture of
impunity in the country, as forcefully underlined by
Mr. Darusman today.
Myanmar is at a crossroads and now has a historic
decision to make. Either it chooses the path towards
more repression and growing international isolation, or
it chooses the path of justice, peace and prosperity. If it
chooses the latter, the international community stands
ready to support it. Regional actors have a critical
role to play. The Special Envoy’s positive engagement
to build trust is needed and should now be translated
into concrete steps forward. The United Nations
and its partners have the capacity to support peace,
humanitarian and longer-term development efforts.
We cannot expect the Government to solve
everything overnight, but steps are urgently needed
to demonstrate commitment and gain credibility in
the international community. One such simple step
would be to immediately pardon and release the two
imprisoned Reuters journalists. Myanmar should
further recognize the gravity of the crisis, take needed
measures on accountability and improve the situation
in Rakhine. Only then will conditions for safe and
voluntary return of refugees be in place.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
Chairperson of the Human Rights Council’s independent
international fact-finding mission, Mr. Marzuki
Darusman, for his detailed and very worrying briefing.
The alarming findings presented in his report
show that the problem is grave and should be dealt with
accordingly. I would like to underline the importance of
accountability. While welcoming the State Counsellor’s
commitment to bringing all the perpetrators of human
rights violations and other criminal acts to justice, we
stress that the credible allegations of serious human
rights violations and abuses must be investigated.
We call on all sides to put an immediate end to
all violence. We particularly urge Myanmar to ensure
the protection of all civilians without discrimination
and to fully abide by international human rights law.
We further reiterate the call on the Government of
Myanmar to take every possible step to defuse the
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

tensions between communities and to grant full, safe
and unconditional humanitarian access without delay.
We call on the Government and its security forces to
ensure that security, the rule of law and accountability
prevail in Myanmar, including in Rakhine, Kachin
and Shan states. We must also seek a comprehensive
and durable solution addressing the root causes of the
problem, including the elimination of statelessness,
discrimination and underdevelopment, as outlined in
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State. We hope the Government of Myanmar
will swiftly and fully implement the Commission’s
recommendations in that regard. We are of the view
that lasting peace and stability can be achieved only
through comprehensive and inclusive national dialogue,
with the participation of all ethnic groups.
We acknowledge Myanmar’s establishment in
July of an independent commission of inquiry, and the
Secretary-General’s appointment of a Special Envoy
on Myanmar. The commission is expected to submit a
report within six months. We hope that the commission
will bring us closer to ensuring accountability by
working in an independent, objective and transparent
way. We also note the Special Envoy’s visit to Myanmar
this month and encourage the Government of Myanmar
to continue cooperating with both the commission and
the Special Envoy. At the same time, we reiterate our
call to Myanmar to fully cooperate in addressing the
situation in Rakhine state with all the relevant United
Nations and international bodies, including the Human
Rights Council’s independent international factfinding mission.
Poland also emphasizes the importance of
establishing conditions conducive to the safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable return of displaced
persons to Rakhine state and their reintegration. We
urge the Government to immediately ease restrictions
on freedom of movement in order to facilitate access
for all communities to employment opportunities,
education, health care and other services. We also
look forward to the implementation of the arrangement
signed in November 2017 between Myanmar and
Bangladesh on the return of displaced persons from
Rakhine state, and the memorandum of understanding
signed in June by Myanmar, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Darusman for his briefing. We have been following

S/PV. 8381

the situation in Myanmar very closely since we joined
the Council. We believe that so far the Council’s
constructive engagement has had a positive impact
in terms of addressing the humanitarian situation in
Rakhine state. We note the progress that has been made
but also recognize the enormous challenges that still
lie ahead.
The human rights situation in Myanmar is indeed
a matter for serious concern and we understand that
the relevant and appropriate United Nations bodies are
handling the matter. The issue with respect to whether
or how the Security Council should directly address
human rights issues has been a matter of debate in the
Council and there is no consensus among members
on it, as we have clearly seen today. The situation in
Myanmar is extremely complex and difficult, and a
sustainable solution to the root causes of the problems
that led to this humanitarian disaster must be found. In
that context, we do not believe that our course of action
will help to make progress in ongoing efforts where
building mutual confidence and trust among those
concerned is so critical. That is the main reason why
we decided to abstain in the voting on the agenda item.
We believe that ensuring accountability through a
transparent and independent verification mechanism
is absolutely critical. In that regard, we recognize the
efforts that the Government of Myanmar is making
and underscore the importance of speeding them up in
order to ensure peace and reconciliation in the country.
We would like to take this opportunity to appreciate the
role of Special Envoy Christine Burgener, and we have
seen the outcome of her third visit to Myanmar and
the region, which enabled her to engage with various
stakeholders. As she emphasized during her visit, the
issues of accountability and inclusive dialogue are
indeed important pillars for national reconciliation.
We could not agree more with her on the need for
credible and reliable fact-finding as a first step towards
accountability. We believe the Council should continue
to support her important efforts.
We are also pleased to note the recent bilateral and
regional engagement aimed at repatriating refugees and
addressing the complex issue of Rakhine state. In that
context, the three-point consensus reached between
China, Myanmar and Bangladesh during the informal
meeting held on the sidelines of the General Assembly
is indeed encouraging. We look forward to the outcome
of the third joint working group meeting, to be held on
29 October in Dhaka. We hope it will help in making

18-3377415/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

further progress with regard to the process of voluntary,
safe and dignified repatriation.
The enormous burden that Bangladesh has taken
on in providing safety and humanitarian assistance
to refugees is indeed commendable. However, the
magnitude and scale of the humanitarian situation
means that Bangladesh requires further financial and
logistical support. We therefore hope that bilateral
and multilateral partners will scale up their support to
the country.
Finally, without a united Security Council there can
be no meaningful progress in support for the efforts to
find a sustainable solution to the situation in Myanmar.
We hope we will be able to restore that unity of purpose
despite our divergent views.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At our last meeting on this subject, on
28 August (see S/PV.8333), together with other members
of the Council, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea again
reaffirmed its profound concern for the hundreds of
thousands of Rohingya who, for fear of violence and
atrocities, have been forced to flee their homelands and
property in Myanmar to Bangladesh.
We applaud the solidarity of the Government and
the people of Bangladesh who, with the support of the
United Nations, its partners and non-governmental
organizations,
continue
to
provide
security,
accommodation, assistance and humanitarian aid to an
enormous number of refugees. We hope that this major
humanitarian effort can continue while the international
community works together with Myanmar and
Bangladesh to ensure the entire population’s dignified
and sustainable return to their homeland.
Despite the well-known difficulties surrounding
this issue, our delegation certainly appreciates the
work that has been carried out by the United Nations
this year. Among other things, it includes the important
visit by members of the Council in the second quarter
of this year and the June visit of the Secretary-General,
in which he was joined, significantly, by the President
of the World Bank. We also highlight the SecretaryGeneral’s April appointment of his Special Envoy on
Myanmar, who has made several trips to explore and
familiarize herself with the area since then. Nor should
we forget the direct and continued support supplied by
the various agencies of the United Nations system on
the ground.
16/27

24/10/2018

During those visits, the delegations were able
to confirm the deplorable situation of the displaced
Rohingya in the settlements in Cox’s Bazar, where
hearings and meetings were also arranged with the local
authorities in Myanmar and Bangladesh, with whom
they had important exchanges with a view to finding a
solution to the conflict. It will be impossible to ensure
a dignified and prosperous future for young refugees
with the very limited education prospects and ways to
earn a living available to them, so if they remain there
a long time an entire generation of a people will be
condemned to poverty. The international community
and Myanmar must understand that, but they must also
respect the generous hospitality of Bangladesh, and that
obliges us to redouble our efforts to advance the process
of ensuring the return of the Rohingya. We hope that the
Government of Myanmar has made progress with the
initiatives it laid out in a letter submitted to the Council
on 20 July through its representative in New York
(S/2018/726) on humanitarian access, accountability
for human rights abuses and the implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, which were also the main areas
identified by the Council.
We welcome the fact that since the office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar
became operational, Myanmar and Bangladesh
have been receiving regular working visits from
Ms. Burgener and having in-depth exchanges with her
on the issue of Rakhine. We must all support her work
and give her time for a more thorough and appropriate
investigation that will better facilitate her dialogue
with local Governments.
We also welcome the ministerial meeting held in
August between Myanmar and Bangladesh, at which
they discussed the implementation of the bilateral
repatriation agreement and reached consensus on issues
such as forms of verification, displaced persons in the
border area and the establishment of a direct line of
communication between their Ministers. We encourage
the parties to continue working together constructively.
We also stress the importance of the joint working group
meetings held in recent months between Myanmar and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme, which in our view help to reinforce their
respective commitments. The meetings should be
frequent, productive and exemplary in order to build
more trust and pursue their shared goal, the creation of
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

a safe sociopolitical environment that can guarantee the
refugees’ return to their homes.
Before concluding, Equatorial Guinea urges
all members of the Council and the international
community to support all initiatives based on peaceful
negotiations and the encouragement of contacts as the
only way to reach a sustainable and lasting solution
to this thorny situation. Lastly, we want to express
our sincere gratitude to the United Nations and all
its agencies on the ground, to Bangladesh and to all
international actors providing assistance of any kind
to the Rohingya refugees or working to facilitate their
return. We also commend the People’s Republic of
China for its exemplary efforts as a liaison between the
various parties concerned and encourage it to continue
in order to ensure that Myanmar collaborates effectively
with Bangladesh for the return of the Rohingya to
their homes.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Marzuki Darusman, Chairperson of
the independent international fact-finding mission on
Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council,
for his briefing, which is crucial to the work of the
Security Council. Peru supported convening this
meeting, considering, among other things, that since the
Council’s visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh in April,
which we had the honour of leading together with the
United Kingdom and Kuwait, the responses aimed at
resolving the grave humanitarian crisis there are still
insufficient. That is why we believe that the Council
should continue to pay due attention to the plight of the
Rohingya refugees, with a view to bringing about their
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation,
as well as to promoting justice, accountability and
reconciliation in order to build sustainable peace
in Myanmar.
We would like to reiterate our appreciation to
Bangladesh for its solidarity in taking in more than
1 million refugees, and to stress the importance of the
international community’s support in addressing the
refugees’ critical humanitarian situation, especially in
the light of the impact of the recent monsoon. We also
stress the role of regional and subregional organizations,
particularly in preventing and responding to emerging
conflicts. In that regard, we welcome the involvement
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
addressing and contributing to a solution to the situation
in Myanmar.

S/PV. 8381

We have high hopes for the ongoing technical
meetings held by the joint working groups established
by Myanmar and Bangladesh, as well as the efforts of
the Burmese authorities to advance the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding signed with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the United Nations Development Programme. We also
underline the recent visit of the Special Envoy and
in that context, we stress the urgent need for all the
current efforts and developments to produce concrete
results on the ground with a view to enabling the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Addressing the root causes of the crisis by fully
implementing the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State is urgent, although
we recognize that these are complex tasks within
the framework of a delicate national process of
peace, reconciliation and democratization. While
we acknowledge the significant effort involved in
establishing an independent investigative commission,
we must point out that in order to fully understand this
tragedy, its jurisdiction cannot be restricted to events
prior to 25 August 2017. In that connection, we take
careful note of the conclusions of the report of the
fact-finding mission (A/HRC/39/64), in which, after
considering the violence that occurred after 25 August
2017 and its causes, it finds reasonable evidence for
the commission of crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
Given the gravity of the situation, we take note
of the decision of the International Criminal Court
to affirm its jurisdiction over the crime of the forced
deportation of the Rohingya people. We look forward
to the results of the preliminary examination by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Court. We also stress the
importance of Human Rights Council resolution 39/2,
which approved the establishment of a new independent
mechanism to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse
evidence of violations of international law. We believe
that this is an urgent task that requires cooperation with
the private sector, particularly in the area of information
and communication technology, and that it should also
serve to develop strategies aimed at preventing the
dissemination of distorted information and narratives
of hatred and discrimination.
In conclusion, I would like to stress how important it
is that the Council continue to focus on this situation. It
can count on my delegation’s full support in that regard.

18-3377417/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Marzuki Darusman,
Chairperson of the independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar, for his very thorough and
informative briefing.
Barely 10 years ago, my country and other countries
in the West African subregion were emerging from
very painful internal conflict. Mr. Darusman’s briefing
brings back those images of hordes of ragged and
desperate people fleeing attacks, trudging over rutted
roads under a blazing tropical sun. When Côte d’Ivoire
emerged from that internal conflict, thanks to the help
of the international community, the people of Côte
d’Ivoire said never again. And as our country decided
to align its ideas with its actions, we have enshrined
as a cornerstone of our Constitution the right to life
as a cardinal principle and value. What we want for
the Ivorian people is also what we want for the other
peoples of the world. That is why the humanitarian
situation of the displaced and refugee Rohingya
people and the human rights situation in Rakhine state
continue to challenge the conscience of humankind and
our humanity. That is why we joined others in calling
for this meeting.
Côte d’Ivoire does not claim to have a monopoly
of the heart, to paraphrase a great President of a great
friendly country, whom I esteem. However, it is clear
that, in spite of the efforts made, enormous challenges
remain, particularly in relation to the delivery
humanitarian aid and the return of Rohingya refugees.
That is why my statement will focus essentially on the
humanitarian aspect.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the commitment of the
Government of Myanmar to cooperating with the
United Nations — a commitment embodied by the
signing on 6 June of the tripartite memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Côte d’Ivoire urges the Myanmar authorities to redouble
their efforts to implement that agreement by facilitating
the access of United Nations agencies and specialized
bodies to populations in need in order to provide them
with access to humanitarian aid and assistance.
With regard to the issue of human rights, my
delegation takes note of the findings of the Human
Rights Council independent international fact-finding
mission on Myanmar. Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its
18/27

24/10/2018

commitment to respecting and protecting human rights.
We underscore the obligation of the international
community to bring the perpetrators of human rights
violations before the appropriate courts. In that regard,
we support the efforts of the Human Rights Council
to implement the findings of the fact-finding mission,
including through the establishment of an independent
mechanism to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse
the evidence of the most serious crimes and violations
of international law in Myanmar.
The solution to the current crisis in Myanmar must
be viewed as part of a comprehensive approach that
addresses, inter alia, the important issue of the safe and
dignified return of Rohingya refugees. Côte d’Ivoire
remains convinced that lasting peace in Myanmar must
be based on the search for consensual solutions that
take into account the concerns of all parties. To that
end, we wish to see the international community focus
its efforts on three main areas: the implementation of
the memorandum of understanding between Myanmar,
UNHCR and UNDP; the establishment of a process to
fight impunity, in support of the work of the ongoing
national commission of inquiry; and the implementation
of the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State.
My delegation reiterates its support for Ms. Christine
Schraner Burgener, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Myanmar, and encourages the Government
of that friendly country to continue to cooperate with
her. My country — which, in the early 1990s, provided
asylum to and facilitated the integration of hundreds of
thousands of refugees fleeing conflict in neighbouring
countries — recognizes the immense efforts and
sacrifices entailed in the opening of national borders
to people in distress. That is why we wish to express
our sincere gratitude to the authorities and the friendly
people of Bangladesh for their hospitality and assistance
to the Rohingya refugees.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the international
community to continue and increase its assistance to
refugees by making an adequate financial contribution
to the United Nations joint response plan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): The situation in
Myanmar and that of the Rohingya refugees remain
among the most critical problems of concern for the
international community. The world is today witnessing
one of the most serious catastrophes and violations in the
humanitarian space, with the displacement of more than
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

700,000 Rohingya refugees who have fled to Bangladesh
since August last year. At the same time, on procedural
grounds, the invitation to the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar — mandated by the
Human Rights Council, which is a subsidiary body
of the General Assembly — to brief the Council is
beyond its mandate. My delegation therefore abstained
during the procedural voting. On the other hand, we
acknowledge the update by Chairperson Darusman and
we thank him.
My country has always stood for an early and
comprehensive solution to this humanitarian crisis, with
the direct participation of Myanmar, Bangladesh and
the entire international community. That stance remains
unchanged even today. We note the arrangements made
by the Government of Myanmar for the repatriation
and resettlement of the Rohingya refugees, as well as
its cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Burgener. We welcome her
third visit to Myanmar from 10 to 20 October, which
has led to further progress in that regard.
With that in mind, my delegation also expresses
grave concern about the results of the fact-finding
mission investigation and condemns the atrocities
committed in Rakhine. The reported flagrant, massive
and systematic violations of human rights have been
shocking, including discrimination on ethnic and
religious grounds, with ongoing large-scale deportation
and systematic oppression that are still prevalent. We
are particularly concerned that the report comes to the
conclusion that,
“The extreme vulnerability of the Rohingya is
a consequence of State policies and practices
implemented over decades” (A/HRC/39/64, para. 20).
It is obvious that the full disclosure of the atrocities
and taking action against those responsible will be
a necessary prerequisite to instil confidence in the
refugees that they can return home. Likewise, under the
current circumstances, the return of Rohingya refugees
from Bangladesh to their homes in Rakhine state will not
be possible unless the authorities of Myanmar expedite
the process of creating the necessary conditions and
providing full security assurances, as well as access to
education, employment, health care and stable, longterm sources of livelihoods.

S/PV. 8381

We strongly believe that it is only by addressing
the root causes — namely, the issues of citizenship
and restoring the rights and freedoms of the Rohingya
Muslims — that this complex and long-standing crisis
can see a dignified and durable solution. We expect
the Government of Myanmar to continue to adopt
confidence-building measures and implement all the
practical measures recommended by the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State. For example, the
freedom of movement of the Rohingya Muslims in
Myanmar should be ensured immediately by the
Government of Myanmar in order to clearly demonstrate
its own sincerity.
More than 1 million Rohingya Muslims — the vast
majority being women and children — have to remain
in extremely difficult conditions in refugee camps
in Bangladesh. Kazakhstan commends the efforts
of the Government of Bangladesh in helping such an
unprecedented magnitude of refugees and providing
them with shelter, medical care, food and other forms of
assistance. At the same time, we still need an enormous
amount of additional funds, as well as all forms of
in-kind assistance. We therefore appeal to all Member
States, international organizations and other actors to
continue providing full support to Bangladesh. At the
same time, Kazakhstan understands that establishing
intercommunal trust is a long-term and challenging
process that will demand the active participation of
all stakeholders.
However, the main responsibility for resolving the
problem lies with the Union of Myanmar itself. We are
particularly encouraged by the results of an informal
meeting between China, Myanmar and Bangladesh
on the margins of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly. We believe that this third meeting
of the joint working group, to be held on 29 and
30 October in Dhaka, will contribute to resolving the
issue of displaced persons in a friendly and expeditious
manner. In our view, the engagement of the Asian
troika has considerable potential to contribute to the
resolution of the current crisis.
Finally, we believe that the Security Council should
contribute positively to settling the crisis and avoid
needless polarization. My delegation is committed to
supporting the multilateral actions aimed at ensuring
peace and security for the Rohingya refugees and the
people of Myanmar, and we expect the Government to
make every effort to that end.

18-3377419/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

Mr. Nebenzia (Russia) (spoke in Russian): Today,
before our very eyes, the Security Council forfeited
consensus on yet another extremely important topic
in the work of our Organization, resulting from an
unconstructive, irresponsible tactic by a number of
States designed to force us to hold a meeting to discuss
the report of the independent international fact-finding
mission on Myanmar established by the Human Rights
Council (A/HRC/39/64). As we already noted in our
statement on the reasons for the procedural vote, we see
absolutely no added value in a briefing to the Security
Council on the subject.
We have been made to discuss a very strange
report, whose legitimacy has given rise to serious
doubts. It has already been widely criticized within the
Human Rights Council by many delegations, including
ours, which testifies to its confrontational nature and
which in itself devalues any discussion of the document
that has been dumped on the Security Council. We
are all aware that Myanmar is not cooperating with
the fact-finding mission, and its representatives have
never visited the country. It is therefore hardly possible
to consider evidence collected outside the country
concerned to be objective or exhaustive. That also fully
applies to the so-called findings and conclusions based
on that evidence.
Those who pushed for today’s discussion of the
report in the Security Council are doing all they can
to reduce the significance of the Myanmar authorities’
establishment on 30 July of an independent commission
of inquiry, whose leaders and staff include reputable
foreign representatives. Rather than blackmailing
and intimidating Naypyidaw, it would be helpful to
give the commission our whole-hearted multilateral
support. After today’s meeting, no one should be left
with any illusions about the fact that its instigators
have absolutely no interest in resolving the problems
of the Rohingya. They are merely an excuse for putting
shameless pressure on the authorities of a sovereign
State and forcing it to do what its former colonizer and
its allies want. The logical next step in that direction
would be pressure for anti-Myanmar sanctions and
corresponding Security Council resolutions, a course
of action that we categorically refuse to support.
I say that because it is hard to avoid noticing that
Naypyidaw is trying to solve the refugee problem. Since
the Security Council’s visit to Myanmar at the end of
April and beginning of May, we have seen a number of
positive changes. The Myanmar leadership is working
20/27

24/10/2018

systematically to implement the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State with a view to
achieving a comprehensive settlement of the crisis, and
81 of the 88 recommendations have been implemented
so far. The authorities have repeatedly confirmed at the
official level their willingness to ensure the gradual
return of all the displaced, including from Bangladesh.
To date, Myanmar has verified the identity of more
than 8,000 refugees. The steps taken to establish the
infrastructure in Rakhine state needed for receiving
and resettling returnees deserve high praise.Another
positive example is the close cooperation of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme with
the Government of Myanmar on implementing the
tripartite memorandum of understanding signed on
6 June. We support the work of Christine Schraner
Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, who has already visited the country three
times, most recently from 10 to 20 October, and we note
the positive response of the Myanmar authorities to her
proposal for opening an office in Naypyidaw.
For our part, we have consistently supported
a balanced and non-confrontational approach in
discussing the situation in Myanmar and finding ways
to normalize the humanitarian situation in Rakhine,
including resolving the issue of the Rohingya. We
should keep in mind that the underlying problems in
Rakhine are multifaceted and complex, and can be
resolved only through peaceful political and diplomatic
efforts establishing a dialogue between the authorities
in Naypyidaw and Dhaka and representatives of all
ethnic and religious groups. The agreed legal basis for
negotiations between Myanmar and Bangladesh and
the functioning coordination mechanisms will make it
possible to take practical steps in that direction. The
tactic of postponing the start of the repatriation process,
which is increasingly being used by outside forces to put
additional pressure on Myanmar, is counterproductive.
At this stage, we believe that the priority is ensuring
international cooperation with a view to tackling the
worst humanitarian consequences of the crisis. We
believe it is essential to provide assistance to both
Bangladesh and Myanmar, and that it is also the role
of the international community to help Naypyidaw and
Dhaka implement their existing agreements.
We see the Rakhine issue as part of a wider
context of the broad challenges and tasks facing the
democratically elected leadership in Myanmar. We do
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

not support attempts to saddle Naypyidaw or specific
groups in Myanmar with the entire responsibility for
resolving the crisis, while ignoring the need to combat
terrorist groups, above all the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army, whose attacks launched by that group
did a great deal to provoke the situation in Rakhine
state. Such actions only make the prospects for a solid
inter-ethnic peace in Myanmar and for its effective
cooperation with the international community more
distant. We believe that assistance to the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving the situation
related to Rakhine state should be provided in a spirit
of equality and mutual respect. Unfortunately, today’s
meeting contributes absolutely nothing to that.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China regrets the fact that the Security Council heard
a briefing today from the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar established by the
Human Rights Council. Such practices jeopardize the
unity of the Council and are not conducive to ensuring
that its members cooperate to jointly solve the issue of
Rakhine state.
Good progress has recently been made in resolving
the issue of Rakhine state through the joint efforts of
the country concerned, other countries in the region
and United Nations agencies. In mid-September, the
first joint mission of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme visited 23 villages
in Rakhine state, while in mid-October a second joint
mission visited a further 26 villages. The Myanmar
Government has promised to grant the joint mission
full access to Rakhine state’s entire territory and to
actively implement the tripartite memorandum of
understanding. The recommendations made by the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State in its report
are being implemented. Myanmar’s independent
commission of inquiry on Rakhine state recently
began work and held a meeting. In consultations
with Bangladesh, the commission visited Kasba, in
Bangladesh, to conduct an investigation with a view
to establishing accountability for the human rights
violations committed in Rakhine state after the attacks
by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army in October
2016 and August 2017.
In mid-October, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar,
visited Myanmar once again. She held in-depth
discussions with Myanmar leaders and officials,

S/PV. 8381

and visited Maungdaw and Buthidaung to get firsthand information on the situation in Rakhine state.
The Myanmar and Bangladesh joint working group
will hold its third meeting by the end of the month.
Mr. Abul Hassan Mahmood Ali, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bangladesh, indicated recently that based on
Bangladesh’s list of 8,000 people and the list provided
by Myanmar, a first group of refugees will soon be
repatriated. The international community should
note and fully acknowledge that active progress. The
Government and the people of Bangladesh have been
providing significant humanitarian support for the
displaced people in Bangladesh despite the difficulties
involved. They are working hard to improve their living
conditions and make the necessary arrangements to
help them respond to natural events such as hurricanes
and the rainy season. China greatly appreciates
Bangladesh’s outstanding efforts.
Myanmar and Bangladesh are both friends and
neighbours of China. Since the beginning of the
Rakhine state incidents, China has been actively
engaged in diplomatic efforts to promote dialogue and
consultations between the two countries so as to resolve
the issue. China proposed the concept of a three-stage
solution to the Rakhine state issue and has encouraged
the parties to agree on a number of important issues.
On 27 September, following the first informal tripartite
meeting in late June between China, Myanmar and
Bangladesh, Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China, held another informal tripartite meeting at
United Nations Headquarters in New York with Mr. Ali
and Mr. U Kyaw Tint Swe, Minister for the Office of the
State Counsellor of Myanmar, which was also attended
by the Secretary-General and Ms. Burgener, his Special
Envoy on Myanmar. The meeting’s friendly, frank and
constructive atmosphere resulted in three important
points of consensus.
First, Myanmar and Bangladesh agreed to properly
resolve the issue of Rakhine state through friendly
consultations. Secondly, Bangladesh indicated that it
was ready to repatriate the first group of people who
had fled the turmoil. Myanmar also indicated that it was
well prepared to receive those ready to be repatriated.
Thirdly, both countries agreed to convene a joint
working group meeting as soon as possible to establish
a road map and timetable for the repatriation, so that
work on it can begin without delay. We are therefore
pleased to note that the consensus I mentioned is being
actively implemented.

18-3377421/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

China is deeply concerned about the displaced
people in Bangladesh and has provided humanitarian
assistance to both countries concerned. On the same
basis as its previous assistance, China recently pledged
to donate 1,000 temporary shelters to local people
to improve their living conditions and resettle the
repatriated, and has also provided Bangladesh with
¥20 million in food assistance. We remain committed
to seeking a solution to the Rakhine state issue.
The Rahkine state issue has a complex historical,
ethnic and religious background. It is essentially
an issue between Myanmar and Bangladesh, and
resolving it will require relentless long-term effort. The
international community should respect Myanmar’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, appreciate its hardwon positive progress, fully understand the difficulties
and challenges it is dealing with and make meaningful
efforts to help resolve the issue. The immediate
task is ensuring the early launch of the repatriation
process for those who fled Myanmar for Bangladesh.
The international community should encourage both
countries to intensify their dialogue and ensure that
the first group is successfully repatriated as soon as
possible so that they can return to their homes.
The issues of greatest concern to everyone in the
repatriation process, which are freedom of movement,
citizenship and accountability, should be gradually and
appropriately resolved. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme should intensify
their consultations with the Myanmar Government and
work for the effective implementation of the tripartite
memorandum of understanding. The Security Council
should continue to support the Special Envoy, who is
seeking dialogue and consultations aimed at helping the
Myanmar Government resolve the issue. Development
is the fundamental pathway to a lasting a solution to
the Rakhine state issue. The international community
should devote more attention to helping local authorities
and residents eradicate poverty, achieve sustainable
development, improve their livelihoods and social and
economic conditions, and foster social stability and
harmonious coexistence among the people.
Last but not least. the international community is
closely following the human rights situation and the
issue of accountability in Rakhine state. The Myanmar
Government is committed to bringing to justice the
perpetrators of human rights violations on a basis
of solid evidence. It has established an independent
22/27

24/10/2018

commission of inquiry on Rakhine state, which has
extensive international participation and has promised
to submit a report within a year. The international
community should respect Myanmar’s sovereignty
and encourage the commission to work independently,
establish the truth and hold the perpetrators of human
rights violations accountable.
With regard to the report of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar
(A/HRC/39/64), the mission did not enter in Myanmar
at all. Its results are based on biased, incomplete
information. They are neither objective nor impartial,
and therefore not credible. Its conclusions, suggestions
and recommendations constitute wilful interference
in Myanmar’s internal affairs and are an affront to its
sovereignty. The fact-finding mission is not a judge.
Such practices are unhelpful to resolving the issue in
Rakhine state and can only jeopardize the possibility
of internal reconciliation and democratic transition
in Myanmar, escalate tensions in Rakhine state
and undermine the authority and credibility of the
United Nations.
Human rights are a common cause of the
international community and one of the three pillars of
the United Nations. China has consistently advocated
for dialogue on human rights issues, based on equality
and mutual respect. That is the right way to promote
the cause of human rights for humankind. China stands
ready to work with the international community to
seek dialogue and consultations, uphold justice and
impartiality, work to find a solution and continue to
play a constructive role in resolving the issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia reiterates its deep concern about the acts
of violence that occurred in Rakhine state in August
2017 and their aftermath, which led to the displacement
of approximately 900,000 people to Bangladesh,
where they are living in difficult conditions. That
violence cannot go unpunished. Those deeds must
be investigated, and the people responsible for them
identified and brought to justice to answer for them in
the appropriate courts. The work of the independent
commission of inquiry on Rakhine state established
at the end of July is key to achieving that goal. To
that end, it is essential that all the relevant agencies
and institutions cooperate with the commission’s
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

investigations and provide all the information needed
to ensure that the perpetrators do not continue to enjoy
impunity. We want to emphasize in that regard that
since its establishment, the commission has held three
meetings with officials at various levels of Government
and members of the populations affected.
We would like to highlight the efforts of regional
actors to bring the parties together and promote dialogue
between them, such as the meeting held on 27 September
with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Myanmar and
Bangladesh at the initiative of China’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, which the Secretary-General attended.
An agreement was reached at that meeting to resolve the
issue through amicable consultations among the parties,
coordinate the repatriation of a first group of displaced
persons and hold a joint meeting to develop a road map
and timetable to achieve that goal. We also want to
point to the meeting in Beijing on 29 June between the
Foreign Ministers of Myanmar and Bangladesh, also
initiated by China’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, during
which the basic principles for four points for resolving
the situation of the Rohingya refugees were agreed
on — finding a way to stop the violence, beginning
the work of repatriation, implementing projects and
sustainable development programmes to the benefit
of both parties and thereby strengthening relations of
trust and cooperation between the Governments of
Bangladesh and Myanmar. It is that type of positive
action that should be at the forefront of promoting the
resolution of the situation in Myanmar.
On the other hand, it is also important to
strengthen the cooperation and coordination work
for the repatriation of Rohingya refugees that the
Government of Myanmar is developing together with
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in the framework of the memorandum
of understanding signed on 6 June. As a result of its
implementation, 23 villages were evaluated in July and
26 additional villages are currently being evaluated. In
addition, the international community should provide
all possible support to the Governments of Bangladesh
and Myanmar for the implementation of the framework
for a dignified, safe, voluntary and transparent return
of the refugees to their places of origin and encourage
the fulfilment of the remaining tasks. In that regard, we
have taken note of the visit to Myanmar of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar, which
concluded a few days ago.

S/PV. 8381

Finally, as all the other delegations have done, my
delegation acknowledges and commends the efforts
that the Government of Bangladesh has made over the
past year with regard to the refugees in its country.
In that regard, it is imperative that the international
community and the United Nations do everything
possible to support host communities in Bangladesh
and ensure that they have access to short-, medium- and
long-term development incentives.
I shall make a brief reference to what we heard at
the end of the statement made by the representative
of the United States. I will be very brief so as not to
distract the Council’s attention from the subject that
brings us together today. I would like to point out that I
agree with the Permanent Representative of the United
States that there are ways of doing things at the United
Nations. There are ways to have relations of cooperation
and mutual respect among Member State. And there is
also the other way — to use and instrumentalize the
United Nations and its facilities for political purposes,
or to use and instrumentalize the issue of human rights
with a double standard and for political purposes. My
delegation, in its national capacity, is not going to ask
anyone for permission on how to behave or act. On the
other hand, we insist that United Nations facilities not
be used for political purposes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Today, 24 October, marks
the seventy-third anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations. In Myanmar we celebrate United
Nations Day every year with a special ceremony and
public activities to promote awareness of the work of
the United Nations. This is a day to celebrate, a day to
cherish, a day to remember the past and a day to renew
our noble commitment to building peace, development
and human rights in the world, the responsibilities the
founding fathers of the Organization entrusted upon us.
Sadly, though, we are gathering here in the
Chamber in defiance of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations — that of our
own Organization — against the standing rules and
procedures of the Council and against all logic and
fairness of human conscience. We are witnessing the
core erosion of the moral and institutional integrity of
the United Nations as a result of the blatant attempt by
some members of the Council to hijack the human rights

18-3377423/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

issue for their political purposes. My delegation has
joined other Council members in our strong objection
to this injustice and abuse of the established practice of
the Security Council.
When the fact-finding mission on Myanmar was
established by the Human Rights Council, in March
2017, we objected to the mission because of our serious
concerns, particularly about the advisability of its
establishment and the mandate itself. The Human
Rights Council resolution mandated the mission
“to establish the facts and circumstances of the
alleged recent human rights violations by military
and security forces, and abuses, in Myanmar,
in particular in Rakhine State … with a view to
ensuring full accountability for perpetrators
and justice for victims” (Human Rights Council
resolution 34/22, para. 11)
The mandate was very clear. The mission has
already designated who should be perpetrators and who
should be victims. From its genesis, the establishment
of the fact-finding mission has been flawed, biased
and politically motivated, with hidden agendas.
We are also concerned that the release of its report
(A/HRC/39/64), which is based on narratives and not
on hard evidence, will serve only to further inflame
tensions and potentially hinder the Government’s effort
to create much-needed social cohesion in Rakhine state.
The one-sided report of the mission has confirmed
our concerns.
We also raised previously in the Chamber, on
28 August (see S/PV.8333), our doubt — or our
concern — about the sincerity of the mission. Although
the mission was mandated to submit its report to the
Human Rights Council on 18 September, it released,
well ahead and in haste, the unedited version of the
report on 27 August, just one day ahead of the Security
Council’s public debate on the situation in Myanmar.
The action called for our legitimate concerns about the
objectivity, impartiality and credibility of the mission.
The methodology of its investigation is also flawed, as
the report was prepared from results of interviews of
selected groups of displaced persons in Cox’s Bazar
and information gathered from some non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), international NGOs and human
rights groups who had already set their predetermined
agenda on the issue. Therefore, the mission’s report
did not shed new light on the problem but was found
24/27

24/10/2018

to be identical with the reports of certain human rights
groups with no accountability for their work at all.
We have repeatedly explained the fact that the
current humanitarian crisis in Rakhine state was ignited
by the unprovoked and premeditated attacks against 30
police outposts and a military battalion headquarters by
the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorist
group in August 2017 and, previously, in October 2016.
The ARSA terrorists had massacred security personnel
and hundreds of innocent civilians, including 100
Hindu villagers, other ethnic minorities and even proGovernment Muslims. The atrocities perpetrated by
ARSA have made thousands of innocent ethnic people
flee their villages to the other parts of Rakhine state.
Likewise, it created a massive exodus of Muslims to
the neighbouring country. It is crucial to bear in mind
that the present crisis did not affect only the Muslim
community. When we talk about human rights, we
should look at the human rights of both communities.
However, we are dismayed by the fact that the
fact-finding mission has deliberately and glaringly
discounted ARSA terrorist atrocities, which could even
be interpreted by many as justifying or condoning the
acts of Muslim extremist terrorists. In its report, the
fact-finding mission took great courage to reluctantly
and half-heartedly mention the atrocities committed
by ARSA terrorists. It lists a few ARSA human rights
violations, including “the killing of up to 100 Hindu
men and women from Kha Maung Seik” (A/HRC/39/64,
para. 54). It continues:
“[t]he mission’s primary source information
on the latter incident” — that is, the killing
of Hindus — “corroborates the killing, but is
inconclusive as to the perpetrator. Other militant or
criminal groups were also active in the region and
may also have been responsible for abuses.” (ibid.)
Amazing. I am just bringing the naked truth of the
report to the attention of the members of the Council.
Much has been talked about accountability. As the
Council is well aware, the Government of Myanmar
has established an independent commission of inquiry,
led by Ambassador Rosario Manalo. The commission
will investigate allegations of human rights violations
and related issues following the terrorist attacks of
9 October 2016 and 25 August 2017 by the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army in Rakhine state with a
view to seeking accountability and reconciliation. The
commission will conduct its mandate in accordance
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8381

with the principles of independence, impartiality and
objectivity, and will submit its report within a year. We
are willing and able to take on the issue of accountability
for any alleged human rights violation where there is
sufficient evidence. We need to give time and space to
the independent commission of inquiry.

States utilize instruments at their disposal to
promote peace, stability and harmony, and
to mitigate harm and enmity. Objectivity,
impartiality, professionalism, respect for national
sovereignty — these are some of the keys to the
success of the United Nations mission.”

Mr. Darusman has said that Myanmar has taken
no action on alleged violation of human rights. In fact,
legal actions have been taken against military and
police officers and civilians who were found to be in
breach of standard operating procedures and rules of
engagement following the Inn Din incident. In addition,
other administrative actions have also been taken
against high-ranking senior officers of Tatmadaw who
were responsible for overseeing security operations
in Rakhine.

I would like to remind Council members that
Myanmar is still at a critical juncture of transition to
fully functioning democracy. Mr. Darusman has said
patience will not help Myanmar’s democratization, but
the opposite is true. It is not by revolution that we are
building democracy. Our leader, State Counsellor Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, has chosen a peaceful path through
national reconciliation and national consensus, which
require tremendous patience and political wisdom. The
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar,
Ms. Christine Burgener, in her end-of-mission
statement to Myanmar on 20 October, stressed the
need for patience and more trust-building to advance
the peace process towards a home-grown solution. We
concur fully with the Special Envoy. Patience and trustbuilding are key to the success of our common efforts
to find a viable and sustainable solution to the present
humanitarian crisis and the whole issue of northern
Rakhine. That is the way to lead us to realizing our
ultimate national goal of building a truly democratic
federal union.

My delegation categorically rejects the inference
of “genocidal intent” with respect to the legitimate
counter-terrorist actions taken by the security forces in
Rakhine. The conclusion is made based on unverified
circumstantial evidence and has no sound legal proof.
The Government of Myanmar has resolutely rejected
the 6 September ruling of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in connection with Rakhine state. Our
position is clear — Myanmar is not a party to the Rome
Statute and the Court has no jurisdiction whatsoever
over Myanmar. The ICC decision was made on dubious
legal grounds and applied to a situation where domestic
remedies have not yet been exhausted. Therefore, I
want to make it very clear that we will never accept any
call for the referral of Myanmar to the ICC.
As I stated earlier, we have demonstrated our
willingness and ability to address the accountability
issue. Putting accountability above all else, without
regard to other positive developments, will result
only in untoward consequences. Unilateral coercive
measures taken without regard to the objective situation
in Myanmar and the imposition of politically motivated
external pressure will be detrimental to the existing
good will and cooperation of the Myanmar Government
with the international community.
The situation in Rakhine has in no way threatened
international peace and security. The accusation is
absurd and groundless. The report is full of prejudice
and is totally unconstructive. In his United Nations Day
message today, President Win Myint reminds us that,
“The value of the United Nations will be
decided by how the Organization and its Member

Before I conclude, I would like to bring to the
Council’s attention an act of gross contempt of all ethics
and civility on the premises of the United Nations. I
am sorry to raise this issue, but yesterday pamphlets
concerning my country — which I am holding — were
distributed in Conference Room 1, where the Third
Committee was holding its plenary session to hear
an oral presentation by the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, Ms. Yanghee
Lee, and the Chairperson of the fact-finding mission,
Mr. Darusman.
This is not the work of a disgruntle dissident or
a human rights activist who does not care about rule
and regulations. This is the act of a Chairperson of an
international fact-finding mission who was appointed
and mandated by the Human Rights Council, one of the
subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly. We cannot
fathom how such hypocrisy can have a place in this
world body. This is a disgrace to the United Nations.
These pamphlets are a total insult to a Member of the
United Nations and its sitting leaders. It is a gross
violation of the codes of conduct of United Nations

18-3377425/27

S/PV.8381

The situation in Myanmar

personnel. My Government has condemned this action
in the strongest terms. Hate speech and provocation are
now coming right into the United Nations conference
rooms, where we should all work together for peace,
harmony and tolerance.
Everyone has to be accountable for his or her
actions. History will judge individuals based on what
they have said and done in the Council Chamber and in
the United Nations. The people of Myanmar — and no
one else — will decide their destiny.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us an opportunity to speak.
We appreciate the efforts by nine Council members
to organize this briefing by Mr. Marzuki Darusman,
Chairperson of the independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar.
As far as Bangladesh is concerned, our overriding
priority in the Rohingya humanitarian crisis is to
ensure the voluntary and sustainable return of the
forcibly displaced Rohingya to their ancestral homes
in safety and dignity. Bangladesh can have no interest
served by forestalling the repatriation and allowing the
crisis to become protracted with a growing Rohingya
population of 1.1 million. Accordingly, we have agreed
to commence repatriation of the rather small number of
individuals so far verified by the Myanmar authorities
at the earliest opportunity. After all, we painstakingly
negotiated every element in the bilateral arrangements
concluded between our two Governments, and we
would wish to see our Myanmar counterparts adhere to
those provisions.
We have consistently maintained that as long as
the forcibly displaced Rohingya voluntarily opted for
return to Rakhine state and gained confidence about
an environment conducive to their return, Bangladesh
would put in place all possible arrangements to
facilitate that process. At the ministerial meeting held
last month among China, Bangladesh and Myanmar in
the presence of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy on Myanmar, our delegation made our position
on that abundantly clear.
We recall that we proactively enlisted the support
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) for facilitating the verification
process for return, and we welcomed reports on
26/27

24/10/2018

Myanmar’s memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations Development Programme and UNHCR
to gather an objective assessment of the situation on
the ground in Rakhine state. We have also stressed
that dismantling the remaining camps for internally
displaced persons in Rakhine state and allowing those
stranded along the border between our two countries
to return without fear of reprisal could be critical
confidence-building measures.
Along these lines, our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, presented a three-point recommendation in the
margins of the General Assembly’s general debate last
month. First, Myanmar must abolish discriminatory
laws, policies and practices against Rohingyas and
address the root causes of forced displacement in a
genuine and timely manner. Secondly, Myanmar must
create a conducive environment by building trust
and guaranteeing protection, rights and a pathway to
citizenship for all Rohingyas. If needed, it should create
a safe zone inside Myanmar to protect all civilians.
Thirdly, it must prevent atrocity crimes against
Rohingyas in Myanmar by ensuring accountability and
justice, particularly in light of the recommendations
of the independent international fact-finding mission
on Myanmar of the Human Rights Council. This, we
believe, constitutes the minimum requirement for
creating a situation that can be considered favourable
to the Rohingyas’ sustainable return to Myanmar, and
accountability remains an integral part of it.
The evidence-based information and thorough
contextual analysis provided by the fact-finding
mission report (A/HRC/39/64) have validated what we
had logically assumed from the first-hand accounts
we had heard from the forcibly displaced Rohingya in
Bangladesh. Our highest political leadership had no
doubt that the violence and persecution suffered by the
Rohingya were tantamount to the gravest crimes under
international law. Our Prime Minister spoke with full
responsibility when she termed the crimes as genocide,
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing in her
addresses to the General Assembly at its seventysecond (see A/72/PV.14) and seventy-third sessions (see
A/73/PV.11).
The fact-finding mission has done an invaluable
service to history and humanikind by furnishing
its accounts in meticulous detail and by providing
substantive reasoning for its conclusions. Considering
the report’s reliance on multiple sources and credible
evidence, we find its conclusion to be compelling and
18-33774

24/10/2018

The situation in Myanmar

unambiguous — the crimes against the Rohingya in
Rakhine State were committed by Myanmar security
forces with “genocidal intent”, while war crimes and
crimes against humanity were committed in Rakhine,
Kachin and Shan States.
The question of accountability is therefore gaining
precedent. The perpetrators have been identified among
all those involved, including certain non-State actors.
It is critical that they all be held accountable for the
crimes they committed against innocent civilians. The
Rohingya have long been dehumanized by the Myanmar
authorities, but not to the extent that the international
community should absolve itself of its responsibility
to seek justice for them. The resounding plea of the
Chairperson of the fact-finding mission should continue
to echo beyond the four walls of this Chamber.
Having said that, we believe that it is the primary
responsibility of the State concerned to ensure justice
for such atrocity crimes. The State of Myanmar
has made repeated commitments to this effect and
commissioned certain mechanisms that eroded the
international community’s confidence in any credible
domestic efforts to secure accountability. The current
commission of inquiry is expected to present its finding
in a year’s time, even as it provides modest assurance
to the Rohingya living in a climate of impunity for
near perpetuity.
Despite all prognoses otherwise, we will wait
for an independent and impartial judicial process to
emerge in Myanmar. We would consider this to be a
critical building block for democratic consolidation and
intercommunal reconciliation in Myanmar. The factfind mission’s report has offered a mirror to Myanmar
society for the purposes of introspection and mending
the fractures running through its fragile democratic
polity. An honest reckoning with the report should
promote further cohesion within society, provided there
is sufficient political will to make that happen.
The Human Rights Council has acted appositely
on the fact-find mission report, and decided on its
second iteration, while mandating the establishment
of an ongoing investigation mechanism to collect,

S/PV. 8381

consolidate, preserve and analyse evidence of the
most serious international crimes and violations of
international law committed in Myanmar since 2011.
Any criminal justice mechanism, be it national, regional
or international, would have access to an authoritative
and comprehensive body of evidence for exercising its
jurisdiction. In case of repeated obstruction to justice
at the domestic level, the international community
may have to consider good practices from comparable
situations and other possible means to pave the pathway
to accountability.
In the face of such glaring evidence of crimes as
presented by the fact-finding mission, the Security
Council has yet another historic responsibility before it
to do the right thing. In order to pre-empt the possible
recurrence of such crimes in Myanmar and elsewhere,
the Security Council should, as a first step, give due
consideration to the possibility of adopting a resolution.
It would be an affront to the victims to relegate the
action on the fact-find mission report solely to the
General Assembly.
Considering the trauma borne by countless
Rohingya men, women and children, the international
community should seriously consider setting up a
trust fund for victims, pending a judicial decision on
their reparation or compensation. As a State party to
the Rome Statute, Bangladesh would cooperate with
the International Criminal Court in pursuance of its
jurisdiction on the forced deportation of the Rohingya
from Myanmar’s Rakhine state, including the possible
denial of their right to return. We shall also continue to
reach out our hands to our neighbours in Myanmar in
our shared quest for a sustainable future for our peoples
in rights and dignity.
The Council’s decision today to hear the briefing
by the fact-find mission Chairperson has reinforced yet
again this Chamber’s standing as the world’s last resort
for upholding the causes of humanity and justice. We
reiterate our call on the Council to act as the custodian
of the Rohingya humanitarian crisis until the time a
durable solution is reached.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

18-3377427/27
