General AHembly-Twenty-first SeHion

the present session and at previous sessions, together
with all the reports available on this item.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

2197 (XXI). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees• and having heard
his statement, 11
Taking note of the progress achieved in all the countries of the world where the Office of the High Commissioner is carrying out its activities, in the field of
the international protection of refugees and in the
search for permanent solutions to their problems
through voluntary repatriation, voluntary integration
in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries,
Considering the increasing number and scope of refugee problems in Africa and in other regions of the
world, and the additional responsibilities incumbent
upon the High Commissioner as a result of the extension of his activities to new countries, most of which are
in a developing stage,
Recalling its resolution 2040 (XX) of 7 December
1965, in which particular attention is given to the question of the assistance of refugees in Africa,
Noting with concern the serious financial crisis at
present affecting the assistance programme of the High
Commissioner,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international protection to refugees who are his concern, within the limits
of his competence, and to promote permanent solutions
to their problems :
(a) By facilitating their voluntary repatriation
through any steps he may consider appropriate and in
conformity with the humanitarian character of his mandate;
(b) By facilitating the voluntary and rapid settlement of these refugees in the countries of asylum and
by making available to these countries, especially developing countries, a maximum of aid, taking into ac<:ount the specific requirements existing in each country
of asylum;
( c) By assuring that in developing countries the
plans for the economic and social integration of refugees, pending their possible inclusion in the economic
and social programmes carried out by the competent
organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations,
are properly co-ordinated with those programmes, and
also with such other programmes as might be carried
out by regional organizations ;
2. Requests the competent organs and specialized
agencies of the United Nations, when considering development plans, to take into account, at the request
of the Governments concerned, the needs of the refugees;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to give their
full support to the High Commissioner in the accom• Official Records of the Gen.eral Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/6311/Rev.1) and Supplement
No. llA (A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1).
II ]bid., Twenty-first Session, Third Committee, 1447th
meeting, paras. 1-22.

plishment of his humanitarian task and to place at his
disposal the financial means necessary for the completion of his assistance programme.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2198 (XXI). Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, signed at Geneva on 28 July 1951,11
covers only those persons who have become refugees
as a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951,
Considering that new refugee situations have arisen
since the Convention was adopted and that the refugees concerned may therefore not fall within the scope
of the Convention,
Considering that it is desirable that equal status
should be enjoyed by all refugees covered by the definition in the Convention, irrespective of the date-line of
1 January 1951,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 7 that the draft Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees should be submitted to the General Assembly after consideration by
the Economic and Social Council, in order that the
Secretary-General might be authorized to open the
Protocol for accession by Governments within the shortest possible time,
Considering that the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 1186 (XLI) of 18 November 1966'
took note with approval of the draft Protocol 8 con~
tained in the addendum to the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and concerning measures to extend the personal scope of the
Convention, and transmitted the addendum to the General Assembly,
1. Takes note of the Protocol relating to the Status
of Refugees, the text of which 8 is contained in the addendum to the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the Protocol to the States mentioned
in article V thereof, with a view to enabling them to
accede to the Protocol.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2199 (XXI). Draft Declaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1921 (XVIII) of 5 December 1%3, in which it requested the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on the Status of
Women to prepare a draft declaration on the dimina,.
tion of discrimination against women,
Noting with interest the text of the draft Declaration
adopted unanimously by the Commission on the Status
of Women on 8 March 1966 and transmitted to the
General Assembly by the Economic and Social Counct1
in its resolution 1131 (XLI) of 26 July 1966,
6 Unit~ Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first

Session, Supplement No. llA
two , para. 38.
s Ibid., part one, para. 2.

(A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1), part

49

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Considering that the large number of amendments
submitted to the draft Declaration at the forty-first
session of the Economic and Social Council and the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly and the
increased membership of the Commission on the Status
of Women justify a re-examination of the text of the
draft Declaration by the Commission,
Having been unable at the twenty-first session to give
adequate consideration to the draft Declaration and the
proposed amendments thereto,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on the Status of Women to review the text of the draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women at its twentieth
session in 1967, bearing in mind the amendments which
have been submitted9 and taking into account the observations of Governments and also the discussions at
the nineteenth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, at the forty-first session of the Economic
and Social Council and at the twenty-first session of
the General Assembly;
2. Decides that the draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women should be given
high priority at its twenty-second session.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2200 (XXI). International Covenant on Econo1D1c, Social and Cultural Rights, International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
A
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and SS of the Charter,
is to promote universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Considering that in Article 56 of the Charter all
Members of the United Nations have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action in co-operation
with the Organization for the achievement of that purpose,
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly on 10 December 1948 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
Having considered since its ninth session the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights prepared
by the Commission on Human Rights and transmitted
to it by Economic and Social Council resolution 545 B
(XVIII) of 29 July 1954, and having completed the
elaboration of the Covenants at its twenty-first session,
1. Adopts and opens for signature, ratification and
accession the following international instruments, the
texts of which are annexed to the present resolution:
(a) The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ;
( b) The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
11 A/6349, annex II, A/C.3/L.1341/Rev.1, A/C.3L.1383/Rev.1,
A/C.3/L.1384-1386, A/C.3/L.1400 and Corr.I, A/C.3/L.1401,
A/C.3/L.1403, and A/C.3/L.1406.

( c) The Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ;
2. Expresses the hope that the Covenants and the
Optional Protocol will be signed and ratified or acceded to without delay and come into force at an early
date;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its future sessions reports concerning the state of ratifications of the Covenants and
of the Optional Protocol which the Assembly will consider as a separate agenda item.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
ANNEX
International Cm,enant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights
Pll.EAMBLE

The States Parties to the present Covenant,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed
in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent
dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members
of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world,
Recogni&ing that these rights derive from the inherent
dignity of the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying
freedom from fear and want can only be achieved if conditions
are created whereby everyone may enjoy his economic, social
and cultural rights, as well as his civil and political rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote universal respect for, and
observance of, human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals and to the community to which he belongs, is under
a responsibility to strive for the promotion and observance of
the rights recognized in the present Covenant,
Agree upon the following articles :
PART

I

Article 1
1. All peoples have the right of self-determination. By
virtue of that right they freely determine ,'their political status
and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development
2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of
their natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any
obligations arising out of international economic co-operation.
based upon the principle of mutual benefit, and international
law. In no case may a people be deprived of its own means
of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, includi~
those having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the
realization of the right of self-determination, and shall respect
that right, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations.
PART

II

Article 2
1. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes
to take steps, individually and through international assistance
and co-operation, especially economic and technical, to the
maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization of the rights recognized in
the present Covenant by all appropriate means, including
particularly the adoption of legislative measures.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to guarantee that the rights enunciated in the present Covenant
