S/PV.8138

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8138

th meeting
Monday, 18 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44653 (E)
*1744653*

S/PV.8138

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I devote my regular briefing on the situation in the
Middle East today to presenting the fourth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering the
period from 20 September to 18 December. I will focus
on developments on the ground in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution, including on regional and
international efforts to advance the peace process.
Let me note from the outset that none of the
developments on the ground can be divorced from
the broader context in which they are happening:
uncertainties about the future of the peace process,
unilateral actions that undermine the two-State
solution, occupation and violence. As 23 December
will mark one year since the adoption of the resolution,
I will also take this opportunity to address some of the
broader trends we have witnessed during the past year.
In its paragraph 2, the resolution reiterates its
demand that Israel
“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem”.
No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
Some 1,200 units in the occupied West Bank were
approved for construction, approximately 460 of them in
the settlement of Ma’ale Adumim. Israel also advanced,
through the various stages of the planning process,
some 1,400 housing units in Area C of the West Bank.
Plans promoted included units in the new settlement of
Amihai, a new neighbourhood in Kochav Yaakov, and a
new site near Alon Shvut, north and south of Jerusalem,
2/8

18/12/2017

respectively. All three have been designated for either
those evicted from the “illegal outposts” of Migron
in 2012 and Amona in February of this year, or those
soon to be evicted from the outpost of Netiv ha’avot,
which has been planned for demolition and evacuation
in March 2018. In October, the Government announced
that it would issue a tender for 296 housing units in the
Beit El settlement, adjacent to Ramallah. However, that
tender has not yet been published. The authorities also
conditionally approved building permits for 31 housing
units in Hebron’s H2 area, the first such approvals
since 2001.
In East Jerusalem, preparations began for the
construction of infrastructure in Givat Hamatos,
which, if built, would solidify the ring of settlements
isolating East Jerusalem from the southern West Bank.
In October, the Jerusalem municipality conditionally
approved building permits for 168 housing units in
the settlement of Nof Zion located in the Palestinian
neighbourhood of Jabel Mukaber; and in November, it
also granted building permits for at least 418 housing
units in Gilo and Ramat Shlomo.
Let me reiterate that the United Nations considers
all settlement activities to be illegal under international
law and a major obstacle to peace.
As the Middle East Quartet report noted in
2016, all structures lacking permits from the Israeli
authorities in Area C and East Jerusalem are potentially
subject to demolition. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, during the
reporting period the authorities demolished or seized 61
structures for lacking building permits. Consequently,
110 people, including 61 children, were displaced and
the livelihoods of over 1,000 people were affected.
Meanwhile, over 10 Bedouin communities,
comprising some 1,500 residents, remain at heightened
risk of demolition and displacement. This includes
herding communities in Ain al-Hilwe and Um a1-Jmal
in the northern Jordan valley, as well as Jabal al-Baba
in the sensitive El area.
The reporting period also saw several potentially
significant legal developments. In an opinion issued
in November, the Attorney General approved the
legalization of an access road built on private Palestinian
land, leading to the illegal outpost of Haresha. The
opinion came in light of a court decision by Supreme
Court Justice Salim Joubran, who determined that the
confiscation of private Palestinian land for the public
17-44653

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8138

interest, including in the exclusive interest of settler
communities, may under certain conditions be legal
in the West Bank, if done proportionally and with
fair compensations to the landowners. However, the
Attorney General did not soften his stance on the Land
Regularization Law. On 22 November, he wrote that
“there is no alternative to a judicial ruling declaring the
Land Regularization Law unconstitutional”.

stones at a group of Israelis. Both shooting incidents
are under investigation by Israeli authorities.

Separately, and still in November, the Government
informed the Court that, for the first time, it intended
to implement a clause in military law allowing the
confiscation of private land if it has been used by a
third party unknowingly. This may clear the way for
the retroactive legalization of settlement homes and
possibly illegal outposts.

Since 7 December, there has been a visible increase
in rockets fired by Gaza militants. Of the 40 projectiles
fired during the reporting period, 27 were launched
since Hamas called for an escalation. Four rockets
were intercepted by the Iron Dome system. One rocket
and the remains of an intercepted rocket landed in the
town of Sderot, causing damage to a kindergarten and
to vehicles, but resulting in no injuries. At least eight
more rockets landed in Israel.

Allow me to turn to the problems of violence and
terrorism that remain a hallmark of the conflict.
During the reporting period, the security situation
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory remained
relatively calm. During the past three months, 22
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli security forces,
including in clashes and security operations, and one
was killed by an Israeli civilian in the West Bank. Four
Israelis have been killed by Palestinians in attacks. Last
week, Israel reported that it had foiled a kidnapping
plot by Hamas in the West Bank.
Since 6 December, in the wake of the decision of
the United States to recognize Jerusalem as the the
capital of Israel, the situation has become more tense,
with an increase in incidents, notably rockets fired
from Gaza and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces. Most recently, on 10 December one
Israeli was seriously injured in a stabbing attack at the
Jerusalem bus station. The Palestinian perpetrator has
been detained.
On 30 October, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
destroyed yet another tunnel that extended from Gaza
into Israel. During the operation, at least 12 Palestinian
militants were killed underground. According to
statements by a spokesperson for Islamic Jihad, the
group’s aim in constructing the tunnel was to “kidnap
Israeli soldiers”. A second tunnel was destroyed on
10 December. On 31 October, a 25-year-old Palestinian
man was shot dead by IDF while in his car near the
settlement of Halamish. On 30 November, an Israeli
civilian shot dead a Palestinian man in the northern
West Bank and a group of Palestinians reportedly threw

During the reporting period, 28 rockets and 12
mortar rounds were fired from Gaza towards Israel. In
response, the IDF continued to target a number of Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad military posts across the
Gaza Strip, in which two Palestinian militants and one
civilian were killed, and at least 28 people were injured.

Allow me to now turn to some of the problems of
inflammatory rhetoric and provocations. Resolution
2334 (2016) calls on all to refrain from such acts and
undertake efforts to combat them. During the reporting
period, while on a visit to Iran Hamas leaders continued
to make deplorable calls for the destruction of the State of
Israel. The level of provocative rhetoric has heightened
since 6 December, including with calls for escalation,
violence and an intifada. On its official social media
pages, Fatah continued to celebrate perpetrators of
past attacks against Israelis, including a 26 September
attack in Har Adar in which two security guards and
a border policeman were killed. Most recently, Hamas
and other factions applauded the stabbing attack at
the Jerusalem bus station, organizing rallies in Gaza
and the West Bank and calling for escalation. Israeli
politicians also made provocative statements during
this period, including by calling for “only one State
between the river and the sea” or “recognizing Judea
and Samaria as Israel”.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates the call by the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take steps to
reverse the negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution. While the goal of
realizing a sustainable peace based on the two-State
solution remains elusive, Palestinian factions signed
an agreement on 12 October to allow the Palestinian
Authority (PA) to assume control of Gaza, the Gaza
crossings to be fully returned to the control of the
Palestinian Authority on 1 November, and the public
sector employees who were recruited by the PA prior to

17-446533/8

S/PV.8138

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2007 to be registered in preparation for establishing a
unified work force. The process, however, is faltering
over substantial disagreements, including on important
questions related to the payment of public sector
salaries, the lifting of PA-imposed measures and Hamas
giving up its security control of Gaza.
Despite repeated calls on the Palestinian Authority
to alleviate the electricity crisis in Gaza, which was
exacerbated by the Palestinian Authority’s decision
earlier this year to reduce payments to Israel, residents
still live with four hours of electricity per day. Fortyfive per cent of essential drugs and medical supplies
are at zero stock, while basic services are maintained
only through donor-funded emergency fuel that is
distributed by the United Nations. On 7 December, an
additional $2.2 million was released from the United
Nations humanitarian pooled fund to cover urgent
health and food security needs in Gaza.
On a positive note, talks between the Israeli and
Palestinian Ministries of Finance resumed during the
reporting period. On 28 November, Israel transferred to
the Palestinian Authority a lump sum of $63.8 million
in value-added tax collections and tax clearance.
Construction of the Northern Gaza emergency sewage
treatment plant is expected to be completed by the
end of this month. Israel has informed the Palestinian
Authority of its willingness to increase the energy supply
to Gaza by six megawatts for the plant. If implemented,
that would help to address critical sewage and broader
environmental problems in Gaza and beyond.
During the reporting period, there were no
developments related to Member States distinguishing
in their relevant dealings between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied in 1967.
Regrettably, the reporting period did not see significant
positive moves towards advancing peace, and the
parties remain further divided than ever. The United
States President announced in December his decision
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, while stating that final status issues remained
to be determined by the parties. He also made clear
his commitment to advancing peace between Israelis
and Palestinians and called for the status quo at the
holy sites to be respected. Since then, the Palestinian
leadership has cancelled meetings with visiting
United States Vice-President Pence and called for the
establishment of a new mechanism to achieve peace.
The Palestinian President has also vowed to seek
unilateral recognition of Palestine and full membership
4/8

18/12/2017

in international organizations in the absence of a
meaningful peace process.
The United Nations maintains the view that
Jerusalem is a final-status issue that must be resolved
through direct negotiations between the two parties on
the basis of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, taking into account the legitimate
concerns of both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides.
In closing, I would like to share some broad
observations on developments concerning the
provisions of the resolution over the past year.
First, continued settlement construction in the
occupied Palestinian territory contravenes resolution
2334 (2016). Significantly more housing units were
advanced and approved this year. The number of units
advanced and approved more than doubled from 3,000
in 2016 to nearly 7,000 in 2017. In East Jerusalem, the
increase has similarly been from 1,600 in 2016 to 3,100
in 2017. However, the number of tenders published and
opened for bidding has decreased this year. In Area C,
out of tenders for 3,200 units that were announced this
year, only two for some 50 housing units have been
published so far. For the first time since 2010, this
year in East Jerusalem there have been no new tenders
published. About 50 per cent of the settlement moves
this year have been concentrated in and around major
Israeli population centres, while some 20 per cent
have been in outlying locations deep inside the West
Bank. The number of Palestinian-owned structures
demolished this year in the West Bank is significantly
lower than in 2016, and the lowest since 2009. In
total, 400 Palestinian-owned structures have been
demolished in the West Bank this year, including East
Jerusalem — a sharp decline compared to the more
than 1,000 structures demolished in 2016.
In addition to those developments, 2017 has seen
worrying legislative, judicial and administrative
initiatives that aim to change the long-standing Israeli
policy concerning the legal status of the West Bank and
the use of private Palestinian land. Settlement-related
activities undermine the chances for the establishment
of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State as part of a
two-State solution.
Secondly, continuing violence against civilians and
incitement perpetuate mutual fear and suspicion. Since
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), there has been a
significant reduction in the number of violent attacks.
In 2017, there have been 109 shootings, stabbings,
17-44653

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rammings and bombing attacks conducted, compared
to 223 similar attacks in 2016. Regarding fatalities, 72
Palestinians and 15 Israelis have been killed this year,
compared to 109 and 13, respectively, in 2016.
I call on the international community to join the
United Nations in condemning terror attacks and such
reckless action, which impede any efforts to bridge the
gap between Israelis and Palestinians and empower
extremists. Nothing — no cause or grievance — justifies
terror. The terror threat from Gaza of indiscriminate
rocket attacks and tunnel construction continues, and
the recent escalation by militants in Gaza is reckless
and dangerous. I urge all Palestinian factions to
commit to rejecting violence, inflammatory rhetoric
and provocative actions that undermine the cause of
peace. Israel must also uphold its responsibilities under
international human rights and humanitarian law and
calibrate its use of force.
Thirdly, bringing the legitimate Palestinian
National Authority back to Gaza is key to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis, lifting the closures and enhancing
the prospects for peace. I commend Egypt for its tireless
efforts in that respect, and encourage all sides to focus
on addressing the devastating humanitarian situation,
with an immediate focus on the electricity crisis, and
to ensure that agreement is reached on mechanisms to
implement the 12 October intra-Palestinian agreement
in full.
Fourthly, this past year has witnessed important
progress in finalizing agreements between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority with regard to water,
energy, telecommunications and other areas aimed at
improving the economic reality of Palestinians. Those
efforts are critical to rebuilding trust, and obstacles to
their realization must be removed. The United Nations
will continue supporting such efforts.
Fifthly, I am particularly concerned as to the future
of our collective efforts to achieve peace between Israelis
and Palestinians. The United Nations remains strongly
committed to supporting all endeavours towards a
negotiated two-State solution. The Secretary-General
has been clear that ending the occupation and realizing
a two-State solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel and Palestine, is the only way to achieve such a
vision. Today, however, there is a growing risk that the
parties may revert to more unilateral actions.
In the current environment, the continued absence
of a credible proposal that could become the basis of

S/PV. 8138

meaningful negotiations is damaging the prospects
for peace. The lack of significant steps on the ground
that protect the viability of a two-State solution
and support Palestinian statehood is undermining
moderates and empowering radicals. The weakening
of the international architecture in support of peace is
increasing the risks to the region. Resolving the conflict
will remove a key driver of extremism and terrorism
in the Middle East and provide hope to generations of
Israelis and Palestinians trapped in a vicious cycle of
violence and conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): In this
meeting, I will not use the Council’s time to address
where a sovereign nation might decide to put its
embassy, and why we have every right to do so. Rather,
I will address a more appropriate and urgent concern.
This week marks the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). On that day in
December 2016 (see S/PV.7853), the United States
elected to abstain in the voting in the Council, allowing
the measure to be adopted. Now it is one year and a new
Administration later. Given the chance to vote again
on resolution 2334 (2016), I can say with complete
confidence that the United States would vote “no”. We
would exercise our veto power. The reasons are very
relevant to the cause of peace in the Middle East.
On the surface, resolution 2334 (2016) described
Israeli settlements as impediments to peace. Reasonable
people can disagree about that and, in fact, over the
years the United States has expressed criticism of Israeli
settlement policies many times. But in truth, it was
resolution 2334 (2016) itself that was an impediment
to peace. The Security Council put the negotiations
between the Israelis and the Palestinians further out
of reach by injecting itself yet again in between the
two parties to the conflict. By misplacing the blame
for the failure of peace efforts squarely on the Israeli
settlements, the resolution gave a pass to Palestinian
leaders who for many years rejected one peace proposal
after another. It also gave them encouragement to avoid
negotiations in future. It refused to acknowledge the
legacy of failed negotiations unrelated to settlements.
Furthermore, the Council passed judgement on issues

17-446535/8

S/PV.8138

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that must be decided in direct negotiations between
the parties.
If the United Nations history in the peace efforts
proves anything, it is that talking in New York cannot
take the place of face-to-face negotiations between the
regional parties. It only sets back the cause of peace,
not advances it. As if to make that very point, resolution
2334 (2016) demanded a halt to all Israeli settlement
activity in East Jerusalem, even in the Jewish quarter
of the Old City. That is something that no responsible
person or country would ever expect Israel would
do and, in that way resolution 2334 (2016) did what
President Trump’s announcement on Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel did not do — it prejudged issues that
should be left to final status negotiations.
Given the chance today, the United States would
veto resolution 2334 (2016) for another reason. The
resolution gave new life to an ugly creation of the
Human Rights Council: the database of companies
operating in Jewish communities. That is an effort to
create a blacklist, plain and simple. It is yet another
obstacle to a negotiated peace. It is a stain on America’s
conscience that we gave the so-called boycott,
divestmen and sanctions movement momentum by
allowing the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016).
To the United Nations shame, this has been a
disproportionately hostile place for the Middle East’s
most enduring democracy. The United States refuses to
accept the double standard that says we are not impartial
when we stand by the will of the American people by
moving our United States Embassy; but somehow the
United Nations is a neutral party when it consistently
singles out Israel for condemnation. For decades, Israel
has withstood wave after wave of bias in the United
Nations and its agencies. The United States has often
stood beside Israel. We did not on 23 December 2016.
We will not make that mistake again.
This week marks the one-year anniversary of a
significant setback for peace in the Middle East peace,
but the United States has an undiminished commitment
to helping bring about final-status negotiations that
will lead to lasting peace. Our hand remains extended
to both parties. We call on all countries that share this
commitment to learn the hard lessons of the past and
work to bring Israel and the Palestinian people to the
peace table in good faith.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
As we do every month, we once again thank the
6/8

18/12/2017

Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his very complete and
detailed briefing. Above all, we thank him for his work
and that of his team, which indicates a seriousness and
a commitment to the task entrusted to them that should
be justly valued and recognized. He can continue to
count on the full support of Uruguay.
We appreciate the presentation of the fourth
quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). We reiterate once again, as we have done
throughout this year, that, in future, these reports,
as well as all other reports submitted to the Security
Council concerning issues on its agenda, should be
circulated in writing before the meetings, so as to enable
Security Council members to analyse and comment in
greater detail on their content.
With only a few days left before our time as a
non-permanent member of the Council comes to end,
and this being the last time that Uruguay will make
a statement on an issue to which it attaches great
importance, and to which it has been commmitted since
1947, when the General Assembly adopted resolution
181 (II), allow me to summarize our position on this
question, as well as to discuss our expectations for
the future.
We hope that the voting to be carried out following
this meeting, undoubtedly important, will not detract
focus from other matters of great importance in relation
to this long and complicated conflict.
The year 2017 was one of a number of anniversaries
relating to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It marked a
century since the Balfour Declaration, the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), which decreed the partition of
Palestine, and a half century since the Six-Day War,
which resulted in the occupation by Israel of territories
in the Middle East. We hope that 2017 will not be
remembered as the year in which certain notorious
events seriously affected the possibility of reaching
a negotiated peace between Israelis and Palestinians
and the two-State solution. The voting that will take
place today is intended to blot out the negative effects
of such measures, and to prevent similar events, caused
by other States or by the parties themselves, from
being repeated.
We express our satisfaction for the fact that so
many countries recognize and wish to protect the
special status of Jerusalem, which was derived from
17-44653

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General Assembly resolution 181 (II), and which several
States did not support at the time. Despite numerous
multilateral, regional and unilateral initiatives that
attempted to put an end to this conflict, we are still
a long way from seeing a peaceful and mutually
acceptable solution.
On 23 December 2016, the Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016) with the intention of noting
that certain trends on the ground, including the
Israeli settlement policy and violence, were seriously
undermining prospects for peace. Nearly one year
since that day, which has been qualified as historic,
we deeply regret that none of the provisions of the
resolution have been respected. The resolutions of
the Council, the primary responsibility of which is
to maintain international peace and security, must be
implemented. We cannot be selective in that respect,
that is, demanding compliance with certain resolutions
and completely ignoring others. All Security Council
resolutions must be respected in order to achieve the
proposed end.
The two-State solution remains the only viable option
to end this conflict. It will be necessary to relaunch,
as quickly as possible, bilateral direct negotiations that
can clarify all pending issues. Whatever the forum,
Uruguay will continue to support all initiatives in
that regard. To achieve that goal, it is necessary that
current trends on the ground be reversed, including
the settlement-construction policy, legal measures to
appropriate Palestinian lands, the demolition of housing
and forced displacement of communities, including
most recently Jabal Al-Baba, Ein Al-Hilweh and Umm
El-Jamal. Otherwise, it will be extremely difficult for
Palestine to consolidate territorially its State, which is
consistently smaller on maps. On another note, maps
should be updated and distributed by the Secretariat as
often as possible, so as to reflect the Israeli settlements
and outposts that are still being constructed in the West
Bank and in Jerusalem.
Uruguay maintains strong ties of friendship with
both the State of Israel and the State of Palestine.
We underscore once again the right of Israel and of
Palestine to live in peace, within secure and recognized
borders and in an environment of renewed cooperation,
free from any threat or act that interferes with peace.
The Fatah and Hamas reconciliation agreement,
signed in October in Cairo, and the recent return of
the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip to regain

S/PV. 8138

control after a decade are undoubtedly important
steps to achieve Palestinian unity. The reunification
of Palestine under a single, legitimate and democratic
Government is essential to be able to work towards
the aspirations of the Palestinian people and make it
possible to improve the living conditions in that area,
which has been submerged in a serious humanitarian
crisis since the 2007 armed conflict.
In order for that agreement to be successfully
implemented, it will also be essential that those
measures be accompanied by agreements on security,
the disarmament of Hamas and the renunciation of
violence, the incitement and glorification of violence
and the destruction of Israel as a declared objective.
Likewise, the obstinate non-recognition of Israel
as a State by several countries in the region is a
wholly negative sign for a favourable climate for the
peace process.
In that still very complex scenario, although with
some signs of hope, it is necessary more than ever
that the Security Council and the entire international
community remain united in their desire to see a
peaceful resolution, in all its aspects, of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Only in that way can we exert
due pressure on the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
to stop the trends that jeopardize the process and ask
them to be sufficiently flexible and reasonable to
understand at last that peace is a much more valuable
objective than the violence, hatred and injustice that
have characterized the region over recent decades.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that Uruguay
has presented its candidature to once again become
a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
for the period 2034-2035. We hope that, by that date,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be part of history,
and both peoples will finally be able to live together
in peace and security, without grudges and with equal
opportunities for the development and well-being of
future generations.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his presentation of the fourth
and final report of the year on the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016).
We would mention that, among other things, the
resolution refers to the legal invalidity and flagrant

17-446537/8

S/PV.8138

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violation of international law of the establishment
of settlements by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories since 1967, including East Jerusalem. This
is the fourth time in 12 months that the delegation of
Bolivia has attended such an important meeting as this
on resolution 2234 (2016), which, on 23 December,
it will be one year since its adoption. We note that
in that time little or nothing has been achieved in
its implementation.
We reiterate our appeal that the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) be presented in written format
and prior to the Council’s briefings thereon, with a
view to conducting a more thorough analysis of its
content and the statistics on the settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, such as those that were
presented today.
Contrary to expectations, we take note of the
Secretary-General’s report (A/72/564) from 1 November
presented before the General Assembly entitled, “Israeli
settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the Occupied Syrian
Golan”, which mentions that the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process reported that, during the first six months of the
year, plans have been advanced for approximately 5,000
housing units through the Israeli planning bodies in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We are concerned
about the forced evictions that several Palestinian
communities faced, during which their inhabitants
endured the demolition of their homes. We must point
out that those actions constitute a manifest violation of
human rights, including the rights to adequate housing,
water, sanitation, health and education.
My delegation wishes to refer to General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), adopted in 1947, as part III, in
reference to the special regime of the city of Jerusalem,
provides that the City of Jerusalem shall be established

8/8

18/12/2017

as a corpus separatum under a special international
regime. Recent events, especially since 6 December,
when the Government of the United States of America
unilaterally recognized Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel, are in clear violation of the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The
decision has led only to an escalation of violence in the
region. We wish to recall that it was the Organization
that established the special international status for the
city of Jerusalem, under the administrative authority
of the United Nations. Similarly, it was the Security
Council that reiterated that all measures that altered the
geographical, demographic and historical character of
the city of Jerusalem are null and void and should have
no effect.
We express our firm commitment to all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that regard,
we support initiatives such as the Quartet road map,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and
others that constitute guarantees for a just and lasting
peace so that both peoples can live within secure and
recognized borders.
Bolivia remains convinced that the two-State
solution continues to be the only long-term alternative
for a solution to the conflict — where at last there is
a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State
within the pre-1967 international borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital and in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-44653
