S/PRST/2010/29

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 December 2010
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6460th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 December 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and in Chad
(MINURCAT) dated 1 December 2010 (S/2010/611), the lessons-learned and
the recommendations contained therein, and expresses its intention to take
them into account in the framework of its ongoing work to enhance the overall
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.
“In the context of the expiration of the mandate of the Mission on
31 December 2010, the Security Council commends the contribution of
MINURCAT for providing, without prejudice to the primary responsibility of
the government of Chad, security for refugees, internally displaced persons
and humanitarian actors in eastern Chad and for its efforts to enhance the
capacity of the Chadian ‘Détachement intégré de sécurité’ (DIS). The Council
notes the importance of action by the Government of Chad, supported as
appropriate by the UN Country team, on justice, including the prison sector,
sexual and gender-based violence, child protection, human rights, local
reconciliation and mine action, following MINURCAT’s withdrawal.
“The Security Council recalls the commitment of the Government of
Chad, outlined in the letter sent to the President of the Security Council dated
7 September 2010 (S/2010/470), to assume full responsibility for the security
and the protection of the civilian population in eastern Chad, including
refugees, internally displaced persons, returnees and host communities, with a
particular focus on women and children, United Nations and humanitarian
personnel and assets, in accordance with its obligations under international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
“The Security Council encourages the finalization of the establishment of
the ‘Coordination nationale pour le soutien aux humanitaires et au DIS’ to
allow efficient interaction of the Government of Chad with humanitarian
partners and other key actors. It welcomes the establishment of the ‘Bureaux
de sécurisation et des mouvements’ (BSM) in eastern Chad for the local
coordination with humanitarian actors on security issues, joint analysis and
escorts.
10-70181 (E) 201210

*1070181*

S/PRST/2010/29

“The Security Council acknowledges the critical role the DIS will have
to perform in the foreseeable future for the protection of civilians. It takes note
of the revised national plan for the sustainment of the DIS (S/2010/536). The
Security Council welcomes the commitment of the Government of Chad to
assure the future sustainability of the DIS and the funding it has pledged. It
welcomes the work of UNDP and UNHCR with the relevant national Chadian
authorities to establish a mechanism for the mobilisation and management of
donor support for the DIS after 1 January 2011. It especially welcomes the
establishment of a new ‘basket fund’ in support of the DIS administered by
UNDP. The Security Council calls upon Member States to ensure that the
necessary donor funds are made available to meet the budgetary requirements
of the DIS. The Council urges the Government of Chad to assume full
responsibility for the sustainment of the DIS as soon as possible.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary General to report by the
conclusion of the MINURCAT liquidation phase on 30 April 2011 on the
progress made in eastern Chad on the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, including (i) the status of refugees and internally
displaced persons and durable solutions to their displacement, (ii) unimpeded,
safe and timely humanitarian access, including the movement and security of
humanitarian personnel and the delivery of humanitarian aid, (iii) on the
measures taken to respond to violations of humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, and (iv) the overall security situation as it affects the
humanitarian situation.
“The Security Council has taken note of the complete withdrawal of
MINURCAT from the Central African Republic on 15 November 2010. It
remains seriously concerned by the challenges facing the security forces of the
Government of the Central African Republic in Birao and stresses the
importance of bilateral partners’ work to enhance the capacity of the Central
African Armed Forces in support of the wider security sector reform process.
The Council also remains seriously concerned by the security situation in the
Central African Republic. It condemns all attacks by local and foreign armed
groups, including the LRA, that threaten the population as well as peace and
stability of the Central African Republic and the sub-region. The Security
Council encourages further cooperation between the Governments of the
Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan in order to secure their common
borders. The Security Council recognizes the contribution of the Mission for
the Consolidation of Peace in Central African Republic (MICOPAX) in
support of durable peace and security in the Central African Republic and calls
on regional and sub-regional organizations to consider, upon request of the
Government of the Central African Republic, further actions to support
security in the Central African Republic, such as reinforcing MICOPAX.
“The Security Council commends the Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, for his leadership and MINURCAT
personnel for their dedication, as well as the commitment of troop contributing
countries to the Mission. It encourages the Government of Chad to continue to
extend its full support for the orderly withdrawal from the country of all
remaining MINURCAT staff and assets until the end of the liquidation phase.”

2

10-70181
