A/58/PV.80

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

80th plenary meeting
Monday, 9 February 2004, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Saint Lucia)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Earthquake in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The President: I should like, on behalf of all
members of the General Assembly, to extend our
deepest sympathy to the Government and the people of
the Islamic Republic of Iran for the tragic loss of life,
serious injuries and extensive material damage that
have resulted from the recent earthquake. May I also
express the hope that the international community will
show its solidarity and respond promptly and
generously to any request for help.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr.
President, allow me to express, on behalf of the people
and the Government of Iran, our profound gratitude for
your words of sympathy and condolence here and for
the message of condolence that you have already
addressed to President Khatami in the wake of the
deaths and devastation caused by the earthquake that
struck the city of Bam. Although my country is located
in an earthquake-prone area and so many fault lines
cross Iranian territory, the devastation caused by the
Bam earthquake was unprecedented in living memory.
It led to the loss of more than 40,000 precious lives and
to the destruction of tens of thousands of families,
rendering thousands of children orphans and widowing
thousands of women.
The attention that you, Mr. President, have
devoted to the calamity visited upon the inhabitants of
Bam and the sympathy and concern of the international
community at large have been overwhelming indeed.

So many countries rushed to the site and to the aid of
the earthquake victims, and dozens of cargo planes
flew in with emergency supplies. The Iranian agencies
involved in that colossal relief effort highly value the
support that they have received from foreign public and
private institutions. More important, that support also
provides an invaluable source of comfort and solace to
the grieving earthquake survivors and to the whole
Iranian people as they note that the outside world
shares in their sorrow.
Allow me to conclude by also expressing my
sincere thanks and appreciation to all Governments,
through their representatives in this Hall, for the words
of sympathy that they have expressed as well as for the
relief assistance and support that they have provided to
the victims of this tragedy. The tragic earthquake in
Bam, which has caused immense human suffering, has
also brought to the surface the best of human
compassion and solidarity, transcending national and
political divides. The people and the Government of
Iran, recognizing their tremendous responsibility to
rebuild the ancient city of Bam, will always remember
the common humanity that has bonded us together
during these difficult times.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Jaime
de Piniés, President of the fortieth session of the
General Assembly
The President: It is my sad duty to inform
members of the General Assembly of the death on
Monday, 29 December 2003, of His Excellency

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-23327 (E)

*
0
4
2
3
3
2
7
*

A/58/PV.80

Mr. Jaime de Piniés of Spain, former President of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Jaime de Piniés had a long and distinguished
career as a prominent diplomat of his country, having
served in various capacities, notably as the Permanent
Representative of Spain to the United Nations for 17
years.
As President of the fortieth session of the General
Assembly, Mr. Jaime de Piniés played a prominent role
in the Organization and made a major contribution
towards the achievement of the objectives set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like
to convey our deepest condolences to the Government
and the people of Spain and to the bereaved family of
Mr. De Piniés.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Jaime de Piniés, former President of
the General Assembly.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan, who will speak on behalf
of the African States.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the African Group, I would like to address the
Assembly today to join in the expression of sorrow
following the passing of Mr. Jaime de Piniés, a man
familiar to the United Nations for many years.
He held many posts in his diplomatic career. The
United Nations recognizes his wealth of contributions
throughout his quarter century at the United Nations.
He represented his country for many years as the
Permanent Representative of Spain. His career
culminated in his election as President of the fortieth
session of the General Assembly.
At this sad time, we convey to the country and
the people of Spain and to his family our most sincere
condolences. May God have mercy upon him.
The President: I call on the representative of
Nepal, who will speak on behalf of the Asian States.
Mr. Sharma (Nepal): The passing away of
Ambassador Jaime de Piniés, former President of the
General Assembly, has profoundly saddened us all.

2

With Ambassador De Piniés’ death, Spain has lost an
illustrious son and a brilliant diplomat. We at the
United Nations have lost an outstanding member of our
family, and the world has lost a great humanist.
Ambassador De Piniés was at the helm of the
General Assembly at a very difficult time. The bipolar
world had begun to fray at the seams, with the
attendant tumult. The United Nations remained a
battleground for the divided world of that day. A slight
slip could have sent the world Organization tumbling
down a precipice and into a quagmire. With his wisdom
and skill, Ambassador De Piniés deftly navigated the
fortieth session of the General Assembly to a
successful conclusion and earned wide appreciation. A
consummate career diplomat, Ambassador De Piniés
joined the ranks of those very few presidents of the
General Assembly who have made a difference and
rendered commendable service to the United Nations
and the world at large.
That he represented Spain at the United Nations
for more than 25 years, including 17 years as
Permanent Representative, bears eloquent testimony to
his dedication and commitment to the causes the
United Nations stands to promote. Indeed, his work for
and contribution to the United Nations were exemplary.
Ambassador De Piniés is no longer with us. His
death is an irreparable loss to Spain, the United Nations
and the world. On behalf of the Asian Group, I extend
our deepest condolences and sympathies to the
Government and the people of Spain and to the
bereaved family of Ambassador De Piniés in this hour
of agony and distress.
Ambassador De Piniés will no longer physically
be with us, but he will continue to inspire us to
dedicate ourselves to working for the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. Ambassador De
Piniés will continue to live in our thoughts and in our
minds.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador, who will speak on behalf of
the Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour to address the Assembly on
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States on the occasion of the well deserved tribute we
are paying today to the distinguished Spanish diplomat,
Mr. Jaime de Piniés. His long and brilliant career in

A/58/PV.80

Spain’s foreign service as representative of his country
to Cuba, the United Kingdom, the United States of
America, the Philippines and the United Nations
demonstrated his personal qualities and great
diplomatic skill and experience.
Of particular note is his record of 16 years in the
United Nations, where he served as President of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council. In all
the work he undertook in the Organization, he
demonstrated his firm commitment to multilateralism
and to the lofty and imperishable goals of the
Organization.
The fortieth session of the General Assembly,
over which he presided, was a very important year for
the Organization. On that occasion, the international
community unanimously reaffirmed the validity of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, created
primarily to maintain international peace and security.
As we have seen, the Organization has had to adapt
itself to emerging problems and to face new challenges
that require reform. The example set by Ambassador
Jaime de Piniés of hard work and dedication to the
goals of the United Nations are everlasting legacies on
his part which will remain forever within this
Organization.
I should like, on behalf of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, to convey our sorrow
to the Kingdom of Spain and to the Ambassador’s
family at the very sad loss they have suffered.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ireland, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and Other States.
Ms. Murnaghan (Ireland): On behalf of the
Western European and Other States Group, I have the
honour to speak in tribute to Ambassador Jaime de
Piniés, who passed away recently.
Ambassador De Piniés had a long career in
diplomacy, in the course of which he came to know the
United Nations intimately, having served at the Spanish
Permanent Mission to the United Nations on four
occasions, twice as Ambassador and Permanent
Representative. In all, he represented his country at 28
sessions of the General Assembly and served as
President of the Security Council on two occasions
during Spain’s tenure on the Council.
His long association with the United Nations
culminated in his election to the presidency of the

fortieth session of the General Assembly, in 19851986, during which he also chaired the thirteenth
special session of the General Assembly on the critical
economic situation in Africa.
During the course of his long career as a
diplomat, he also served as Spanish Ambassador to the
United Kingdom, the Philippines, Cuba and the United
States.
Following
his
retirement,
he
continued
contributing to the cause of international diplomacy
through seminars and personal contacts. I wish to offer
the heartfelt condolences of my Group to the
Government and the people of Spain and to
Ambassador De Piniés’ family, friends and colleagues.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States, the host country.
Mr. Siv (United States of America): On behalf of
the United States as host country, I wish to extend our
deep condolences to the Government, the delegation
and the people of Spain on the passing of Ambassador
Jaime de Piniés late last year.
Ambassador Jaime de Piniés represented Spain at
the United Nations before his election as President of
the General Assembly in 1985. During his tenure, the
United Nations celebrated its fortieth anniversary, with
the theme “United Nations for a better world”.
Ambassador Piniés was also President of the Security
Council on two occasions.
Ambassador Piniés served the Organization with
distinction and dedication, as his nearly-30-year career
in New York clearly demonstrated. He strongly
endorsed multilateralism and worked to enhance the
visibility of the United Nations on the world stage.
Twenty years ago, speaking to this plenary, he
addressed members with a challenge that remains to
this day: the United Nations does no more or no less
than its members want it to do.
I wish to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
honour a global diplomat whose contributions through the
United Nations will be missed by all. Ambassador De
Piniés’ family members have our greatest sympathy.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
begin by expressing my profound appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for the very gracious gesture of wishing
to pay tribute to the memory of my colleague and
compatriot, Ambassador Jaime de Piniés.

3

A/58/PV.80

I met Ambassador De Piniés — probably the
most popular and best-known Spanish diplomat of the
last 50 years — around the time of my wedding. For
many complicated reasons, he was attending my
wedding here in New York as Ambassador to the
United Nations. At the ceremony, everyone, myself
included, was impressed by his sympathetic nature, his
naturalness and his elegance.
Somewhat later I worked with him — he as the
Permanent Representative of my country, and I in
leading posts at the Spanish Foreign Ministry — and
throughout those years we had close contact. I was also
very much impressed by his knowledge of the issues,
his professionalism and his tact. But what has always
remained with me as my impression of the
Ambassador — what had the greatest impact on me —
was his deep and intense love of the United Nations.
Ambassador De Piniés came to the United
Nations in 1956, and he stayed until 1984-1985, when
he retired. Throughout those years, he was never
disillusioned by the United Nations. He always showed
tremendous faith in its purposes, and, as I said, an
intense and profound love of the Organization.
Ambassador Piniés, were he still among us,
would be very interested in the question of the master
plan, in the situation in the Middle East, in the United
Nations International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), and in
the situation in Iraq. Indeed, he was someone who
believed in and loved the Organization and who devoted
a part of his life to the pursuit of its ideals — that is to
say, promoting the well-being of the human race and
working towards international peace and security.
May he rest in peace, and, once again, I wish to
thank the President of the General Assembly and all of
those who took the floor.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/58/688 and Add.1)
The President: I should now like to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/58/688, and to addendum 1 thereto, containing two
letters from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the General Assembly.

4

In document A/58/688, the Secretary-General
informs the Assembly that 26 Member States are in
arrears in the payment of their financial contributions
to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of
the Charter.
May I remind delegations that, under Article 19
of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
In document A/58/688/Add.1, the SecretaryGeneral informs the Assembly that, since the issuance
of his communication contained in document A/58/688,
Antigua and Barbuda has made the necessary payment
to reduce its arrears below the amount specified in
Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in documents
A/58/688 and A/58/688/Add.1?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: request for the reopening of the
consideration of agenda item 19
Note verbale dated 19 January 2004 from the
Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the General Assembly
(A/58/692)
The President: In order for the General
Assembly to take action on the request contained in
document A/58/692, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of agenda item 19, “Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.

A/58/PV.80

The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting on 19 September 2003, the
General Assembly decided to consider agenda item 19
directly in plenary meeting.
In order for the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the document, may I further take it
that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Note verbale dated 19 January 2004 from the
Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the General Assembly
(A/58/692)
The President: By its note verbale, the
Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations advises me of the
interest of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in
becoming a member of the Special Committee on the
Situation with Regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
As delegations are aware, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November
1961, members of the Special Committee are
nominated by the President of the General Assembly.
After consultations with regional groups, I have
nominated Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as a
member of the Special Committee on the Situation with
Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of this
nomination?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 8 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: request for the reopening of the
consideration of agenda item 20
Draft resolution (A/58/L.57)
The President: As indicated in the footnote to
document A/58/L.57, in order for the General Assembly
to take action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary
to reopen consideration of agenda item 20.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting on 19 September 2003, the
General Assembly decided to consider agenda item 20
directly in plenary meeting.
In order for the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft resolution, may I further take
it that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to
the consideration of agenda item 20?
It was so decided
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/58/L.57)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Qatar to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.57.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to extend my condolences to Iran for
those who fell victim to the earthquake in Bam.
I also wish, on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, to join those who have spoken in condolence to
the Government of Spain and to the family of
Ambassador Jaime de Piniés, former President of the
General Assembly. May his soul rest in peace.
It gives me great pleasure to extend to you, Sir, our
sincerest wishes and congratulations on the occasion of
the new year, wishing you and the members of the
Bureau the best of health, happiness and prosperity.

5

A/58/PV.80

On this occasion, I have the honour and privilege
to submit to the members of the General Assembly, in
the context of its fifty-eighth session and under agenda
items 8 and 20, a draft resolution contained in
document A/58/L.57, dated 3 February 2004, entitled
“Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”.
The draft resolution is almost identical to that
which was adopted by the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session under agenda item 35 in 2001. The
only change introduced in the draft resolution before
the Assembly today is confined to some specific points
required by the new draft.
We are submitting this draft resolution in view of
the conviction of my Government of the importance of
strengthening the role of democracy and consolidating
it in the lives of peoples, and that democracy today has
become a basic tenet of good governance in any civil
society. Sound social development and security require
the promotion of the participation of citizens in
choosing those who represent them in the
administration of society. In that respect and by way of
enhancing this role, my Government is building
modernized civil institutions in accordance with the
recognized universal standards. Also emanating from
this conviction, a national constitution was recently
adopted in my country. It specifies and clearly defines
the role of the three branches of Government, the
legislative, the executive and the judicial, which
provides for the establishment of an elected national
Parliament.
Hence, in order to provide support by the United
Nations for the efforts made by Governments to
strengthen and consolidate new or restored
democracies, my delegation would greatly appreciate
the adoption by the Assembly of the draft resolution
before it.
By paragraph 1 of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would welcome the proposal of the
Government of Qatar to hold the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies from l3
to 15 November 2006 in Doha.
The following countries have joined the list of
sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Argentina,
Armenia, Belarus, Belize, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador,

6

Guatemala, Iceland, India, Madagascar, Oman, the
Philippines, the Republic of Korea and. Thailand.
In conclusion, allow me to express my gratitude
to the Member States that sponsored this draft
resolution and my utmost respect and appreciation to
all members of the General Assembly.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.57, entitled “Sixth
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies, to be held in Doha in 2006”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of A/58/L.57:
Djibouti, Egypt, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, the
Republic of Moldova and the Sudan.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.57?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/281).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 41 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children
Draft resolution (A/58/L.58)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at
its 39 th and 40 th plenary meetings, on 21 and 22
October 2003. In connection with this item, the
General Assembly had before it a draft resolution
contained in document A/58/L.58.
The draft resolution the Assembly now has before
it is to advance follow-up to the special session of the
General Assembly on children. When world leaders
convened at New York for that special session in May
2002, they committed themselves to a time-bound set
of specific goals for children and young people and to a
basic framework for getting there. Earlier, heads of
State or Government had pledged, in their Millennium
Declaration, to take specific action to improve the lives

A/58/PV.80

of the world’s people. The Millennium Development
Goals emanating from the Declaration, the Convention
on the Rights. of the Child — the most universally
ratified human rights treaty — and its optional
protocols, together with the outcome document of the
special session, “A World Fit for Children”, constitute
an essential framework for improving the lives of
children and young people throughout the world.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/58/333)
which we have considered in our discussion of agenda
item 41 and in consultations on this draft resolution
takes note of progress made in the implementation of
the Declaration and Plan of Action of the special session
by Governments, intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations and relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes.
The adoption of the draft resolution will take us
all a step forward in keeping the promises those world
leaders made, and in implementing the agenda they set
themselves to better the lives of children and young
people. Among its provisions, the draft resolution calls
for the convening of a commemorative plenary meeting
in 2007, on a date to be decided at the sixtieth session
of the Assembly, and invites the President of the
General Assembly to finalize organizational matters in
consultation with Member States. This, I believe, is
important for ensuring that we remain focused and take
appropriate action at all levels to keep the promises we
have made.
I hope the draft resolution will meet with the
support, and approval by consensus of all delegations.
I wish to take this opportunity, on my own account
and on behalf of the General Assembly, to thank
Ambassador Staehelin of Switzerland for undertaking
the task of holding consultations and successfully
concluding the negotiations on the draft resolution.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/58/L.58.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.58?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/282).
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats. I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Ms. Tamlyn (United States of America): We
welcome the resolution on follow-up to the outcome of
the special session on children and thank the Swiss
delegation for its efforts.
This year, the tenth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family, we would like to
underscore the importance of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) that work with children,
especially NGOs that work with their families. These
NGOs that work for and with families have a vital role
to play in assisting Member States to implement the
commitments made at the special session on children
and at other relevant major United Nations conferences
and summits.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
41?
It was so decided.
The meeting was adjourned at 3.50 p.m.

7
