272

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

IV of the report of the Secretary-General on the analysis of
the financial situation of the United Nations, 69
Noting with concern that the short-term deficit of the
Organization is expected to exceed $356 million as at 31
December 1984,
Concerned at the increasingly precarious financial situation of peace-keeping operations and, in particular, its
adverse impact on developing-country troop contributors, 75
Noting also with concern that delays and partial payment
of assessed contributions continue to create serious cashflow problems for the Organization,
Considering the possibility that for many Member States
administrative considerations, including a calendar difference between the national fiscal year and that of the
Organization, may be responsible for the delay in the payment of assessed contributions,
Taking note of the views expressed in the Fifth
Committee, 70

I. Reaffirms its commitment to seek a comprehensive
and generally acceptable solution to the financial problems
of the United Nations, based on the principle of collective
financial responsibility of Member States and in strict
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Urges all Member States to meet their financial
obligations;
3. Renews its appeal to all Member States to make
their best efforts to overcome constraints to the prompt
payment early each year of full assessed contributions and
of adv:ances to the Working Capital Fund;
4. Expresses its appreciation to all Member States
which pay their assessed contributions in full within thirty
days of the receipt of the Secretary-General's communication, in accordance with regulation 5.4 of the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in addition to his
official communications to the permanent representatives
of Member States, to approach, as and when appropriate,
the Governments of Member States for the purpose of
encouraging expeditious payment in full of assessed contributions, in compliance with regulation 5.4 of the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations;

6. Invites Member States also to provide, in response
to the Secretary-General's official communication and
consistent with regulation 5.4 of the Financial Regulations
of the United Nations, information regarding their expected pattern of payments, in order to facilitate the financial
planning by the Secretary-General;
7. Requests the Negotiating Committee on the Financial Emergency of the United Nations to keep the financial
situation of the Organization under review and to report,
as and when appropriate, to the General Assembly;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session detailed information relating to the extent, rate of increase and composition of the deficit of the Organization, the pattern of payments of Member States, the cash-flow situation and voluntary contributions received from Member States and
other sources pursuant to Assembly resolutions 2053 A
(XX) of 15 December 1965 and 3049 A (XXVII) of 19
December 1972;
75 See Official Records o(the Secunty Council. Thirty-eighth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1983, document S/15863, para. 28.

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Financial emergency of
the United Nations".
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39 /240.

Impact of inflation and monetary instability
on the regular budget of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/230 of 18 December 198 I
and 37/130 of 17 December 1982,
Deeply concerned at the increased cost of the goods and
services associated with the operation of the United
Nations and the United Nations system as a whole as a
result of the persistence of inflation and monetary instability in those developed countries in which the United
Nations makes its main expenditures,
Convinced that many Member States are not responsible
for the losses that the budget of the United Nations experiences as a result of the monetary phenomena referred to in
the preceding paragraph,
Stressing that, in order to cover the substantial losses
caused by inflation and monetary instability, there is a
need for a continuing review of procedures that could help
to meet the above-mentioned budget costs in the most
appropriate way,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the impact of inflation and monetary instability on the
regular budget of the United Nations, 76
Convinced of the need to analyse more thoroughly all
aspects of the increased costs of the goods and services
associated with the operations of the United Nations,

I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the impact of inflation and monetary instability on the regular budget of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a more
penetrating, extensive and detailed study on the impact of
inflation and monetary instability on the regular budget of
the United Nations, as was requested in General Assembly
resolution 37/ 130, taking very duly into consideration the
content of the preambular paragraphs of Assembly resolutions 36/230, 37/ 130 and the present resolution, together
with the opinions expressed by Member States during the
debates on this item at the thirty-ninth session of the
Assembly, and to submit it to the Assembly at its fortieth
session;
3. Also requests that the above-mentioned study
include:
(a) The amounts which, over the last four bienniums,
have resulted from inflation and monetary instability in
the developed countries where United Nations organizations have their headquarters;
(b) A comparison between real, net and growth
increases and increases due to inflation during the last four
bienniums.

105th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
76 A/C'.5/39/44.
