34

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

1784 (XVII). The prohlem of Chinese refugees
in Hong Kong
The General Assembly,
Considering that for humanitarian reasons refugees
in various parts of the world require international
assistance,
Recalling its resolution 1167 (XII) of 26 N ovember
1957, in which it recognized that the problem of the
Chinese refugees in Hong Kong is of concern to the
international community and pointed out the need for
emergency and long-term assistance,
Appreciating the efforts of Member States, the Government of Hong Kong, certain non-governmental organizations and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in endeavouring to meet the needs of the
refugees entering Hong Kong,
1. Reaffirms its concern over the situation of the
Chinese refugees ;
2. Appeals to the States Members of the United
N ations and members of the specialized agencies and to
interested non-governmental organizations to increase
their contributions and to continue giving all possible
aid to those refugees ;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to use bis good offices, in agreement with the Governments of the countries concerned,
to provide assistance to the Chinese refugees in Hong

Decides to give priority to the items entitled "Draft
Convention on Freedom of Information" and "Draft
Declaration on Freedom of Information" and to devote,
at its eighteenth session, as many meetings as necessary
to the consideration of these items.
1198th plenary 111/'l'tino.
19 December 1967.

1841 (XVII). Implementation of the Supplementary Convention of 1956 on the Abolition of
Slavery, the Slave Trade and Institutions and
Practices similar to Slavery

The General Assembly,
N oting that the Third Committee has adopted the
preamble and article 1 of the draft Declaration on the
Right of Asylum,
H aving been unable to complete the consideration of
the draft Declaration,
Decides to take up the ítem entitled "Draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum" as soon as possible at its
eighteenth session and, at that session, to devote as
many meetings as necessary to the completion of this
ítem.
1198th plenary meetinq,
19 December 1962.

The General Assembly,
Recallinq article 4 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which states :
";\Jo one shal1 be held in slavery or servitmle :
s1averv and the slave trade shall be prohibitrd in a 11
their forms",
B elievinq that slaverv, the slave trade and a11 instit11tions and practices simiÍar to slavery shonld br ri hoführd.
Belil'vinq further that the participation of al! Statf'~
Memhers of the United Nations an<l memhers of th,-,
specialized agencies in the Tnternational Slaverv Convention of 19261 º an<l the Final Act and Snnnlfmentarv
Convention of 1956 on the Abolition of Slavfrv, tlw
Slave Trade and Tnstitutions and Practicfs similar to
Slavery,11 and the full implementation of these instruments, would constitute an important advance towards
the achievement of this end,
N atina that as vet fiftv-two States Mfmbers of tlw
United ;\Jations and memhers of the specialized agencifs
are not parties to the Convention of 1926. ;,n<l th;,t
seventy-eight are not parties to the Supplementarv Cnnvention of 1956,
1. Calls upan those States Members of the Unitfrl
:'Jations and members of the specialized agt>ncirs which
have not yet become parties to these Conventions to
do so;
2. Urges all States parties to the Conventions to cooperate fully in carrying out their terms. in particular bv
furnishing to the Secretary-General, if they have not
already done so, the information called for undfr article
8, paragraph 2, of the Supplementary Convention of
1956.
1198th plenary meetinn,
19 December 196:!.

1840 (XVII). Draft Convention on Freedom of
Information; draft Declaration on Freedom
of Information

1842 (XVII). Measures designed to promote
among youth the ideals of peace, mutual
respect and understanding hetween peoples

The General Assembly,
H aving made progress in the preparation of the draft
Convention on Freedom of Information at its fourteenth,
fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,
Bearing in mind that a draft resolution concerning the
future organization of work on this subject was submitted to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
session,9
Having been imable at its seventeenth session to consider the draft Convention and the draft Declaration on
Freedom of Information, as well as thé above-mentioned
draft resolution,

The General Assembly,
Rec.alling its resolution 1572 (XV) of 18 December
19~ on measures designed to promote among yonth
the 1deals of peace, mutual respect and understan<ling
between peoples,
Taking note of the report on this subject snbmitted
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the Economic and Social Council, 12
as well as Council resolution 895 (XXXIV) of 27 Jnly
1962 requesting the General Assembly to take such
decision thereon as it may see fit,

Kong.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.

1839 (XVII). Draft Declaration on the
Right of Asylum

9 Jbid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 45 and
47, document A/C.3/L.1048/Rev.1.

lO Publications of the League of Nations, Vl.B.Slavery,
1926.VI.B.7 (document C.586.M.223.1926.VI).
11 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 57.XI\'.2.
1 2 Trammitted by a note of the Secretary-General (E/J638).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind that a draft dedaration on the subject13 has been submitted to the General Assembly at
its seventeenth session for consideration,
Having been unable to consider the ítem at its seventeenth session,
Decides to give priority to the ítem entitled "Measures
designed to promote among youth the ideals of peace,
mutual respect and understanding between peoples" and
to devote, at its eighteenth session, as many meetings as
possible to the consideration of this item.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1843 (XVII). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights

A
The General Assembly
l. Decides to request the &onomic and Social Council to refer to the Commission on Human Rights all the
proposals relating to an article on the rights of the
child, together with the records of the discussion thereon
at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly, for
a thorough study, taking into consideration all the legal
irrlplications of including such an article in the draft
Covenants;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to send to the
Governments of Member States and to the specialized
agencies the documents ment:oned in paragraph 1 above
so that they may submit their comments thereon to the
Commission on Human Rights;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to report on its deliberations, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

B
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the forthcoming discussion by the
Third Committee of the articles on the implementation
of the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Considering that the question of implementation raises
a number of issues which are urgently in need of clarification,
N oting that the Secretary-General's annotations 14 on
the texts of the draft International Covenants on Human
13 Official Records of the General Assenibly, Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 83, document A/C.3/L.1051.
14 [bid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 28 (part II),
document A/2929.

35

Rights submitted by the Commission on Human Rights
in 1952 need to be brought up to date,
Believing that such clarification is necessary to facilitate an effective discussion of the problem of implementation,
Mindful of the fact that since 1952 the membership of
the United Nations has more than doubled and that not
all Governments of Member States have had an opportunity to participate in the drafting of the articles on
implementation,
Convinced of the desirability that all Member States
have before them a systematic account of all proposals
and suggestions concerning measures of implementation
and a review of the important issues involved,
l. Requests the Secretary-General, with a view to
clarifying the main issues involved in the implementation
of the International Covenants on Human Rights, to
prepare an explanatory paper bringing his annotations
up to date in the light of the developments that have
taken place since the publication of that document in
1955;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to forward the explanatory paper by 1 May 1963 to the Governments of
Member States in order that they may send to him any
observations thereon by 30 July 1963;
3. Invites the Governments of all Member States to
send to the Secretary-General the observations referred
to in paragraph 2 above, within the time-limit prescribed
therein;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the e;_
planatory paper to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session, together with such observations of Governments
thereon as he may receive.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

e
The General Assembly,
N oting that the Third Committee has adopted articles
2 to 5 of the draft Covoc:nant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and articles 3 and 5 of the draft Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,
C onsidering however that the Committee has been unable to complete its consideration of the general provisions, the measures of implementation and the final
clauses relating to the two draft Covenants,
Decides to give priority, at its eighteenth session,
to the consideration of the draft International Covenants
011 Human Rights.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
