S
TR’ENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

[[I

23 NOVEMBER

197 I

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Statements

of welcome

599)

. , . . . . . . . . . . , .. , , . . . . . ,. . . . . . .

to the representative

of the People’s Republic

Page
1
1

of China

.. . . . . . . . . , , . . . , ,. . . . . . .

9

. . . . .. . , . . , . .. , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Complaint by Senegal:
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council established under
resolution 294 (1971) (S/10308)
. . . .. , . . . ,. , . . . , , .. . . . . . . .. . .

10

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV. 1599

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Document; of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Pecisions of the
Secutily Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted befog 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
-

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-NINTH

Held in New York on Tuesday, 23 November
President: Mr. Eugeniusz KU$AGA (Poland).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 599)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Senegal:
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (197 1) (S/l 0308).

MEETING
1971, at 3.30 p.m.

Your reputation as a diplomat who, together with great
experience, has a deep knowledge of history and of the
practice of international relatjons, has preceded YOU. I am
certain that I am interpreting the feelings of the members
of the Council in expressing the hope that the People’s
Republic of China will make its full contribution to the
realjzation of the tasks and the mandate of the Security
Council and therefore to the maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security, in compliance with
the United Nations Charter. Excellency, the Council relies
upon your active contribution for the attainment of these
tasks. As President, may I assure you that my co-operation
will always be at your disposal.

4. I hope, Gentlemen, that you will allow me to exercise
the privileges of the Presidency to add a few words on
behalf of POLAND. During the last 22 years Poland has
constantly and firmly defended the lawful rights of the
People’s Republic of China in the United Nations. In our
opinion, therefore, the decision of the General Assembly
constitutes the recognition owed for so long to political
reality, as established by the revolutionary change that took
place in China in 1949. This decision is a victory over the
irrational policy of certain States which attempted to
isolate the great Chinese people and to deny the rights of
the People‘s Republic of China in the United Nations and in
the international community.

Statements of welcome to the representative of
the People’s Republic of China
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In my
capacity as President of the Security Council for the month
of November, it is both a pleasant duty and a great honour
for me to address a welcome to the permanent representative of China, Mr. Huang Hua, as well as to his colleagues, at
a time when they come to occupy in the Security Council
the seat which is theirs as the representatives of one of the
five permanent members of the Security Council.

5. I would wish on behalf of the Government of the
People’s Republic of Poland to offer our cordial congratulations to the People’s Republic of China upon the restoration to it of its rights in the United Nations and in
connexion with its coming to the, Security Council. The
Polish delegation wishes to express the conviction of its
Government that the participation of the People’s Repubhc
of China in the activities of our Organization in general and
in the Security Council in particular will contribute to the
attainment of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, namely, the strengthening of international
security and the promotion of co-operation among nations
in the interests of peace and progress in the world,

2. We have all present in our minds the terms of resolution
2758 (XXVI), adopted on 25 October 1971, by which the
General Assembly decided to restore all its rights to the
People’s Republic of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the sole legitimate representatives of China to the United Nations. The fact that today
China returns to the Security Council is unquestionably an
event of great importance for the United Nations and for
the Security Council in particular. With the restoration of
the rights of the People’s Republic of China, justice has
been done and political realism, which is an essential
quality for the United Nations organ primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
prevails.

6. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): When my delegation raised the
question of the legal representation of China ln this Council
at the 1565th meeting, on 9 February last, it drew
attention to the absurd situation caused by the Council
refusing to recognize dramatic political changes that had
taken place on the China scene following the successful
revolution of the Chinese people in October 1949. By the
Council’s action in continuing to accord recognition to
representatives of a regime that no longer exercised any
authority over the affairs of the Chinese people it created a

3. In extending a weIcome to the representative of China I
am particularly privileged in greeting Mr. Huang Hua here. I
am convinced that all the members of the Security Council
are gratified, as I am, that the People’s Republic of China
has chosen so distinguished a personality to represent the
great people of China in the Security Council because,
indeed, Excellency, you do not come here as an unknown.
1

lc”

no basis in common sense.

so long as that resolution is in force. The objectives of

7. At that time my delegation expressed the hope that the
Security Council would involve itself once more in the
question so that illogic and injustice would no longer be
allowed to impair the credibility of the United Nations. It is
a matter of great satisfaction to my Government that that
time has now arrived. Today we are privileged to witness
the true representatives of China taking their lawful places
in this Council and to welcome their presence here.

United Nations and the authority of its most powcrfu*
organ can only find practical expression through consenSuS
or majority vote. If that elementary principle of democrikcY
is not observed at the highest level, then the credibility
Of
the United Nations will be very much in doubt. Similarly*
States which are not members of the Security Council rnmt
consider themselves bound by its decisions.
12. A pertinent commentary on this question wasgiven bY
the International Court of Justice, It was given in the
context of the question of Namibia, but it applies generally
to the nature and function of the Security Council. ‘I-he
Court considered that “when the Security Council adopts a
decision under Article 25 in accordance with the Charter, it
is for member States to comply with that decision I
including those members of the Security Council which
voted against it [or abstained] . . . To hold otherwise would
be to deprive this principal organ of its essential functions
and powers under the Charter.“’

8. No one can say with complete assurance what might
have happened in the past had the United Nations treated
the issue of China’s representation in the me correct
manner in which it had treated other cmes of rival
representation that had come before it. But there can be no
question that for 22 years the United Nations was deprived
of the presence of a nation whose counsel wasvital for the
satisfactory solution of grave problems involving questions
of war and peace. Without the presenceof the most
populous nation in the world, the true balance of power in
international affairs was not reflected in the United
13. At Iong last the United Nations has acted in accordNations. Without China we were deprived of the voice of a
ance with the letter and spirit of the Charter in deating with
country in which the wisdom and discipline of one of the
one of the most controversial issues of the past two
world’s oldest and most respected civilizations had been decades-the restoration of the rights of the PeopIe”s
transmuted through a tremendous national effort to serve Republic of China in the United Nations. In welcoming the
the. needs of the twentieth century, a century whose
representatives of China to the Security Council arty
outstanding feature has been the struggle against endelegation looks forward to a new era characterized by
trenched privilege and for the rights of the common man.
right attitudes by all nations to the purposes and principIes
of the Charter of this Organization.
9. If the United Nations has profited from the lessons
learned from the China question, it wilI go on to deal with
14. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President, it
other issues such as southern Africa and the Middle East
gives me great pleasure to associate myself with you irl
with the same honesty and the same respect for the
welcoming to the Security Council the representatives rlf
principles of the Charter that have triumphed in recent
the People’s Republic of China. This is a development WC’
days.
have long felt to be overdue, and we feel it is right that the
true balance of the memberstip of the Security Council
10. My delegation believes that the collective wisdom of
should be restored. My delegation looks forward with
the United Nations, which is now closer to the goal of
pleasure to working with our new colleagues.
universality, will be brought to bear more successfully than
in the past on the solution of the many problems that still
IS. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretatiorz
threaten international pace. Certainly the Security Council
from Spanish): I would address my first words to the
will be strengthened and better able to carry out its central
representative of Nicaragua, Mr. Sevilla Sacasa, and extend
peace-keeping and peace-making role now that there is no
to him our warmest congratulations on his brilliant presiquestion about the legality of any of its members.
dency of this body during the month of October. During
that month the Council held several meetings on items 115
11. One of the more significant aspects of the presence of
important as they were difficult, and it was because of the
the representatives of China in the United Nations is that
endeavours, sagacity and character of Ambassador Sevilla
for the first time since 1949 the Security Council will be
Sacasa that the respective negotiations and discussions were
properly constituted. It will be a realistic reflection of the
brought to a successful conclusion. We are therefore most
world power structure, and it will have an unquestionable
grateful to him.
basis for its authority. This is an opportune time for ail
Member States, and more particularly the permanent
16. May I also express to you, Mr. President, the c(
members of the Security Council, to examine the attitudes
best wishes of the delegation of Argentina on accedir
that have been prevalent regarding the nature and function
the Presidency of the Security Council. We are convil
of this Council, which alone can ensure the effectiveness of
that your experience and the wellknown attributes of:
the United Nations. The effectiveness of this Organization
personality will once again come to light in guiding
has often been seriously impaired-for example, by the
debate.
tendency of members of the Security Council to feel they
are not bound by majority decisions if they have voted
1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presen
negatively or abstained on some matter. That type of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithsta
attitude is inconsistent with a full commitment to the rule
Security Council resolution 2 76 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I ,,
of international law. Once a decision has been taken by this
Reports 1971, para.116.
2

Ii. At the 1982nd plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on 1.5 November last, the Chairman of the
Latin American group, speaking on behalf of the nations
comprising it, welcomed the People’s Republic of China to
our Organization. We feel we were fully represented at that
time in the statement made by Ambassador Molina of Costa
Rica. At this time we wish to add the individual greetings of
the delegation of Argentina.
18. The conversations that commenced in Bucharest
almost three months ago between the representatives of
Argentina and the People’s Republic of China with a view
to normalizing diplomatic and trade relations between
those countries arc characterized by frank and positive
dialogue. With that same frankness we now wish to state
that we arc confident that the participation of that State,
which has the largest population on earth, not only will fill
a void and bring us closer to the desired universality of the
United Nations but will have a really constructive signi!%
cance in attaining the great purposes and principles laid
down in the San Francisco Charter. People are weary of
sterile divisions and yearn for peace. One of the primary
responsibilities of each country represented here, whatever
its size or potential, is to contribute to the elimination of
those divisions, making efforts to find genuine joint
solutions to the serious problems besetting the international
community within harmonious coexistence and the framework of the most complete respect for the conditions,
characteristics and systems prevailing in each nation.
19. The United Nations has achieved a great deal in its
first 35 years of existence? both in the field of’ concrete
achievements and in the establishment of a propitious
atmosphere for overcoming differences. In the long and
difficult road that still lies ahead for the attainment of
those objectives, the People’s Republic of China is called
upon to play a historically decisive role. In welcoming
among us its representatives, headed by Mr. Huang Hua, we
wish to offer in advance the co-operation of the Argentine
delegation in that great enterprise.

23. I had the opportunity, at previous meetings, to express
the high estceni and the deep-gratitude we f&l, Mr. I%esident; for your distinguished predecessor. I wish, however,
to renew our special tribute to Ambassador &villa Sacasa
of Nicaragua, who presided over our deliberations with
great ability and foresight during one of the most difficult
and important sessionsof the Council.
24. A little over a week ago I had the opportunity to
extend, on behalf of my Coyernment, an official welcome
to the delegation of the People’s Republic of China, at the
eventful 1982nd plenary meeting of the General Assembly
at which it occupied its rightful place in the United
Nations. I shall therefore not repeat what I had to say on
that fateful occasion. But this is indeed a momentous day
in the life of our Organization, a day when, by formally
occupying its permanent seat and joining us in the Security
Council, the People’s Republic of China gives a new
dif”ension to the very existence and activity of this
essential organ of the United Nations,
25. I, therefore, share the views which you, Sir, and
previous speakers have expressed in stressing the historic
significance of this event, convinced a’s I am that the more
closely the composition of the Security Council reflects the
reality of today’s world, the more effective its action can
become in support of peace and security, An important and
long-overdue step has thus been taken today. It is certainly
most welcome, and I am sure its full importance will be
appreciated by the general membership, in particular by a
number of States that have long maintained that the
Security Council’s composition directly affects the prospects of strengthening peace and security throughout the
world, a task for which the Council bears the primary
responsibility.
26. I should like at the same time to join you, Mr. President, and the representatives of Somalia, the United
Kingdom and Argentina in giving a heartfelt welcome to the
new colleague at our table, Ambassador Huang Wua. He
comes here with impressive credentials both asa man and as
a diplomat; as a man, because he, a militant patriot, proved
his attachment to principles by not yielding to any
pressure, even physical; as a colleague, because his record
speaks for itself. Envoy of a great nation and of a millenary
civilization, he has lived up to the high responsibility of
representing the new Chinese reality in a number of highly
important diplomatic posts at Geneva, Accra, Cairo and
Ottawa, I think all of us will benefit from the wisdom,
experience and skill of Ambassador Wang Hua.

20. On this day when the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China takes part for the first time in the work
of the Security Council, I believe it most timely to address
a special message to our esteemed Secretary-General,
U Thant, who worked so hard for the restoration of China’s
rights in our Organization, and to offer our most cordial
wishes for his quick recovery so that we may seehim soon
again among us.
21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn French): I wish
to thank the representative of Argentina for the kind words
he has said about me.

27. With this bright prospect in mind, my delegation and I
are looking forward to co-operating closely with our
Chinese colleague and his collaborators, in this body as well
as in all the other bodies of the United Nations.

22. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The special occasion of today’s
meeting leads me to break a long-standing practice of my
delegation, that of dispensing with complimentary remarks.
I shall start, Mr, President, by congratulating you. We feel
indebted to you for the tact and discretion which the
exceptional circumstances of the moment have demanded
and which you have shown yourself to possessin such a
high degree in conducting our affairs during the month of
November, now approaching its end.

28. Finally, I should like to associate myself with the good
wishes our colleague from Argentina has extended to our
Secretary-General, whom we hope to see back at a very
early date.
29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Bench): I wish
to thank the representative of Italy and assurehim that I
3

have been very much moved by the kind words he has
addressed to me.
30. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): Mr. President, as this is the
first meeting of the Security Council under your Presidency, I should like to join Ambassador Vinci in congratu.
lating you on your assumptionof this high office of the
Security Council. I am confident that under your ableand
experiencedleadershipthe Security Council will achieve
fruitful results.1 assureyou of the full co-operationof the
Japanesedelegationduring the courseof this month,
31, I should also like to expressdeep appreciation and
thanks to AmbassadorSevilla Sacasaof Nicaragua, the
out-going President, who presidedwith utmost tact and
dignity over one of the fullestmonthsof our Council.
32. I should like to associatemyself with the previous
speakersin extending, on behalf of the Japanesedelegation,
our warm welcome to the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China, a great Power and our closeneighbour
in Asia. My delegationisconfident that the presenceof the
People’sRepublicof China will strengthenthe functioning
of the Security Council and will further the cause of
international peaceand security. The constructive contribution of the Government of the People’sRepublic of China
to the future activities of the United Nationswill be a great
assetin our continuing effort to achievelasting peacefor
the whole world.
33. I should also like to add that my delegation looks
forward to the contacts betweenour two delegations,to a
deepeningmutual understanding,and the furtherance of
friendly relationsbetweenour two countries.
34. The PRESIDENT (intcrprerafiorl fion? French): I
thank the representativeof Japan, for the kind words he
hassaidabout me.
35. Mr. MALIK (Udon of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, permit me to
expressto you, the representativeof a fraternal socialist
country, Poland, our sincerecongratulationsupon your
assumingthe exalted post of President of the Security
Council and to wish you all successin dischargingthe
functions entrusted to you. Your outstandingdiplomatic
talents and your great experiencein the work of the United
Nations, together with your personalqualities, will undoubtedly have a positive influence on the work of the
Security Council. Permit me to assureyou that in carrying
out your important tasks as Presidentof the Council YOU
will have the full support and collabbration of the Soviet
delegation.
36. I should also.Jike to expressmy gratitude to your
predecessor,the distinguishedMr. Gutiermo Sevilla Sacasa,
for his active and wide-rangingwork as President of the
Security Council and to point to the important decisions
that were adopted by the Council underhis leadershiplast
month.

tive of China, Mr. HuangHua. I am, I think, the only one
among those present at the Security Council table, if not
the only one in this room, who had the opportunity 20
years ago, as representativeof the Soviet Union in the
Council, to welcomethe first representativeof the People’s
Republic of China to the Security Council table at the
meeting at which we, with considerabledifficulty, SUCceedcd in overcomingthe oppositionof those who sought
to prevent this and invited the Chineserepresentativeto
take part in the work of the Security Council. Wehave had
to struggle for more than 20 years for the restoration of
justice and in order to have a second opportunity to
welcome the representativeof the People’sRepublic of
China-on this occasion as a permanent colleague and
participant in !he work of the principal United Nations
organ for the strengthening of peace and security, the
Security Council. However, the fight for justice in the
United Nations continues,The forcesof oppositionarc still
active. The fight for the participation of States in this
important international organization on a basisof equality,
for the even-handedapplication of the Charter to all States
irrespective of their socio-political system continues as
before. We have still not seenthe last in the United Nations
system of the policy of unequal treatment and discrimination againstthe socialistStates. We shall continue in the
future to fight for the restoratjon of justice, for the
even-handedapplicationof the United NationsCharter, and
for the participation-or, at least, presence-of all Statesin
this Orgarlizationon a basisof equality, irrespectiveof their
socio-politicalsystem,and, above all, of the socialistStates,
which until now havebeendiscriminatedagainst.
38. There are forces, blinded by classhatred towards
socialism,which are continuing to prevent certain socialist
countries from having official representativesat the United
Nations, I have in mind the German Democratic Republic,
which hasthus far been denied an opportunity to have an
official observerhere. That is a flagrant injustice, a relic of
the worst days of the cold war. Within the United Nations
there are still forcesthat are continuing along the road on
which they set out in the worst years of the cold war,
unmindful of present-dayreality and despitethe fact that
that coursehaslong been condemnedby history. Official
representativesof the German Democratic Republic are
denied United Statesvisas.Official representativesof the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are denied an
opportunity to attend sessionsof the General Assembly
during discussionof the Korean question or of matters
relating to Korea, The way is barred to them. To this day
they have received no opportunity to state the official
position of their Government on questions discussedat
GeneralAssemblysessions
that directly affect Korea,
“,
39. Those who are opposed to affording them this .l. :,;
opportunity and are still following the path of cold war ,.:
should serjouslyreconsidertheir position and take account ~.:
of present-dayrealitiesand the sorry lessonsof the failtub ‘.I. :
of their struggleto prevent the restoration of the rights of
$,
the People’sRepublic of China in the Unjted Nations; they
should reconsideralso their preconceived positions with .’ ‘i
regardto other socialistcountries.

37. Permit me also, on behalf of the Soviet delegation,to
associatemyself with the words of welcomeand the good 40. On 15 November, at the 1983rd plenary meetingof
wishesthat you expressedto the distinguishedrepresenla- the GeneralAssembly,the Soviet delegationwelcomedtf
r

4

delegation of the People’s Republic of China, which had
come to participate in the work of the twenty-sixth session
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and aII other
United Nations organs. In that statement, the Soviet
delegation expressed the hope that the restoration of the
rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United
Nations and its permanent, full-fledged participation in the
work of the Organization would be a positive contribution
towards increasing the effectiveness of the United Nations
and would help to consolidate world peace and inter.
national security and to develop and strengthen mutual
understanding and co-operation among peoples. In our
opinion, the presence and participation of the delegation of
the People’s Republic of China in the work of the Security
Council is bound to have great significance. We should like
to hope that it wiII have the appropriate positive influence
on the work of the Security Council, which under the
United Nations Charter is the principal United Nations
organ responsible for the maintenance of peace and
security.
41. Permit me to express the hope that the Security
Council will benefit from the effective and positive cooperation of the representative of the People’s Republic of
China, Mr. Huang Hua.
42. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): 1
thank the representative of the Soviet Union, Comrade
Malik, for his statement and the kind words he has been
good enough to address to me.
43. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spattish): Mr.Presidcnt, may my first words be
addressed to you to congratulate you most cordially on
your well-deserved accession to the Presidency of this
highly respected international forum. We are aware of your
outstanding abilities, your diplomatic tact and your inter.
national experience and are therefore completely certain
that you, Mr. Kuraga, wiI1 succeed to the satisfaction of all
in guiding the debates of the Security Council. I congratulate you most cordially as a friend and a colleague.

population of China should be represented in the United
Nations.
“To deny this would mean closing our eyes to
irrefutable facts in the contemporary world. These are the
ever-wider participation of the Government of the
People’s Republic of China in world affairs, the growth of
an economic system whose presence in the world is
undeniable, and the growing number of Governments
which recognize the legal existence of the Government of
the People’s Republic of China.“2
46. As he joins this Council, it is for me a satisfaction
rather more than a diplomatic duty to greetMr. HuangHua
most respectfully with the hope that hisaction here in this
forum will, in many waysand in different forms,contribute
to the strengtheningof international peaceandsecurity.
47. The PRESIDENT (inteqvetation from French): I wish
to thank Mr, SeviIIa Sacasa and say that I wasparticularly
moved by the very generouswords that he addressed
to me.
48. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Last week on
behalf of my delegation and of the host Government, I
made a statementof welcomein the GeneralAssemblytq
the delegationof the People’sRepublic of Chinaand I join
with our other colleagueshere today in welcomingAmbassador Huang Hua and AmbassadorChenChu, his deputy,
on their first appearancein the Security Council, this very
specialbody of the United Nations.
49. In doing so, I want to confirm that all of us in the
United States Missionlook forward to co-operatinghere,as
in other chambersof the United Nations, with the members
.of this new Chinese delegation in our efforts to find
constructive solutionsto the important issuesof peaceand
security which concernusall.
50. Mr. Ambassador, we bid you and your delegation
welcome.
51. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (hterpretation from
French): My delegation is very pleased to see you,
Mr.President, occupy the office of President of the
Security Council during this month of November, which
promisesto be particularly difficult, confronted as we are
by important and numerousproblems and the fact that
peaceis threatened throughout the world. Weare familiar
with aII your qualities becausewe have seenyou in action
both in the past and now and we have full confidence in
your competence.We haveevery good reasonfor expecting
fruitful resultsfrom the work that the Security Council will
perform during this month.

44. Now I should like to express my gratitude to the
representatives of Argentina, Italy, Japan and the Soviet
Union for their words of cordial praise for me personally and
their kind references to me as President of the Security
Council during the past month of October, I accept those
statements for my country, which gave me the privilege of
representing it in this forum, where such eminent personalities as all of you doubtless are, dear friends and
colleagues, take part,
45. I too take great pleasure in respectfully greeting the
representative of the People’s Republic of China, Mr. Huang
Hua. He is a person whose name is respected and who is
known throughout the world. I greet him by recalling what
only yesterday I said on behalf of my country before the
General Assembly in regard to his Government and his
people. I said then:

52. My delegation would likewise wish to thank you for
the important role you have played in variousmissions in
Africa on behalf of the Security Council and in its name,
and we know how strongly attached you areto the African
causewith which you have identified yourself in spite of
the distancewhich separatesAfrica from Poland,a country
with a long and rich history both of culture andcivilisation.

“Nicaragua does not deny, nor could it deny, that more
than 700 million people with a governmental rCgime
which, for more than 20 years, has proved its effectiveness and control over a major part of the territory and the

2 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Twen:y-sixth
Plenary Meetings, 1974th meeting, paras. 93 and 94.

5

Session,

predecessor and my delegation is in a good position to
wonder whether Mr. Sevilla Sacasa is not to someextent a
magician,and I will explain why. Over a year ago he
presidedover our Councilwhena historic resolutionon the
Namibiacasewas referred to the International Court of
Justice [resolution 284 (1970)]. It was he who was
presidingover our Council when it endorsedthe advisory
opinion of the Court [resolution 301(1971)/. We are
particularly grateful to him and he can rely on our great
appreciationand profound gratitude,
54. At the time when the United Nations has finally
crossedthe Rubicon and that it is thereby, like Julius
Caesar,able to utter the wordsjucro alca est.-the die is
cast-we do not wish by our presentstatementto comply
with a traditional ritual of expressingwelcome,
55. This meeting assumessymbolic significanceand a
characterwhich is both uniqueand historic inasmuchas it
is attended, for the first time since the creation of the
United Nations, by the five permanent memberswho
henceforth are to sit sideby sidein this organin order to
safeguardthe welfare of mankind.
56, This event signifies that one era has passedand
another has dawned, one which the world hopeswill be
brilliant. Would it really be indulgingin hyperbole to say
that a generalsenseof universality has accompaniedthe
People’sRepublic of China to the United Nations? Is it
necessary,on the other hand, to emphasizethat the hopes
of Stateswere basedon a numberof criteria? As far asthe
Republic of Burundi is concerned, a small country of
5 million inhabitants, it learned with interest that China
had recovered its rightful seatin the international forum.
But the Burundi people have heard with even greater
satisfactionthe ardent plea of the People’sRepublic of
China in favour of the lawful rights of the smallnations
within the United Nations. It becameincumbentupon the
Burundi delegationto have the honour to hail the presence
of their ExcellenciesMr, Chiao Kuan-hua,Deputy Minister
for ForeignAffairs and Mr. HuangHua, PermanentRepresentative, and their collabq@ors. We believe that we are
fulfilling this task on behalf of Burundi, but alsoon behalf
of the African group as we have the privilege and the
happinessof beingone of the threemandatedspokesmen
in
this Councilfor that group,
57. A far moresignificant elementjustifies the enthusiasm
of our Organization, namely that the new membershipof
the Security Council is now in the last analysisthe literal
application of Article 23 of the Charter, which establishes
the numberof permanentmembersat five.
58. If the lion’s sharebelongsto the MemberStatesin the
Organizationit is not excluded that bilateral and parallel
talks betweenthe American and the ChineseGovernments
have constituted a decisivesupplementarycontribution to
their happy resolution of the situation. Accordingly, the
participation of the two great Powers in the Security
Council provides them with an additional channel of
communicationat a time when they have launcheda policy
of ardently desired rapprochement since the two parties
will be able now to speak together face to face on both
6

sidesof the table of the Council, which is a distance far
shorter than that separatingWashingtonand Peking. It is
generally notorious, unfortunately, that the performanceof
the Security Council has remainedwell below the hopes
placed in it. The powerlessness
of this organis in major part
to be ascribedto ideologicalantagonisms.
Nevertheless,the
more damagingdifference, however invisible it might have
been, lay in the absenceof one of the great Powers.
Doubtless we have to refer here, in the interests of
appropriate comparison, to the fate of the League of
Nations when a colossus,
the United States of America,
abstained from participating in it, whereas President
Woodrow Wilson had so fervently and with a tenacity
which wasto lead to self-sacrif’ice
attempted to support the
creation of what he qualified in January 1918 in his famous
Fourteenth Point as “a generalassociationof nationsto be
formed to afford mutual guaranteesof political independence and territorial integrity to great and smaI1States
alike”.
59. At the presentjuncture it is necessaryfor Washington,
Moscow, Paris,Peking and London to return to the letter
and the spirit of the Charter, as they did when they
founded the United Nations, in which the world hasplaced
so much hope for aiding the solidarity and progressof all
peoples.And now in this Council we seecollaboration in
the maintenanceof peaceamongthesesamefive Powers,to
whom their weapons,their economies,their policies and
their influencehave attributed world-wide responsibility.
60. It was perhaps because1 was taken up with my
habitual passionfor the future destiny of our institutionlike Teilhard de Chardin for the destiny of the human
race-that last May. while I was Presidentof the Security
Council, I describedthe monumentaltask of the permanent
membersof the Security Council in the following terms:
“It is the giantswho, in the last analysis,bear the full
brunt of the destiny of mankind and the primacy of
peace. , , . the United States,the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, France, the People’sRepublic of China and
the United Kingdom . . , by dint of the nuclear weapons
at their disposalas also their overwhelmingmight in all
political, economicand military fields . . . are best able to
ensurethe salvationof mankind if they aredeterminedto
make of this Council a powerful instrument for peace.”
[See 1567th meeting,pams.110 and III.]
.
“Invested with unlimited powers, when in harmony
they could act as dependableand supremeguarantorsof
peace and the authority of the United Nations.” [Ibid.,
para. 112,J
61. The present situation inauguratesan era of diterrr’e
becauseideologicalconflicts no longer raiseany obstacles
to harmony amongthe five giantsand the invisiblegapleft
by the absenceof China has now been filled. We are
therefore entitled to hope now that efforts towards unity
will continue to grow and.will take tangible shapein the
form of actionsso that little by little it may be possibleto
solve the crucial problem of peaceand security. We finally
see what weight could and should be attributed to this
Council, on condition that it makesfull useof its rights and
powers, We can also see now how lofty the ideals and

principles of the Charter of our Organization are, and how
strong the motives are for safeguarding them.

of the Council in seeking lasting and just solutions to
problemsconcerninginternational peaceandsecurity.

62. The PRESIDENT (ir~leprelation from French): I
thank the representative of Burundi. I am most grateful to
him for the kind and eloquent words he has addressed both
to my country and to me. I was especially grateful for the
reference he made to the friendly relations which I have
had both the honour and pleasure of establishing with
numerous representatives of Africa.

69. Together we are called upon to pursuesustainedand
concerted efforts to prevent any crisis situation from
degenerating into open conflict and to maintain peace
throughout
every region of the world. In our work we are
guided by the spirit of the United Nations Charter which
has enunciated the basic principles which are to govern
relations between States. The political, cultural and economic dynamismof which the Chinesepeoplehave given
proof, particularly during the last two decades, will
certainly be transferred to the United Nations and will, I
hope, be reflected in a creative originality in the work of
the Security Councilwhich isthe primary organchargedby
the Charter with the maintenanceof international peace
and security.

63. Mr. LONCERSTAEY (Belgium) (intcprefafim
from
French): Allow me first, Mr. President, to pay a tribute of
gratitude to Mr. Sevilla Sacasa, who conducted our debates
with so much tact, diplomacy and authority during the
month of October. We benefited from his judicious counsel
during the consultations which he successfully carried out.
As a member of the Special Mission which went to Senegal
last summer, we were particularly able to appreciate his
qualities of impartiality.

70. Once again, Mr. President, allow me to extend a
welcome to the delegationof Chinato the Council.

64. Mr. President, may I avail myself of this opportunity
to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of
the Council for this month. Mr. Ku/alp is known to US !
because of his lengthy diplomatic experience and his solid
training. We are certain that all of this will guaranfee the
Council success under his prcsidcncy.

7.1. I should like to associatemyself with my colleagues
who have earlier expressed their sympathy with our
Secretary-General.My delegationhopesthat, soon,his state
of health will improve enoughto permit him to join us in
our work again in the Security Council, as he has in the
past.

65. My delegation is happy to associate itself with you,
Mr. J’rcsident, and with speakers who have preceded me in
addressing in turn our warmest congratulations to the
delegation of the People’s Republic of China in the Security
Council. WC hope to work in close co-operation with our
colleagues from China and I can assure them that they will
always be able to count on the co-operation of the
delegation from Belgium,

72. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): r
thank the representativeof Belgium for the kind words
which he hasaddressed
to me.

66. Belgium welcomes with great satisfaction the fact that
the People’s Republic of China occupies its seat in the
Security Council of the United Nations. The great people of
China, which through the centuries has transmitted to the
entire world the brilliance of a particularly glorious cultural
heritage, will bring to mankind, as its President, Mao
Tse-tung has promised, a much greater.contribution than
before. We have also noted that in the spirit of Mao
Tse-tung this conception meansacceptanceof “the challenge that military supremacycannot decide the fate of
man” and that LLmanand man’sideasare infinitely more
important than the atom bomb”.
67. The great changeswhich have occurred in human
society sincethe end of the SecondWorld War have opened
up new horizons. These transformations, which daily
acquire ever vaster dimensions,by keeping in pace with
technical progress,require new adaptations and a new
fernlent. We have noted with particular interest the
awakeningand reawakeningof the masses
in Asia to their
historic role and their international responsibility. In this
context the powerof China, its people,its vision of history,
constitute a paramountfactor in mouldingthe future.
68. We are convinced that in the Security Council the
representativesof the People’sRepublicof Chinawill work
constructively and in co-operationwith the other me;&--(:

73. Mr. JOULJATI (Syrian Arab Rcpublic)lirztaprefatior?
from French): Mr. President,allow me to congratulateyou,
on behalf of the delegationof the Syrian Arab Republic, on
your accessionto the Presidencyof the Security Council, a
post which will makegood useof your talentsasa diplomat
and your lofty conception of the principles of justice and
equity, not to mention the human warmth of your
personality. We feel certain that the task which you will
accomplishwill be an effective contribution to the work of
the Council for the maintenanceof international peaceand
security.
74. It is also an honour and a pleasure for us to
congratulate Mr. SeviBaSacasaof Nicaragua,who, during
the month of October, assumedthe heavy burden of the
Presidency of the Council. Becauseof his vast diplomatic
experience he wasable successfullyto guideour debatesin
the Council. The report of the SpecialMissionwhich this
year visited Senegalunder his chairmanship3will remain a
vibrant tribute to his qualities.
75. At the sametime, this meeting of the Council is
marked by the presenceamong us for the fust time of
representativesof the People’s Republic of China, who,
after more than two decades,have taken the placewhich
always should have been theirs. The importance of this
event has no limits. Indeed, the majority of the Member
States of our Organization have finally brought about the
triumph of legality andright in a matter asimportant asthe
3 Officio1 Records of the Security
Spwial Suppletnettt
No. 3.

7

Council,

Twenty-sixth

Yeczr,

L~I~VersalilY Of the United Nations. Thjs augurs well for a
future in which other jnjustices towards peoples, towards
States, will disappear one after another. At a time when the
pOhCY of aggression, of occupation and of fait accompli
creates ruin and claims count&
victims, this triumph of
justice marks an evolution which has come in the to
reawaken the hopes for a rebirth of the primacy of right
over force. At the same time, the balance of the Security
Council, which was expected to be the corner-stone of this
Organization, has now been reestablished. But the greater
significance of this event is that the People’s Republic of
China will be able IO make its voice heard, the voice of
justice, of peace, of liberation from the colonial yoke and
from foreign occupation, and will be able to associate itself
effectively with the defenders of the true cause of the
United Nations and the principles of the Charter.
76. We are certain that the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China will make an effective and constructive
contribution to our debates and will again bring the Council
to the position which it should rightfully occupy as the
supreme organ of the United Nations. We welcome the
arrival of the People’s Republic of China as a crucial turning
point in the life of the Security Council, a turnmg point jn
the restoration of international justice. This in itself is
sufficient to express the significance of this renewal and the
possibility of having a rejuvenated, dynamic Security
Council which will fulfil its mission with more courage,
nlure firmness and greater faithfulness to the hopes of the
masses of people who wish truly to see in it the apostle of a
better w;lrld.
77. biure concluding. I wish to say Ilow much we regret
the abscncc, because of an indisposition, of the SecretaryGeneral, who has worked so hard for the restoration of the
lawful rights of the People’s Republic of China. We address
to him the most sincere wishes .for the recovery of his
health.
78. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frenclz): I
thank the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for
the kind words he said abour me.

welcome in our midst today for the first time the authentic
representatives of the People’s Republic of China. As a
sponsor of the 23.Power draft resolution that was adopted
by an overwhelming majority at the historic 1976th
meeting of the General Assembly on 25 October, my
dcIcgation adduced cogent reasons why the representatives
of the great country of China, with a population comprising
one quarter of the human race, should be invited to take its
rightful place in this world body.
82. For over 20 years the People’s Republic of China
struggled hard, in the face of several obstacles, to regain its
lawful rights to sit side by side with us in the United
Nations. These rights, we all know, were unlawfully taken
away from this great nation by forces not only beyond
China’s controf but also beyond the control of the United
Nations. It is worthy of note, however, that there has been
a change of heart on the part of those Powers that have for
all these years been the contributory factors in suppressing
the legal rights of the People’s Republic of China and
completely denying it the opportunity of exercising such
rights in the United Nations,
83. We cannot lose sight of the fact that the greatness and
vast experience of the People’s Republic of China, its
culture and rich civilization and its political wisdom, which
has transcended thousands of years, will help create the
balance that has always been needed to make the work of
the United Nations an all-round success, now that it will
play the role of one of the permanent members of the
Security Council.
84. We listened the other day with rapt attention to the
policy statement delivered by Mr. Chiao Kuan-hua, the
leader of the Chinese delegation, and we are satisfied with a
number of declarations he made. His Government’s powerful stand on questions of colonialism, disarmament, peaceful coexistence and international security leaves absolutely
no doubt in our minds of the true intentions of his country
and its leaders, whose presence will, we hope, encourage
forthrightness within these hags and put a much desired
end to prevarication and double-talk.
85. On behalf of the President, the Government and the
people of the RepubIic of Sierra Leone, I welcome the
distinguished representatives of the People’s Republic of
China seated among us in the Council today and look
forward to closer relations-official
and otherwise-with
them during the remainder of our term in this Council and
afterwards.

79. Mr. TAYLOR-KAMARA
(Sierra Leone): Mr. President, it gives my delegation much pleasure to have you
conduct the affairs of this Council in the capacity of
President for the current month. We are well aware of your
great skill and qualifications for the post and have
witnessed your ability in the course of the frequent
consultations you have held during your tenure of office.
We have no doubt that under your wise leadership our work
will progress with the utmost speed and sagacity.

86. Last but not least, may I be permitted to send to the
Secretary-General, through you, Mr. President, the special
greetings of my delegation, wishing him a speedy recovery
and a quick return to us to join in carrying out the duties of
the United Nations, to which he has been so dedicated.

80. To your predecessor, Ambassador Sevilla Sacasa of
Nicaragua, I extend my delegation’s warm appreciation of
the enormous tasks which he and his delegation grappled
with and of the significant results achieved. Notwithstanding the fact that the twenty-sixth
session of the
General Assembly has fully engaged our attention, both
you and your predecessor have found time to deal with the
issues that face the Council. We thank you for your efforts.

87. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of Sierra Leone for the very kind
words he was good enough to address to me.
88. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from French): France has already hailed in the Genera1
Assembly, with the solemnity that was appropriate to the

81. My delegation cannot allow this occasion to slip by
without taking advantage of the opportunity it provides to
8

occasion, the People’s Republic of China and the restordtion
of its fights in this Organization. You, Sir, as
President of the Security Council and as a worthy sticcessor
to Mr. Sevilla Sacasa, expressed at the beginning of this
meeting our common feelings. We are grateful to you for
this.
89. A1I the speakers that have preceded me, each in turn
with his talent, his temperament, his ideology and even his’
terminology, have said all there was to be said, For our part
we shall limit ourselves to observing that the presence of
the People’s Republic of China will bring to our Organiz&ion more realism, more balance and, we hope, more
effectiveness. While this arrival was desirable and desired in
all the United Nations organs, it was even more essential in
the Security Council, which is primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We are
therefore happy to have among us-and, indeed, next to
us-as eminent a diplomat as Mr. Huang Hua in the
permanent seat of China. In bidding him a most friendly
welcome, we assure him of our will to co-operate with him.
We are convinced of the importance and the quality of the
contribution which he will make to the work of the
Council,
90. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated f?orn Chinese):
Allow me, Mr. President and fellow representatives, to
express our thanks for the words of welcome that you have
extended to the Chinese representative. It is a pleasure for
us to take part, together with the other members of the
Security Council, in the work of this Council.
91. After the Second World War, very profound changes
took place in the world situation. Countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want
revolution. This has become the main trend of the present
international situation, propelling the advance of history
and social progress. However, the colonialists and neocolonialists, and particularly one or two super-Powers, have
not ceased their activities in practising power politics and in
carrying out aggression, interference, subversion and control against other countries and people.
92. The struggle of aggression versus anti-aggression, interference versus anti-interference, subversion versus antisubversion and control versus anti-control is becoming ever
more acute. Since the end of the Second World War,
although a new world war has not broken out, local wars
have not ceased and tensions have occurred one after
another. There is no peace on earth. The danger of a new
world war still exists. The people of the whole world must
be vigilant.
93. The Chinese people have suffered over a long period of‘
time from imperialist aggression and oppression; they have
persistently opposed the imperialist policies of aggression
and war and supported oppressed peoples and nations in
their just struggles to win freedom and liberation, to oppose
foreign interference and to become masters of their own
destiny. The Chinese people have always received the
sympathy and support of the people of various countries in
our struggle for independence and liberation over the past
century and more and in the cause of our socialist
revolution and socialist construction.

94. We regard it as our bounden duty to give support to
‘the just struggles of the people of all countries. According
to the purposes of the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council should play its due role in maintaining international peace and opposing aggression and interference. It is
our hope that the spirit of the United Nations Charter will
be followed out. To this end we will stand together with all
the countries and peoples that love peace and uphold
justice, to work for the defence of national independence
and State sovereignty bf various countries and for the
safeguarding of international peace and the promotion of
human progress.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
9.5. The PRESTDENT (inTelprctation from French): Ekfore we proceed to the adoption of the agenda, it is a great
pleasure for me to express the profound gratitude of the
Council to Mr. Sevilla Sacasa who was President of the
Security Council during the month of October. His tact,
experience and diplomatic skill which we all recognize in
him enabled him with brilliance and success to guide the
work of the Council during the month of October. To this
he added the living breath of a far-seeing and generous spirit
that aimed at conciliation and co-operation. We are most
grateful to him.
96. I am also certain that you will authorize me and the
Under-Secretary.Gcneral to transmit to U Thant, the Secretary-General of our Organization, the wishes extended to
him during this meeting, and 1 wish to add my own good
wishes to them.
97. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) {ir?tcrprefatior?
from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to express to you
my most sincere gratitude for your words of undeserved
praise addressed to me and for your generous references to
my action as President of the Security Council during the
month of October last. These expressions honour me and
they please me deeply, my dear friend, Mr. Kuraga, not
only because they come to me from the President .of the
Council but also because you, Mr. Ku)‘aga, have addressed
those generous words to me. AlI of your colleagues on the
Council feel the greatest respect and esteem for you, and
also for the noble country which you so worthiiy represent
among us. As I just said, knowing your abilities, your
human qualities, your tact, your great experience and your
civic virtues, we feel sure that your presidency will be a
complete success, to your satisfaction and to the satisfaction of your country, which numbers you among its most
illustrious sons. You know, Mr. Kulaga, that we, your
colleagues and friends, will share with satisfaction in the
success that I predict for you.
98. I wish to express my most sincere thanks to the
esteemed Ambassadors of Sierra Leone, Burundi, Argentina
and France and to the President for what they have said
about me. Their words encourage me in my career devoted
to serving the interests of peace and in my ability to justify
the friendship so generously offered by all of you-my
friends whom I so greatly esteem and respect.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda NUSadopted.

9

.

Complaint

by Senegal

,-I,.,

. . . . ..-.

.,._

.__.___

.

.

company of honoured and distinguishedambassadors
1
greatly esteem---ambassadors
such as Mr, Kulaga and the
rcprescntativcsof Burundi, Relgium,Syria andJapan.

Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council

establishedunder resolution294 (1971) (s/103084)
99. The PRESIDENT (itttcrpretation from nench): you
will recall that during the first meetingsdevoted to the
consideration Of the present item on the agenda, the
Security Council had decided to invite the representatives
of Senegal,Guinea, Mali, Sudan, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Togo and Zambiato participatewithout right to vote k the
debateof the Council on the questionbefore it.
100. In view of the limi!ed numberof seatsat the Cal~ncjJ
table and in conformity with the usual practice, I would
invite the reprcscntativcsof countries non-members
of the
Security Council wishing to participate in this debate to
take their placesin the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be asked to take a seat at the
Council tablewhen their turn to speakcomes,
At the invitation of the President,Mr. M. Fall (Serqa[)
took a piace at the Council tab/e and Mr. E.-H, A. Touri
(Guinea). Mr. S. Traore (Mali), Mr, M. El Hassen(hfauriianti), Mr. R. Rarnphal (Muuritius) and Mr. A. M. A.
hxan (SU&IJ) look lhc p/aces reserved/or them in the
Council chamber.
101. The PRESIDENT (intcrprctation from French): It
uill be rccallcd that, following a complaint by Senegalto
the Security Council. the Council last July decided in
res~)lutir)n794 (1971) to dispatch a Special Mission to
Senegal. That Mission. consisting of six mcmbcrs, was
presidedover by Mr. &villa Sacusa.The SpecialMissionhas
submitted its report,4 which was formally introduced to
the Council by Mr. ScvillaSacasaal the 1586th meeting.
The Council today continues its deliberations on the
matter.
103. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua)(interpretation
fiotrl Spanish): As I saidat the 1586th meeting,held on 29
Septemberlast, the report+o which the Presidenthasjust
referred contains several parts. These are: introduction,
tasks of the Special Mission, conclusions and recommendations.In addition there are annexeswhich contain
reports of the military experts of the membersof the
Special Mission and documentssubmitted to the Special
Mission by the Government of Senegal.The recommendations are basedon what we heard,what we observedand
what we inferred; and furthermore they are based on
Security Council resolutions.
103. The SpecialMissionof which I had the honour to be
Chairman has submitted its report to this Council for
consideration in the knowledge that we, the members,
dischargedthe missionmtmsted to us in a Constructive
spirit, inspiredby the interestsof peace,the preservationof
which constitutesthe invincible goal of our OJganization,
governed as it is by sacredprinciples which we must
safeguard,
104. It was a signalhonour for me to be Chairman of so
important a mission, and I dischargedmy duties in the
.--.-

4md.
10

105, As I said yesterday, this Missionmay be regardedas
one of the most important ever to be designated
by the
Council becauseit was the first to which this high body
gave authority to makeany recommendations
necessary
to
guaranteepeaceand security in the region,
106. We express our gratitude to the Government of
Senegal for its hospitality, its many courtesiesand the
facilities of every kind it gaveus for the performance
of our
delicate mission.
107. As I also said yesterday, the Mission strongly
deplored the fact that it received no invitation from the
Government of Portugal to visit Guinea(Bissau)for the
purpose of carrying out in that sector activitiesrelated to
its task.
108. Having now submitted our report to the Security
Council, and since its membersare all familiarwith that
document, the membersof the Missionareanxiousto have
a draft resolution which, inspiredby the recommendations
contained in the report-which are very clearcut, categorical and consistent-will further our work. The members
of the Special Missionare alsovery willing to reply to any
question that may be put to us in regardto the work we
performed recently. As Chairman of the Mission, I in
particular offer the Council my servicesto explainideasand
aspectsthat may flow from any part of’ the report.

109. J thank you for allowingme to speakand for giving
me an opportunity to expressonce againthe satisfaction
felt by six colleagues,distinguishedambassadors
all, at
having assumeda great responsibilityandat havingcarried
out with honour and dignity the missionthat wasa part of
that responsibility.
110. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
give the floor to the representativeof Senegal.
111. Mr. FALL (Senegal)(interpretation from French):
On behalf of my Government I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and through you all the membersof the
Security Council, for havingbeengoodenoughto allow me
to participate in this meeting, at which the Council will
discussthe complaint my country has lodged against
Portugal.
112. Mr. President, I am doubly gratified to see you
presidingover the Security Council at the time this matter
has come before this body-first because you are a man
whoseloyalty and dedication to the causeof the United
Nations is recognizedby all and secondlybecause
no oneis
more familiar with this wholematter since YOU have studied
it in your dual capacity asmemberof the Security Council
and memberof the SpecialMission sentto thespot. I take
advantageof this opportunity to thank the Chairmanof the
mission for the kind words he just addressedto my
Government. I shall not fail to transmit them to the.
President of the Republic of Senegal.My Government has
instructed me to reiterate to all the members
of the Special

,__

Mission its gratitude for the objectivity and impartiality
with which they discharged their delicate task. Lastly, I am
gratified at the presence at this meeting of the representative of the People’s Republic of China to the Security
Council. There is no doubt that the participation of the
genuine representatives of the great Chinese people in the
Council’s debates will confer upon its decisions an entirely
new dimension.
l13. Before coming to the substance of my intervention J
would like first to make a confession. Indeed, after the
pertinent interventions that took place at the meeting of 29
September, during which the Mission introduced its report’,
my Government, believing the matter had been sumciently
considered, instructed my delegation not to intervene
further at that stage in the debate. It wished thereby to
indicate its total confidence in the Council.

Mission met the most prestigiousof them, the SecretaryGeneral of the PAIGC, Amilcar Cabral.You were therefore
able to note, Mr. President, that this man is neither a
subversiveelementnor a wild leaderof a mob, but on the
contrary, a wise and calm man, a great patriot, certainly
confident that he is right, but also very muchawareof the
duties imposed upon him by his heavy historic responsibilities. Thus for my Government this meetingwith the
representative of the PortugueseGovernment was to give
rise to a definition of the policy of the LisbonGovernment
vis&is the peaceproposalsthat had beensubmitted to it
by the Head of State of Senegal.
118. A secondreasonalso made us accept this meeting:
our complaint to the Security Council had already been
introduced on 27 April in documentS/10182. Wethought
that Portugal would probably take advantage of the
opportunity given to it to seekwith usa way out, making it
possible for it to emerge from a trap into which it is
slipping ever more deepiy. Our illusionsdid not last very
long. From the very beginningof the talks we understood
that Portugal waspurely and simply trying a new manoeuvre with a view to making us withdraw our complaint
before the Security Council.

114. Unfortunately,
various subsequent events have
obliged us to go back on that wise decision. First of all, this
involves a letter the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal
addressed to the President of the Security Council on 29
September 1971, which was circulated as document S/
10343. It is to this new element, or part of this new
element, that I shall limit the essential features of my
statement. It is indeed evident that the purpose of that
1J9. For the Portuguesedelegation the acts of violence
letter is not to place in the files any elementslikely to
which Senegalhasbeencomplainingof are provoked by the
destroythe Senegalese
thesesor to contradict the assertions troops of the national liberation movements,especjallythe
contained in the Special Mission’s report. That letter’s
PAIGC, which arc allegedlysupportedby an international
purposeis simply to createa diversion, to createdoubt by
brigade with communist allegiance,Of course, our delealleging that Scncgal has been disloyal in seizing this
gation did not accept this falsified version of the facts. On
Council of this matter after having come to a common
the contrary, throughout this meeting our delegation
agreementwith Portugal on it.
constantly stressedto the other party that the genuine
problem, the substantive problem, remains that of the
freedom of Africans, asof all peoples,to decidefreely upon
115. My Government has instructed me formally and
their fate and that the armedstruggleundertakentoday by
categoricallyto reject theseinsinuations.Of course,there
the liberation movementsappearsto everyoneas the only
has been an encounter betweenthe Ministers of Foreign
answer to the obstinacy of Portugal, which still remains
Affairs of SenegaIandPortugal,at the requestof the latter.
deaf to the appeal of the United Nations to grant
That encounter took placein May. If it did not leadto any
official communique or any other form of publicity, it is
independenceto colonial peoples.
becauseno positive decisionwasreached.My Government
120. The national liberation movementshave resorted to
neverthelessinformed the parties concernedof it in good
violence becausethey have despairedof being able to
time, in other words, the leadersof the national liberation
movementof Guinea (Bissau).But sincethe representative persuadePortugal, which 1, more than everattachedto this
obviously ridiculous view that considersterritories in the
of the PortugueseGovernmentnow wishesto utilize this
African continent asan appendix of the Iberian Peninsula.
iile, we shallhelp him to do soby remindinghim of certain
factswhich he failed to mentionin his letter.
To the Portugueseproposalto establisha joint commission
containing a representative of each of the two parties,
116. As I have already pointed out, this encountertook
under the chairmanshipof a personality of a neutral
placeat the requestof the PortugueseGovernment.Senegal country, our delegationin the course of that encounter
answered that Senegalwas not in a state of war with
acceptedit for two reasons.
Portugal and that if the latter truly wishedto enter into
117. The first is that the President of the Republic of
discussionsit must do so with those againstwhom it is
Senegalhad already proposeda peaceplan soasto put an
fighting, in other words,the nationalliberation movements.
Thus, my Governmenthcsneveracceptedthe establishment
endto a situation which hasbeentearingapartthat part of
of a joint commission,contrary to the statementsmade in
the African continent for morethan 10 years.The terms of
the letter from the Minister for ForeignAffairs of Portugal,
that peaceplan are well known to you, Mr. President.The
Presidentof the Republic of SenegaIbrought them to the
knowledgeof the SecretarpGeneralof the United Nations.
121. These are the conditions in which the talks took
place. The Council will have noted that the letter of
Our Minister of Foreign Affairs presentedthem to the
Portugal accusesthe Government of Senegalof having
Security Council at its 1569th meeting on 12 July last.
violated the terms of an agreement,by bringingbefore the
That plan has, in addition, beenapprovedby the leadersof
the liberation movements of Guinea (Bissau).And those Security Council the matter in question,whereasthe talks
leadersare known to you, Mr. President. The Special betweenthe two Ministersfor Foreign Affairs took place in
11

May, that is to say after our complaint to the Security
Council, which dates from 27 April. This will give the
Council an idea of the credence that can be attributed to
the affirmations of the representatives of the Government
of Lisbon.
122. Other acts reflecting the hostile attitude of Portugal
vis-8.vis the Government of Senegal and its people have also
been perpetrated since the Council’s 1586th meeting of 29
September last. I might point particularly to the most
recent of them which were referred to in my letter of 1.5
November [S/l 03881. During those incidents, one soldier
of the Senegalese army was killed and another was seriously
injured. A herd of 200 cows was stolen. Moreover, on 30
October last, another incident had resulted in six wounded
when a Senegalesemilitary lorry was blown up by a mine in
the village of Djibanar. Less than a week ago two persons in
a lorry were seriously injured by the explosion of a mine
near the Guinea (B&au) border, and it was stressed that
this incident took place on the road from Kolda to
Ziguinchor-that
is to say the most heavily frequented of
the region. All these facts, coming after the inquiry
conducted by the Special Mission, prove, if proof were still
needed, the scant heed that the Portuguese authorities
accord to decisions of the Council.
123. I shall refer to the matter being dealt with in the
debate today only in order to repeat something that I
stated to a member of the Council a few days ago, one who
had described as stupid the refusal of Portugal to receive
the members of the Special Mission on the Territory of
Guinea (Bissau). I did not share his assessment of the
behaviour of the Portuguese authorities. On the contrary,
you are well aware, Mr. President, that the membership of
the Special Mission of Inquiry was such that neither of the
two parties could, a priori, raise any objection whatsoever
concerning its impartiality. The attitude of Portugal, in
these circumstances, is far from stupid, because, if an
enquiry on the Territory of Guinea (Bissau) itself would
have been quite useful to supplement the information
possessed by the members of the Mission, it is also beyond
doubt that it would have enabled the Mission to discover,
on the spot, the weapon of the crime, as policemen would
call it. And that is what the Portuguese authorities wanted
to avoid at all costs, even at the cost of an affront inflicted
upon the mandated representatives of the Council.
124. My Government has carefully studied the report of
the Special Mission. It accepts its conclusions and recom
mendations. It believes, with the authors of that report,
that it is more than ever appropriate to resolve the tragic
problem of Guinea (Bissau) of which the aggressions
perpetrated against Senegal are but one of the effects.
125. My Government recalls that the Security Council, in
its resolution 273 (1969), has already said that it ‘%rongJy
condenms the Portuguese authorities” for the same acts
that are the substance of our complaint today. The same
resolution declared that, “in the event of failure by
Portugal to comply with paragraph 2 of the present
resolution, the Security Council will meet to consider other
measures”.

consider and decide upon those “other measures”, The
Council cannot, in any event, consider such “other measures” without taking into account particularly those messures decided upon earlier in the matter, because the matter
still remains one and the same. The Council cannot consider
such “other measures” without tackling the deep-rooted
causes underlying the climate of chronic insecurity that
prevails at present in that part of the African continent.
And lastly, the Council cannot in this instance take
measures any less firm and decisive than those already
specified in its various resolutions, in particular resolution
273 (1969) and resolution 294 (1971), all of which include
express condemnations of the Portuguese Government.
127. I know that there are some who always greet
decisions emanating from the United Nations with a certain
scepticism and doubt their effectiveness and indeed their
usefulness. My Government, for its part, has always
retained its confidence in our Organization. That is why,
with renewed expression of its full gratitude to the Council,
it awaits your decision with calm confidence.
128. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn French): I
thank the representative of Senegal and wish him to know
that I am indeed moved by the very generous words hehas
addressed to me.
129. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has already
commented on the report of the Special Mission established
under Council resolution 294 (1971) and so I will be brief
in elaborating on the statement we made at the 1586tb
meeting.
130. In reiterating its support for the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Mission, my
delegation would like to emphasize the following points.
131. Permit me, first of all, to state a fact which may be
obvious but which, in the opinion of my delegation, still
needs to be stated. In the matter of Senegal’s complaint
against Portugal, the Security Council has been called upon
to do the kind of job it was established to do, namely, to
ensure peace and security ‘for a people and Territory which
have been the object of aggression, and to ensure respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State when
those attributes have been attacked. The Security Council’s
peace-keeping role has a particular significance when a
comparatively small and essentially peace-loving State is the
object of aggression. It is a reality of our times that nuclear
Powers rely on the terrible potential of their nuclear
armaments for mutual restraint, and the medium&zed
Powers among the developed countries can reIy on a wealth
of sophisticated armaments. The developing countries, for
their part, can only hope that the Charter and the role it
prescribes for the Security Council will afford them
protection from aggression.
132. Up to this point the Security Council has acted quite
correctly on Senegal’s complaint. As recommended by the
Charter, it has made use of a fact-finding mission, aa
essential measure if fair judgements are to be made aad
effective action is to be taken to deal with any situation
involving a breach of the peace.

126. Portugal indeed refuses to comply with the decisions
set forth in your resolution. You are gathered once again to
12

133. The Special Mission which this Council itself established to investigate Senegal’s complaint has ascertained
that acts of aggression have indeed been carried out against
the people and territory of Senegal. To cite the words of
the Special Mission in paragraph 127 of its report, the
Mission “found the indications such as to designate the
Portuguese authorities in Guinea (Bissau) as responsible”.
We know these were not isolated acts, and they have to be
viewed against the background of a history of complaints
by Senegal about similar acts of aggression which have in
the past been condemned by the Security Council. My
delegation feels strongly that this Council has no alternative
but to let the Portuguese authorities know that any further
act of aggression against Senegal, or against any other
African State bordering on Portuguese-held territory, will
be met by the application of coercive measures appropriate
to the situation which the Council has at its disposal. In
taking such a stand the Council must leave no room for
doubt about the firmness of its purpose in this matter,
134. Necessary as such a stand would be, it would still
only be an attempt to deal with a symptom rather than
with the root-cause of the violence endemic alorig the
borders of Portuguese-held Territories in Africa, The
Special Mission has quite rightly reduced the whole
question to its simplest elements, namely, the need for the
Security Council to ensure peace and security for the
people of Senegal, and the need to ensure that the people
of Guinea (Bissau) and, one may add, of all the Portugueseheld Territories in Africa, are given the opportunity to
exercise freely their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence.

138. The whole recordof Portugal’sadministrationof that
Territory over the past two decadesis replete with details
of barbaric acts and grim statisticsportraying the ruthless
and repressivepolicies that are being imposed upon the
valiant peopleof Guinea(Bissau).Last week the Chairman
of the Fourth Committee brought to the attention of
memberdelegationsthe text of a cable dated 9 November
that had been addressedto the Secretary-Generalof the
United Nationsby Amilcar Cabral,Secretary-Generalof the
PAIGC-the liberation movement of Guinea (Bissau). It
would not be out of place to draw the attention of the
Council to that communication,particularly sinceit gives
an idea of the extent of the latest outragesthat are being
inflicted on the people of Guinea (Bissau).It reads as
follows:
“Rendered desperateby the great victories our party
has won this year the Portuguesecolonialist criminals
have, since August, been carrying out savage aerial
bombardmentsof the peacefulpopulationsof the regions
we have liberated. By the end of October they had
destroyed38 villages,killed 7 womenand8 children, and
wounded28 persons.
“Have the honour to inform you that, having failed to
terrorize or demoralizeour peoplein their determination
to continue their just struggle for freedom, peace and
progress,the Portuguesecolonialistsare feverislzly preparing to disseminate
poisonouschemicalproducts so as
to destroy our crops before the next harvest, with the
obviousaim of stoppingour struggleby famine. In view
of the sombreprospectscreatedby thesepreparationswe
requestyou to take all measureswithin your power to
denounceand condemnin advancethis monstrouscrime
againstAfrica andmankind.”

135. It is, of course, the denial of their inalienable rights
to the people of Guinea (Bissau) that is the underlying
cause of the tension in the region we are concerned with
today. This point is brought out forcibly in paragraph 127
of the report, where it is stated that the “acts of violence
and destruction appear to be the consequence of the special
situation prevailing in Guinea (Bissau), which. . . is in
contradiction
to the Declaration on the’ Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”.

139. The Council should pay particular attention to
paragraph45 of the report of the SpecialMission,in which
the Presidentof Senegalis on record asdeclaringthat there
wasno fundamentaldispute betweenSenegalandPortugal,
but rather betweenPortugal and the nationalistsof Guinea
(Bissau).Senegalis preparedto engagein a dialoguewith
Portugal,not to settlethe questionof Guinea(Bissau),but
to help bring about a dialoguebetween the Portuguese
Governmentand the nationalists.That is how problemsof
this nature shouldbe approachedand settled; the alternative is war, and it is war which is beingwagedin Guinea
(Bissau).

136. The report of the Special Mission would, of course,
have provided the Council with a much deeper insight of
conditions
prevailing in the region had the Portuguese
Government
permitted the Special Mission to visit the
Territory
of Guinea (Bissau) so that some of the charges
rnade against that Government could have been investigated
on the spot. Unfortunately, and true to the defiant attitude
which the Portuguese Government has displayed towards
the United Nations on questionsconcerning thoseAfrican
Territories controlled by Portugal, the responsewasnegative. That fact is dealt with in paragraph122 of the report,
which states: “The Special Mission strongly deploresthis
lack of co-operation which prevented it from implementing
fully the mandate given to it under paragraph4 of
resolution 294 (197 l).”

140. To sum up, the Security Councilmust now do two
things: it must validate the trust that a small nation has
placed in its authority in appealing for redress and
protection againstaggression;and it must throw the ful1
weight of its moral, political and, if necessary,coercive
authority behind every effort that the United Nations asa
whole is making to bring about the application of General
Assemblyresolution 1514 (XV) to the Territory of Guinea
(Bissau)and to the other Portuguese-held
Territories in
Africa.

137. My delegation is sure that membersof this Council
will draw their own conclusions at the refusal to allow a
fact-finding missionof the Security Council to enter Guinea
(B&au).

141. Thoseare the coursesof action which are indicated
by the recommendationsof the SpecialMissionand those
are the coursesof action which my delegation would
support.

13

142. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
now calI on the representative of Burundi, who wishes to
introduce the draft resolution sponsored by Burundi, Sierra
Leone and Somalia, contained in document S/10395.

150. On the other hand it will be realized that thecauses
of these periodic and endemic attacks directed againstthe
Government and people of Senegal are to be ascribed to the
fact that Portugal is persistently clinging to its colonial
territory and, as long as this situation exists, there can be
no peace in the region.

143. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, as you have quite rightly said, it is
on behalf of the African delegations on the Council-Sierra
Leone, Somalia and my own delegation-that I now take
the floor to submit to the Council the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 10395.

151. Again, we recognize that, in a desire to co-operate,
and since the Security Council assumes collective responsi.
bility, we were compelled to sugarcoat and even to weaken
the draft resolution so as to make it acceptable to all
members. Therefore I wish to say that it is in a spirit of
co-operation and concession that we have drafted this and
we hope that in return a spirit of unanimity will prevailin
the Security Council. We rely, therefore, on the unanimous
support of members of the Security Council in the voting
on this draft resolution, which, after the consultations
which were undertaken, required certain changes that have
sweetened it somewhat. However, taking into account the
realities in the Council, we were compelled to co-operate
and consent to certain proposals which did not correspond
exactly to the gravity of the situation as described in the
report of the Special Mission.

144. As the Council will recall, a report was introduced
some weeks ago; and the draft resolution which I now
submit is in fact fundamentally based on the main elements
of this report, Accordingly, my delegation will limit itself
to introducing the draft resolution and making a few
comments. On a later occasion we shall speak to the
substance of the problem which Senegal has placed before us.
145. This draft resolution has been discussedin the course
of meetings held by the six members of the Special Mission
which was sent to Senegal. I should like to place special
emphasis on certain parts of the draft resolution.

152. In the event that any member of the Council hasa
question on the subject, my delegation, as well as the
delegations of Somalia and Sierra Leone, will be readyto
reply.

146 First of all, as I have said earlier, it is based
essentially on the report of the Special Mission; and I wish
to emphasize that the report was unanimously adopted by
the representative of Nicaragua-who was Chairman ,of the
Mission-and the representatives of Belgium, Japan, Poland,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Burundi.

153. Mr. TAYLOR-KAMARA (Sierra Leone): As one of
the sponsors of the draft resolution, my delegation associates itself with the draft and, for that matter, with the
able manner in which the representative of Burundi,
Mr. Terence, has this day presented it to the Security
Council.

147. Representatives will note that its operative paragraph 2 is in accord with the contents of paragraph 127 of
the report. I refer to that paragraph because every
Government is naturally motivated by certain contingencies 154. My delegation spoke at length on the subject under
which are peculiar to it and which, accordingly, in cases consideration when the report of the six-man Mission to
such as this may cause some apprehension and even some Senegal, was submitted a while ago [1586th meeting]. WC
fears.
pointed out in no uncertain terms that the findings of the
Mission and its military experts left absolutely no doubt in
148. Operative paragraph 3 corresponds to paragraph 122 our mind that a number of attacks against the territorial
of the report. Here the draft deplores the lack of
integrity of the Republic of Senegal had been committed
co-operation by the Portuguese Government. We even by Portuguese armed forces stationed in the neighbouring
received a letter from the Government of Portugal refusing occupied enclave of Guinea (Bissau). We are convinced
to co-operate with the Special Mission of the Security beyond any doubt whatever that the mines which caused
Council. YOU will thereby note the reasonswhich probably
death to individuals and destruction to property in Seneled the Government of Lisbon to refuse its co-operation,
galese villages and roads were planted by Portuguese troops.
because had there been no guilt there would have been no
This conviction is reinforced by our awareness-and, I am
reason to refuse to co-operate. Hence Portugal’s attitude
sure, that of the Council-of Portugal’s behaviour to
towards the Security Council’s Special Mission is already a countries bordering its African colonies. The Council has
sign of its guilt,
from time to time been seized with similar complaints of
aggression from Zambia, the Republic of Guinea, Congo
149. Paragraphs 4 to 8 of our draft resolution-I wish to
(Kinshasa)-now called Zaire-and Tanzania. The records
emphasize-are the recommendations of the Mission asthey
can attest to this.
appeared in paragraph 128 of the report. You will notice
that operative paragraph 4 corresponds to section A of
1.55. We would have very much liked to have had a
paragraph 128 of the report, whereas operative paragraphs stronger draft resolution presented for adoption by the
5 and 6 are a reflection of the text of section B. Paragraphs Council but, taking into account the political equations
5 and 6 obviously reproduce what is a necessity for the
derived from its composition, my delegation cannot help
Security Council and the United Nations-to recognize for
but settle for the present draft.
all peoples in general and for the people of Guinea (Bissau)
in particular-the right to accede to independence.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.
14
Litho

in United’Nafibn;,

N&York

Price: $U.S.

1 .OO (or equivalent

in other

currencies)
