S/2018/947

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 October 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fifty-sixth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017) and
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), in which the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for September 2018.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: September 2018
1.
A significant intensification of military activity, including air strikes and
artillery shelling, took place in parts of Idlib and surrounding areas during the first
half of September. Civilians were reportedly killed and injured in areas controlled by
non-State armed opposition groups and in areas controlled by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Several hospitals and schools were hit by air strikes during this
period.
2.
On 17 September, the Presidents of Turkey and the Russian Federation
announced plans to establish a demilitarized zone in the so -called Idlib de-escalation
area. The agreement stipulated that heavy weapons and “radical terrorist groups”
would be withdrawn from the zone by 10 and 15 October, respectively. The
announcement was followed by a marked reduction in military activity in the area,
and the suspension of air strikes. Civilians across Idlib and surrounding areas

18-17575 (E)

261018

*1817575*

S/2018/947

continued to face a range of protection threats, and massive humanitarian needs
persisted.
3.
The reporting period saw further deterioration of the humanitarian situation of
some 45,000 people estimated to be in the Rukban camp, on the Syrian -Jordanian
border. Sources inside the camp reported that three people, including two children,
died during this period for lack of access to medical care. Reports were also received
of a significant reduction in the availability of food and water in the camp. Because
the provision of basic humanitarian assistance in the camp is increasingly urgent,
efforts to deploy an inter-agency humanitarian convoy to the area continued.
4.
In eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, military operations against Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the Hajin enclave continued to severely affect
civilians. The number of people estimated to have been displaced in the wider area
since June reached 27,000. Humanitarian access to many of the makeshift sites
hosting newly displaced people remained challenging because of in security, but
efforts to scale up humanitarian assistance continued. An estimated 15,000 people,
the majority civilians, remained in ISIL-controlled areas, exposed to ongoing
hostilities.
5.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners continued to reach
millions of people in need. From inside the country, the United Nations reached more
than 3.05 million people with food assistance. No inter-agency humanitarian convoys
were deployed in September and the bimonthly inter-agency convoy plan for
September and October was not approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic. However, United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to
reach people across the country through regular programming, including in several
locations under Government control categorized as hard to reach. Cross -border
assistance also remained an indispensable part of the response, and food assistance
was delivered to more than 620,000 people from Turkey during September.

3.
Since 24 February 2018, when the Security Council adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a cessation of hostilities, military conflict has continued in many
parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. During the month of September, there was a
reduced level of hostilities in a number of areas, but air strikes, artillery shelling or
ground fighting were reported in the Governorates of Aleppo, Idlib, Hama and Dayr
al-Zawr.
4.
During the first half of September, there was a significant intensification of
military operations in the Idlib de-escalation area. From 4 to 12 September, air strikes
and ground-based attacks reportedly killed and injured civilians in areas controlled
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and in areas controlled by non-State
armed opposition groups. Three health facilities, one of which had been deconflicted
through agreed procedures, were allegedly hit by air strikes during this period. Three
schools were reportedly damaged by air strikes or shelling, resulting in the suspension
of educational activities in several locations across Idlib and Hama Governorates.
Reports were received that between 17,350 and 27,500 people had been newly
displaced in the Idlib de-escalation area.
5.
On 17 September, the Russian Federation and Turkey agreed to establish a
demilitarized zone inside the Idlib de-escalation area. The agreement stipulated that
the demilitarized zone would be situated up to 20 km inside the Idlib de -escalation
area, and that heavy weapons and “radical terrorist groups” would be withdrawn from
the zone by 10 and 15 October, respectively.

2/15

18-17575

S/2018/947

6.
After the announcement of the agreement, military activities dramatically
decreased in the Idlib de-escalation area, and a cessation of air strikes was also
observed. However, reports continued to be received of kidnappings, improvised
explosive device attacks and other threats to civilians. The United Nations and its
humanitarian partners continued to pre-position aid in preparation for the possible
resumption of large-scale hostilities in the Idlib area and related mass displacement.
7.
The reporting period saw further deterioration of the humanitarian situation of
some 45,000 people estimated to be in the Rukban camp, on the Syrian -Jordanian
border. Sources inside the camp reported that three people, including two children,
died during this period because of lack of access to medical care. Reports were also
received of a significant reduction in the availability of food and water in the camp,
understood to be linked, in part, to military operations affecting road access to the
area. In view of the fact that the last significant delivery of United Nations aid to
Rukban was made in January 2018, discussions with the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and other interlocutors on an inter-agency humanitarian convoy to the
area continued.
8.
In eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, military operations against ISIL in the
Hajin enclave continued to affect civilians, the total number of people es timated to
have been displaced in the wider area since June 2018 reaching 27,000. Humanitarian
access to many of the makeshift camps hosting the displaced people remained
challenging, but efforts to scale up assistance, including food and hygiene items,
continued during the reporting period. It was estimated that 15,000 people, including
a majority of civilians and ISIL fighters, remained in ISIL -controlled areas, and scores
of civilians were reportedly killed and injured as a result of air strikes or havin g been
caught up in ground fighting. Significant restrictions on civilians ’ freedom of
movement in the area remained in place, and movement was also impeded by the
intensity of the fighting in some areas.
9.
In eastern Ghutah, levels of humanitarian need remained high, while the United
Nations continued to face significant access constraints, hindering its efforts to scale
up assistance in the area. The United Nations continued to provide food assistance,
household items, trucked water and hygiene supplies and other aid through the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent and other local humanitarian partners. Significant gaps were
reported in relation to health services, as there were only two hospitals operational in
the area, limited numbers of doctors, and insufficient coverage through mobile clinics.
Restrictions around commercial activities were reported to have resulted in high
prices for some key commodities. The public transportation system was reported to
have been reactivated.
10. In the south-west of the country, internally displaced people returning to Dar‘a
city reported high levels of destruction, in particular in areas previously held by
non-State armed opposition groups. Extensive damage was also reported in western
rural Dar‘a Governorate, where returnees’ efforts to begin rehabilitating were further
complicated by high prices for building materials. Access for United Nations
personnel to the south-west remained very limited. Assistance continued to be
provided through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, technica l line ministries and local
humanitarian partners.
11. Some 152,000 civilians have returned to Raqqah city since the end of hostilities
in October 2017 despite high levels of explosive hazard contamination. Humanitarian
assistance in the city has continued to be scaled up, through international and Syrian
non-governmental organizations.
12. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria met on several occasions
with the Astana guarantors (the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and
Turkey) and members of the Small Group (Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
18-17575

3/15

S/2018/947

Arabia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America); at those meetings he reiterated the United Nations responsibility
in facilitating the constitutional committee and rules of procedure, as well as other
matters of substance that are contained in resolution 2254 (2015), and the 12
principles developed in the United Nations-led Geneva process and endorsed in
Sochi. On 10 and 11 September, the Special Envoy convened the Astana guarantors
in Geneva with a view to moving the political process forward.
Protection
13. Despite a relative decrease in the intensity of violence, civilians acr oss the
Syrian Arab Republic continued to be severely affected by the direct and indirect
consequences of hostilities. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure
civilians and damage and destroy civilian infrastructure. The many civilian cas ualties
and the scale of the destruction of civilian infrastructure remained a strong indication
that violations of the fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality and precaution
and, in particular, of the prohibition on the launching of indiscrimina te attacks were
continuing.
14. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into populated areas, killing and
injuring civilians and destroying and damaging vital infrastructure. Explosive hazard
contamination in populated areas killed and injured civilians a nd impeded
humanitarian access. The use of improvised explosive devices in some areas added to
the complexity of the explosive hazard threat and continued to hinder the work of
humanitarian actors.
15. In Idlib Governorate and surrounding areas in Hama an d Aleppo Governorates,
incidents of military bombardment by Government forces and their allies over the
first half of the reporting period seriously affected civilians and their well -being, prior
to the Russian-Turkish agreement reached on 17 September to establish a
demilitarized zone in and around Idlib Governorate.
16. Infighting between various non-State armed opposition groups in areas in the
north-west of the country continued to have an impact on civilians, owing primarily
to the use of improvised explosive devices in close proximity to civilians and civilian
objects. Lawlessness and criminality that included threats, intimidation, kidnapping
and killing continued to be reported in Idlib Governorate and other areas in the north west. In areas of Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, civilian casualties were also reported as
a result of the fighting, improvised explosive devices and explosive hazards.
17. The United Nations received reports of multiple air strikes hitting health
facilities during the reporting period. On 6 September, Magharah Hospital in Kafr
Zayta subdistrict, in Hama Governorate, which is supported by a non-governmental
organization (NGO), was hit by an air strike resulting in major structural and
equipment damage. Initial reports showed no casualties. The hospital was reportedly
rendered out of service by the attack. Each month, it had been providing an average
of 780 consultations, 50 admissions, 15 major surgeries and treatment of 200 trauma
cases.
18. On 8 September 2018, another NGO-supported specialized hospital in Kafr
Zayta was hit by an air strike which resulted in damage to the structure and medical
equipment. Three ambulances were seriously damaged. Initial reports showed no
casualties. The hospital was reportedly rendered temporarily out of service. Monthly,
the hospital had been providing an average of 1,590 consultations, 113 major
surgeries and 230 minor surgeries. The attack was the second in two days on hospitals
in Kafr Zayta.

4/15

18-17575

S/2018/947

19. On 8 September 2018, the NGO-supported Nabdh al-Hayat hospital in Has
village, in Kafr Nubl subdistrict, in Idlib Governorate, was hit by barrel bombs,
resulting in damage to infrastructure and medical equipment. Initial reports indicated
that two health staff and two civilians were injured. The hospit al was reportedly
rendered temporarily out of service. Each month, the hospital had been providing an
average of 4,000 consultations, 200 admissions, 215 major surgeries and treatment of
1,200 trauma cases. Credible reports were also received of the Latami nah Hospital in
Lataminah city, in northern Hama Governorate, being rendered out of service as a
result of heavy aerial bombardment in the vicinity of the hospital on 9 September.
20. Several verified reports were also received by the United Nations of at tacks on
schools during the reporting period. Air strikes on the Jisr al -Shughur area early in
September resulted in significant damage to several schools, leading to the
announcement of the suspension of educational activities in the area on 5 September.
On 10 September, in Ma‘arrah district, in Idlib Governorate, two adjacent schools —
Nidhal secondary school and Quds primary school — were affected by a rocket that
released several cluster bombs which fell on both schools, causing damage to
windows, doors and walls, and injuring five students. The incident occurred at around
8.30 a.m., when the students were inside their classrooms. The five injured boys were
hospitalized and both schools were closed for three days.
21. During the reporting period, civilians across the country continued to be
subjected to killings, arbitrary arrest and detention, deprivation of liberty, abduction,
torture, and inhumane, cruel and degrading treatment.
22. In areas retaken by Government forces and their allies in Rif Dimash q and
northern rural Homs Governorates, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received reports of the detention by
Government security forces of civilians who had remained in the Governorates and
supposedly reconciled with the Government following the takeover of the area in
April and May 2018 by Government forces and their allies.
23. In areas under the control of non-State armed opposition groups, OHCHR
continued to document incidents of violations of international humanitarian law as
well as human rights violations and abuses committed by those groups against
civilians. Tens of men including activists, health service providers, journalists, and
religious figures have reportedly been targeted by non-State armed opposition groups,
including Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (Levant Liberation Organization), in Idlib
Governorate. Other victims were allegedly murdered after being accused by the armed
groups of providing information to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic or
merely because they had been critical of the behaviour and actions of Hay ’at Tahrir
al-Sham. In one incident, a civilian man was publicly shot and killed by Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham in Tallmannis village in the Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man area in southern rural Idlib
Governorate on 20 September. The civilian had been taken and held by the group
early in August and had reportedly been accused of promoting reconciliation with the
Government. Tens of men have been kidnapped by non-State armed opposition groups
since August, either for ransom or reportedly because the individuals targeted had
been accused of promoting reconciliation with the Go vernment. Their whereabouts
remain unknown. ISIL continued to hold hostage civilians, including women and
children, abducted from Shubayki village and surrounding areas of Suwayda ’
Governorate on 25 July.

18-17575

5/15

S/2018/947

Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points
1.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian
assistance provided from within the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies
based in the country to regularly accessible locations in Government-controlled areas
reached more than 2.46 million people with food assistance.
2.
Although 1.5 million people remain in hard-to-reach areas, no inter-agency
convoys have been approved since 16 August, and the September–October convoy
plan was not approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period. The Syrian authorities have expressed a wish to see a change in the
focus of the inter-agency convoy plan, to allow locations that have recently come
under the control of the Government to be targeted through regular programmes. The
United Nations is currently ensuring that those locations are included in monthly
regular programme requests, while maintaining that some hard -to-reach locations
should continue to be targeted through the inter-agency convoy modality.
3.
Cross-border assistance, authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017), remained a vital part of the
humanitarian response. In September, 348 trucks (13 consignments) delivered
life-saving assistance to more than 968,000 people through cross -border deliveries.
United Nations humanitarian cross-border operations through Jordan remained
suspended in September.

24. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners reached millions of people
in need, including women and children, through all available access routes, including
(a) humanitarian operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby
humanitarian deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines; (b) cross line convoys, whereby assistance from within the country is delivered across conflict
lines; and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to those in need
from neighbouring countries (see table 2). In addition to the United Nations and its
partners, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and non-governmental
organizations continued to deliver life-saving assistance to people in need. Local
authorities in many areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also
continued to provide services where possible.
25. As at the end of September the Syrian authorities had not yet responded to the
proposed United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for September and October and
no inter-agency convoys were deployed during the reporting period. The authorities
have, however, stated a wish to see a change in the focus of the inter-agency convoy
plan, to allow locations that have recently come under the control of the Government
to be targeted through regular programmes. The United Nations is currently ensuring
that those locations are included in monthly regular programme requests, while
maintaining that some hard-to-reach locations should continue to be targeted through
the inter-agency convoy modality.
26. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries to
locations across the country. Such deliveries are undertaken by United Nations
agencies based in Damascus to regularly accessible areas. In September, all 1,898
official requests submitted by the World Food Programme to the Syrian authorities to
obtain facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to locations across the

6/15

18-17575

S/2018/947

country were approved. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) submitted 52 requests for facilitation letters for the movement of
core relief items and livelihood kits, all of which were approved. UNHCR reached
more than 2.7 million people with multisectoral support. The United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reached 528,000 children and mothers with primary
health-care and immunization services. In addition, an estimated 64,100 children and
pregnant and lactating women were provided with complementary feeding and
micronutrient supplementation. Some 13,500 children benefited from education
supplies and services, school rehabilitation and textbooks, and 6,400 children
benefited from protection and psychosocial support services. Around 275,000 people
were reached with reproductive health and gender-based violence services supported
by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and its partners. Approximately
3.05 million people received food assistance and more than 1.2 million people
benefited from water, sanitation and hygiene services and supplies.
Table 1
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, September 2018
Organization

Number of
people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

24 000

International Organization for Migration

25 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 766 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

2 000 000

United Nations Development Programme

1 038 751

United Nations Population Fund

278 745

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

195 000

World Food Programme

3 035 080

World Health Organization

1 293 000

27. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (see
figure and table 2). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the
Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its destination
and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached.
28. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as authorized under resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017). During the reporting period, the Mechanism monitored
the delivery of 13 consignments by seven United Nations agencies, consisting of
348 trucks, from three border crossings: six from Bab al-Hawa (287 trucks), six from
Bab al-Salam (58 trucks) and one from Ya‘rubiyah (3 trucks). There were no concerns
or questions about the humanitarian nature of the consignments sent. The United
Nations provided 48-hour notice to the Government regarding all shipments. Once in
the country, United Nations partners ensured that shipments arrived at the designated
warehouses. Independent third-party companies contracted by the United Nations
ensured independent verification of the assistance arriving at the warehouses and
monitored the distribution and/or service provision. The Mechanism continued to
benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
29. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 874 cross-border
consignments, with more than 22,063 trucks (15,107 through Bab al -Hawa and
18-17575

7/15

S/2018/947

2,307 through Bab al-Salam from Turkey; 4,605 through Ramtha from Jordan; and
44 through Ya‘rubiyah from Iraq). Those operations complement and support the aid
provided by international and Syrian non-governmental organizations that provide
services to millions more from neighbouring countries.
30. During the reporting period, humanitarian cross-border operations through
Jordan remained suspended. However, the World Food Programme and its
implementing partners delivered food assistance to more th an 590,000 people from
the two authorized cross-border entry points with Turkey. The World Health
Organization also conducted health and medical deliveries, providing nearly 1 million
treatments through the cross-border mechanism. In the northern part of the Syrian
Arab Republic, UNICEF delivered winter kits, child protection assistance, nutrition,
education, health and water, sanitation and hygiene supplies through a number of
cross-border shipments. Primary health-care services were provided to more than
87,700 people through mobile and fixed health services. Over 20,000 children under
the age of 5 as well as pregnant and lactating women were reached with micronutrient
supplies. More than 22,000 children under the age of 5, as well as pregnant and
lactating women, were screened for acute malnutrition; of them, 520 severely
malnourished children received appropriate treatment.
31. UNHCR and its partners continued to enhance the response to the protection
needs of internally displaced persons, returnees and other crisis-affected populations.
By the end of August, 1,958,444 individuals were reached through protection
interventions, including 793,908 individuals reached with general protection
activities, 8,654 individuals reached with child protection activiti es, and 155,882
individuals reached through awareness-raising campaigns on prevention and response
activities relating to sexual and gender-based violence in 12 governorates. As at the
end of September 2018, the total number of functioning UNHCR -funded community
centres and mobile units stands at 97 community centres, 15 satellite centres and
92 mobile units, supported by 2,370 outreach volunteers. This network provided
protection-related services, including community mobilization, child protection, legal
aid, the prevention of and response to sexual and gender-based violence, livelihood
services and services for persons with specific needs, to benefit some 2.6 million
internally displaced persons, returnees, members of host communities and other
crisis-affected people across 12 Syrian governorates. As of September, 37,451
internally displaced persons in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Suwayda ’, Dar‘a,
Qunaytirah, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Hama, Aleppo, Hasakah and Dayr al -Zawr
Governorates benefited from the UNHCR legal assistance programme, including
some 3,000 internally displaced persons from eastern Ghutah (Rif Dimashq) and
1,100 from Afrin (Aleppo Governorate). Moreover, UNFPA reached more than
275,000 people, carrying out activities relating to reproductive heal th and the
prevention of and response to gender-based violence and youth-related violence. Also
during the reporting period, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) launched the third round of food
distribution for 2018 on 30 August 2018. A total of 94,763 Palestine refugees received
food parcels through the planned round of distribution; in addition, 26,377 refugees
displaced from and/or affected by conflict in Yarmouk, eastern Ghutah and Dar ‘a
received ready-to-eat food baskets during the same period. There was no cash
distribution during the month of September 2018. Owing to the financial crisis faced
by the Agency, the number of rounds of cash distribution has decreased to three
rounds over 2018 as opposed to the six rounds planned in the UNRWA Emergency
Appeal.

8/15

18-17575

S/2018/947

Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster, September 2018
(Thousands)

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district, September 2018

Governorate

District

Aleppo

Bab

Aleppo

I‘zaz

Aleppo

Food

Health

5 000

6 000

118 515

106 620

12 264

Jarabulus

7 500

1 000

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

16 650

Hasakah

Qamishli

200 000

Hama

Salamiyah

3 100

Hama

Suqaylibiyah

Idlib

Ma‘arrahAriha

Idlib

Harim

Idlib

Education

Non-food
items/
shelter

89 900

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

9 000

13 000
65 700

88 400

30 000

49 600

279 605

284 600

16 064

122 400

12 985

Idlib

Idlib

85 985

Idlib

Jabal Sim‘an

16 600

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

3 100

Ladhiqiyah

Haffah

2 000

36 803
4 300

32. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Visas and registrations
33. A total of 96 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government in September. Of those, 48 were approved, 47 remained pending as at
30 September (some were submitted late in the reporting period) and one was
cancelled by the United Nations. Of the 22 previously submitted visa applications that
remained pending at the beginning of the reporting period, 19 were approved in
September, two remained pending and one was rejected. A total of 98 United Nations
visa renewal requests were submitted in September, of which 48 were approved and
50 remained pending as at 30 September (some were submitted late in the reporting
18-17575

9/15

S/2018/947

period). Of the 36 previously submitted visa renewal requests that remained pending
at the beginning of the reporting period, all were approved in September.
34. A total of 24 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
35. Agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, air strikes, the regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and asymmetrical
attacks. As a result of activities relating to the armed conflict, significant populated
areas became highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of
war and landmines, which pose an elevated risk to the implementation of
humanitarian activities in those areas.
36. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and organizations of the
United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of UNRWA; 66 staff
members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff members and
volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international
and national non-governmental organizations have also reportedly been killed.
37. A total of 27 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and
26 UNRWA staff members) were detained or missing as at the end of the reporting
period.

III. Observations
38. The agreement of 17 September between the Russian Federation and Turkey to
establish a demilitarized zone in the Idlib de-escalation area has averted the
immediate risk of a humanitarian catastrophe. However, the continued risk of a rapid
deterioration of the situation for the 3 million people in the area remains of very
serious concern. It is absolutely essential to avoid a full -scale battle in Idlib. As the
demilitarization goes into effect, adherence to international humanitarian law,
including protecting civilians and facilitating principled humanitarian action, will
remain critical. Should civilians wish to leave the area, parties to the conflict should
allow them to do so, if at all possible. The agreement reached has the potential to
provide a degree of reprieve to civilians. The alternative is certain to be massive
human suffering.
39. At the same time, I condemn in the strongest terms the attacks directed against
civilians and the abduction and deprivation of liberty of civilians by Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham and non-State armed opposition groups in Idlib Governorate. Such acts are
in violation of international humanitarian law.
40. Safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access vi a the most direct
routes is critical to avoid a further deterioration of the humanitarian crisis.
Inter-agency convoys remain an important means of ensuring that people in hard -toreach areas receive assistance and protection, alongside regular programming . Crossborder humanitarian assistance continues to provide an indispensable lifeline for
hundreds of thousands of people across the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations
continues to operate in the north-west of the country from across the border in Turkey
to reach those in need, to provide additional support for the oncoming winter, and to
ensure that aid is pre-positioned in the event of an increase in hostilities. Many others
are reached in the north-eastern Syrian Arab Republic from Iraq with critical life10/15

18-17575

S/2018/947

saving items not otherwise available. The humanitarian nature of cross -border
assistance continues to be verified by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism and
its deliveries are confirmed on the ground by third -party monitors. It is vital that the
modalities set out under resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions, which
allow for cross-border assistance to be provided to those in need through the most
direct routes, be renewed in order to ensure that those persons continue to have access
to the life-saving assistance they need.
41. I remind all parties to the conflict of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to respect civilians and civilian objects, including medical
personnel and facilities. The parties must also take constant care to spare them in
military operations, including by taking all feasible precautions to avoid damage to
infrastructure dedicated to education, health care and other vital services. I recall that
any use of chemical weapons is unlawful and completely unacceptable. Moreover, the
parties should ensure civilians’ freedom of movement to the maximum extent that
they are able to do so, and must continue to protect civilians whether they choose to
move or remain.
42. I also call upon all parties to the conflict, all States, civil society and the United
Nations system to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Res ponsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing information and
documentation. I reiterate that accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law is a requirement under international law and central to achieving
sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in
the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
43. In view of serious ongoing concerns repeatedly raised by OHCHR with regard
to the protection of civilians and other human rights issues in the Syrian Arab
Republic, I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in
line with Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with
OHCHR, including through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to
protect and promote human rights.
44. I remain hopeful that the agreement of 17 September between the Russian
Federation and Turkey on Idlib will open a window of opportunity for the political
process to move forward. This is a crucial moment to revive a credible and inclusive
political process for the Syrian Arab Republic, starting with the establishment of a
United Nations-facilitated constitutional committee in Geneva. The goal of the United
Nations efforts continues to be to end the suffering of the Syrian people and find a
sustainable and peaceful solution to the conflict through an inclusive and Syrian -led
political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. My Special
Envoy, with my full support, is committed to realizing this political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012.

18-17575

11/15

S/2018/947

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
September 2018 *
Rif Dimashq Governorate
• On 22 September, two women were detained by Government security forces in
Irbin city in eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq. The reasons for the abductions are
not known.
Hama Governorate
• On 7 September, nine civilians, including five women and three children, were
killed and 22 other civilians were injured as a result of what were alleged to be
ground-based strikes that hit the Government-controlled city of Muhradah in
north-western Hama.
• On 9 September, the Lataminah Hospital in the city of Lataminah in northern
Hama reportedly went out of service as a result of heavy unidentified
bombardment that struck within the vicinity of the hospital.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 1 September, an explosion with what was alleged to be a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device occurred in the vicinity of the local council
building in the city of I‘zaz in northern rural Aleppo. As a result, three civilians
were killed and 11 others were injured.
• On 5 September, an improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike
reportedly detonated in the vicinity of the Sharia school in the city of Jarabulus
in northern rural Aleppo, resulting in the injuring of at least four civilians.
• On 27 September, two civilian men were captured at one of the checkpoints
manned by non-State armed opposition groups in Afrin city in western rural
Aleppo. The whereabouts of the two abductees and the reason for the abductions
remain unknown.
• On 13 September, in the afternoon, mortar shells hit in the vicinity of Nahhas
roundabout and Tali’a school in the Nile St. neighbourhood in Governmentcontrolled Aleppo city. As a result of the attack, a 10 -year-old child was killed
and 13 other civilians, including five women, were injured.
Idlib Governorate
• On 1 September, two civilians (a pregnant woman and her two -year-old
daughter) were killed as a result of what was alleged to be a ground -based strike
__________________
*

12/15

In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of incidents that are
reported to have occurred during the month relates to compliance with Council resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information
is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International
Syria Support Group. The list of incidents gives examples of human rights issues of concern
raised in the report. However, owing to the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks
of credible and/or reliable sources in many conflict-affected areas, verifying incidents is
increasingly difficult. The list contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and have been verified according t o its
methodology, and should not be considered comprehensive.
18-17575

S/2018/947

that hit a residential area in the town of Bdama in the rural Jisr al-Shughur area
of western rural Idlib.
• On 2 September, one boy was killed and another boy was injured as a result of
what was reported to be an improvised explosive device attached to a civilian
vehicle that detonated in the village of Kafr Sajnah in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 2 September, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) fighters abducted a local activist/
journalist in the village of Kafr Ruma in southern rural Idlib. Reportedly, the
activist had been critical of HTS. His whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 2 September, one woman was injured as a result of what was alleged to be a
ground-based strike that hit in the vicinity of her house in Mar ‘and village in
western rural Idlib.
• On 3 September, two civilians, including one woman, were injured as a resu lt
of what was alleged to be a roadside improvised explosive device that detonated
along a highway on the outskirts of Jisr al-Shughur city, in Idlib.
• On 4 September, one civilian was injured as a result of what was reported to be
an improvised explosive device that detonated in the vicinity of the Fatah
Mosque in the city of Ariha in southern rural Idlib.
• On 4 September, at least 13 civilians were killed and 20 other civilians were
injured as a result of air and ground-based strikes that hit the Jisr al-Shughur
area, in Idlib, including the following incidents:
– Five civilians, including four children, were killed and 12 other civilians,
including six children, were injured as a result of bombardments that hit a
residential area in the Basatin neighbourhood in Jisr al-Shughur.
– Four civilians, including one woman, were killed and one civilian woman
was injured in the vicinity of Jisr al-Shughur.
– Two civilians, including one child, were injured in Janudiyah village in
Jisr al-Shughur.
– One civilian was killed and four other civilians were injured in Kafr Din
village in Jisr al-Shughur.
– One civilian was killed and another was injured in Furaykah village in Jisr
al-Shughur.
– Two civilians were killed in Muhambal village in Jisr al-Shughur.
• On 5 September, two boys were injured as a result of what were alleged to be
ground-based strikes that hit the village of Hish in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 6 September, ground-based strikes reportedly hit the town of Tah in Khan
Shaykhun and resulted in the killing of one civilian man and the injury of one
boy.
• On 7 September, four civilians were killed and seven others were injured as a
result of an unidentified bombardment that hit the town of Habit in Khan
Shaykhun. On the same day, two other civilians were injured as a result of what
were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit in the vicinity of a “White
Helmets” office in Khan Shaykhun.
• On 8 September, three civilians, including one pregnant woman and one girl,
were killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the village
of Abidin in Khan Shaykhun.

18-17575

13/15

S/2018/947

• On 8 September, one civilian was killed as a result of an unidenti fied
bombardment that hit the village of Halbah in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 8 September, a hospital known by the name of Nabdh al-Hayat in the village
of Has in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district was allegedly hit with what were reported
to be air strikes. The hospital sustained significant structural damage and was
put out of service.
• On 9 September, three civilians, including one woman, were injured as a result
of what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the village of Kafr Ayn
in Khan Shaykhun.
• On 9 September, a nine-month-old boy was killed and five other civilians were
injured as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of Habit
in Khan Shaykhun. On the same day, one civilian was injured as a result of an
unidentified bombardment that hit the village of Aljabin in Habit.
• On 10 September, ground-based strikes reportedly hit within the vicinity of a
school complex in the village of Jarjanaz in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man. Both the Quds
primary school and the Nidhal secondary school reportedly sustained minor
infrastructural damage. Reports also indicated that seven civilians, including
two women and three students aged from 7 to 15, were injured as a result of the
strikes. On the same day, other ground-based strikes reportedly hit within the
vicinity of another school in the village of Hish in Ma ‘arrat al-Nu‘man but no
reports of civilian casualties were documented.
• On 14 September, members of HTS held two religious preachers (imams) from
the Ahl al-Sunna and Farouk Mosques in Atimah village in the Dana district in
northern Idlib. Both preachers were reportedly accused of rejecting HTS
instructions to preach at the mosque and promote donations and financial
support for HTS. One of the preachers was reportedly released a fe w hours
later — allegedly with signs of cruel treatment inflicted on his body — while
the other preacher’s whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 18 September, unidentified masked armed men abducted the head of a non governmental organization in Sahyan village in the Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district
in southern rural Idlib. Reportedly, the abductee was taken while at the Sahyan
restaurant. The whereabouts of the abductee and the motive behind the
abduction remain unknown.
• On 20 September, a civilian man was publicly executed (shot and killed) by
HTS in Tallmannis village in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district, in southern rural
Idlib. The victim had been held by HTS since August and reportedly accused of
collaborating with and promoting reconciliation with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
• On 22 September, a local activist was reportedly abducted by masked and armed
HTS fighters from his home in Kafr Nubl city in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man. The
abductee had reportedly taken part in peaceful protests organized in the area on
21 September and called for the release of all detainees held by all parties to the
conflict. He had also reportedly been known for his outspoken views that were
often critical of HTS, including on social media. The abductee had previously
condemned the attacks of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant against civilians
in Government-controlled Suwayda’ on 25 July and expressed his solidarity
with the civilians who had been displaced from the two Shia villages of Fu ‘ah
and Kafraya in Idlib. The abductee had reportedly been strongly criticized not
only by HTS but by many other activists in the community who accused him of
promoting reconciliation with the Government and of being pro -Shia. The
whereabouts of the abductee remain unknown.
14/15

18-17575

S/2018/947

Homs Governorate
• On 14 September, at least 11 civilians (all men) were reportedly detained by
Government security forces in the Government-controlled city of Rastan in
northern rural Homs. The detainees were all allegedly former members of the
White Helmets who had remained and reconciled with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic since May 2018. Unconfirmed reports received by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights suggested
that they had been detained on charges of being involved in activities related to
former alleged “chemical attacks”.
Ladhiqiyah Governorate
• On 4 September, three civilians were killed and five others were injured as a
result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the villages of Kafr Din and
Furaykah in rural Ladhiqiyah.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 26 September, two civilians were killed as a result of what was reported to
be a roadside improvised explosive device that detonated in the town of
Markada in southern rural Hasakah.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 26 September, two civilians were injured as a result of what was alleged to
be a missile that hit the town of Dhiban in the rural Mayadin area of eastern
Dayr al-Zawr.

18-17575

15/15
