Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ference on Trade and Development, to ensure its
success and, to this end, to give serious consideration
to the Declaration and Principles of the Action Programme adopted at Lima by the Second Ministerial
Meeting of the Group of Seventy-Seven Developing
Countries, which contain concrete and specific proposals
aimed at solving through international co-operation the
urgent problems of trade and development of developing countries as well as other proposals which may be
put forward by other countries or groups of countries;
4. Also urges the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its third session to adopt
comprehensive action-oriented programmes incorporating special measures in favour of both the least developed among developing countries and the landlocked developing countries;
5. Expresses the view that the conclusion of an
international cocoa agreement as soon as possible would
be of great importance and would contribute to the
success of the third session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, as stated in
Trade and Development Board resolution 85 (XI) of
20 September 1971 ;30
6. Urges the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session to review the
progress achieved since its second session in promoting
trade relations among countries having different economic and social systems, bearing in mind Conference
resolution 15 (11) of 25 March 1968;31
7. Also urges the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its third session:
(a) To appeal to preference-giving countries which
have not yet done so to implement their offers under
the generalized system of preferences in favour of
developing countries;
(b) To pursue efforts in a dynamic context for
further improvements of these preferential arrangements, bearing in mind the agreed conclusions contained in the annex to Trade and Development Board
decision 75 (S-IV) of 13 October 1970,32 inter alía,
that developing countries sharing their existing tariff
advantages with the rest of the developing countries
as a result of the implementation of the generalized
system of preferences will not be adversely affected;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
undertake further consultations with the Governments
of States members of the Conference and with appropriate international organizations, with a view to contributing to the success of the Conference;
11

l. Agrees that the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its third session should
undertake a comprehensive review of its institutional
arrangements with a view to improving the efficiency of
its operations, strengthening its role as a centre for
the initiation of action-where appropriate in co-operation with the competent organs of the United Nationsfor the negotiation and adoption of multilateral legal
instruments in the field of trade, bearing in mind that
31 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Tmde
and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.1 and 3
an4 Add.1 and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publicat10n, Sales No.: E.68.TI.D.14), p. 32.
32 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8015/Rev.1 and Corr.1), part
three, annex l.

63·

the task of negotiation, including exploration, consultation and agreement on solutions, is a single process,
with due regard to the adequacy of the existing organs
of negotiation and without duplication of their activities,
thus enabling the Conference to fu1fil its basic objectives
as set forth in General Assembly resolution 1995
(XIX);
2. Reaf]irms the essential role of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to review and
appraise the progress achieved in the implementation
of the International Development Strategy within its
field of competence and to seek new areas of agreement and the widening of existing ones as well as to
evolve new concepts and seek agreement on additional
measures as envisaged in the Strategy;
3. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session:
(a) To provide general guidelines for the establishment by the Trade and Development Board of
adequate procedures and mechanisms for defining and
keeping under constant review the indicators and other
data necessary for assessing the progress in the implementation of the policy measures within the field of
competence of the Conference;
( b) To make the institutional machinery of the
Conference fully oriented towards the implementation
of the relevant provisions of the Intemational Development Strategy, and particularly to this end to promote
consultations aimed at enabling member States to make
a fuller and more effective contribution to the achievement of the goals and objectives thereof;
(e) To give consideration to such reforms of the
fundamental provisions of General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) as to promote further evolution
in the continuing machinery and in the method of work
of the Conference designed to increase its effectiveness;
111
Decides to consider at its twenty-seventh session, as
a matter of high priority, the results of the third
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development.
2021 st plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
2821 (XXVI). Transfer of technology, including
know-how and patents

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2658 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, concerning the role of modero science and
technology in the development of nations and the need
to strengthen economic and technico-scientific co-operation among States, and its resolution 2726 (XXV) of
15 December 1970 on the transfer of technology,
including know-how and patents,
Having considered tbe report of the Trade and Development Board on its eleventh session, 83
Conscious of the fact that, unless decisive action is
taken at all levels. especially at the international
level, for a more rapid transfer of adequate technology
to the developing countries, the growing rate of technological development in the world will contribute to
widening further the technological gap between de33 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8415/
Rev.1), part three.

64

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

veloped and developing countries, particularly the least
developed among them,
l. W e/comes the unanimous adoption by the Intergovernmental Group on Transfer of Technology of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development-at its first session, devoted to organizational
matters-of a comprehensive programme
work, in
the field of the transfer of operative technology to the
developing countries, to be pursued on a continuing
basis;
2. Reiterates the request made in its resolution
2726 (XXV) that the States members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development give
their fullest support to the lntergovemmental Group
on Transfer of Technology, and expresses the hope that
the three remaining vacancies in the Group will be
filled from among States given in list B of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964 befare it holds its first substantive session;
3. Recommends that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its third session should
seek agreement on action, to be carried out as an
integral part of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
contained in General Assembly resolution 2626 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970, within its field of competence, to
!acilitate the adequate transfer of technology to developmg countries on reasonable terms and conditions and
to create the necessary infrastructure for the technological development of developing countries, including
the transfer of specifications of the raw materials and
technological processes utilized in production;
4. Urges international financing organizations and
programmes, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the Intcrnational Bank for Reconstruction and Development and regional development
banks, to give high priority to economic assistance,
according to the priorities estab1ished by developing countries, to meet their needs in the field of technology. particularly in connexion with the development
of a basic infrastructure, including the training of
personnel and the establishment or strengthening of
extension services for the application of technology
to production units, and taking into consideration the
need to reduce the effective cost involved in the transfer
of operative technology to developing countries;
5. Recommends that in ali action related to the
transfer of operative technology referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 above special consideration shall be
given to the stage of development and special position
of the least developed countries.

of

2021 st plenary meeting,
16 December 197J.
2822 (XXVI). Question of the establishment of
an international university

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2691 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1653 (LI) of 23 November 1971,
Emphasizing the importance of adequate consideration by appropriate intergovemmental bodies of the
United Nations system of ali factors relating to the
question of the establishment of an international university,

l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 34 containing the report and comments of the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
the results of the feasibility study concerning the international university, the decision adopted by the Executive Board of that organization on 18 October 1971,
the recommendations of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research and the report of the Panel
of Experts on the Establishment of an International
University;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
studies, in consultation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
interested bodies, taking into account the views expressed in the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session, and to submit any additional information to
the Economic and Social Council at its fifty-third
session;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to call on the
assistance of the Panel of Experts on the Establishment of an International University, set up in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2691 (XXV),
the membership of which should be increased to not
more than twenty to allow for the designation of five
additional experts by the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with the Secretary-General and
interested agencies and programmes;35
4. Invites the Executive Board of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to
submit to the Economic and Social Council at its fiftythird session such further observations and recommendations on the subject as it may consider appropriate;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give detailed consideration, in conformity with its resolution 1653 (LI), to reports and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, the
further report of the Secretary-General and the views
of the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session a report, together with any recommendations
it may make on the question of the establishment of
an international university;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
take into account also the views expressed in the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
7. Invites the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its seventeenth session to submit to the General
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session such comments
and ob~ervations on the subject as it may consider
appropnate;
8. Decides to consider the matter fully at its twentyseventh session.
2021 st plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
3 4 A/8510

and Add.1/Rev.1.
Panel of Experts on the Establishment of an International University is composed of the fo1!owing persons:
Mr. Tsao Amagi, Mr. Andrew W. Cordier, Mr. Mohammed H.
El-Zayyat, Mr. Gyula Eorsi, Mr. Jacques Freymond, Mr. R.
Gaudry, Mr. Eduardo Hardoy, Mr. Felipe Herrera, Mr. Abdul
8:azza~ _Kaddoura, Mr. Joseph Ki-Zerbo, Mr. S. P. Lopez,
Sir W1lham Mansfield Cooper, Mr. Davidson S. H. W. Nícol,
Rev. Benjamín Núñez, Mr. G. Parthasarathi, Mr. Víctor
Sahini, Mr. Abdus Salam, Mr. Jean Sirinelli, Mr. Saydou
Madani Sy and Mr. S. Verosta.
35 The
