S/PV.9106

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9106th meeting

Monday, 8 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Capacity-building for sustaining peace
Letter dated 1 August 2022 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/592)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-45384 (E)
*2245384*

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Security Council, to His Excellency Mr. Ronaldo
Costa Filho, Permanent Representative of Brazil, for
his service as President of the Council for the month
of July. I am sure I speak for all the members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Costa Filho and his team for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should also like
to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome
to the new Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Her Excellency Mrs. Ruchira Kamboj.
We look forward to collaborating closely with her and
wish her every success.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Capacity-building for sustaining peace
Letter dated 1 August 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/592)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Malta, Morocco, Mozambique,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Switzerland, Tunisia, Thailand and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union Commissioner
for Political Affairs, Peace and Security; Ms. Cristina
2/33

08/08/2022

Duarte, Special Adviser on Africa to the United
Nations Secretary-General; and His Excellency
Mr.
Muhammad
Abdul
Muhith,
Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, in his capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of
the Delegation of the European to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/592, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 August 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: First, I would like to congratulate
the People’s Republic of China on its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. Let me also
commend China for choosing to use its presidency to
reflect on the critical theme of peace and security in
Africa, in particular highlighting the vital need to build
capacity to sustain peace.
The state of play in Africa and globally is rather
challenging today. The trajectory of the global security
landscape reveals very concerning trends. The threats
of violent extremism and terrorism continue to loom
heavily over the continent and the world at large.
We have witnessed popular uprisings, with some
metamorphizing into what is beginning to look like
intractable conflicts. Old conflicts are assuming new
dimensions and are being fuelled and sustained by new
threats of insecurity. Against that continental and global
context, we must redouble our efforts at developing our
capacities to sustain peace.
Most important, we at the African Union (AU) are
fully aware of the critical role of capacity development in
building resilient societies. We are convinced that solid
societies are anchored in robust institutions capable of
fostering coexistence and mediating differences.
There is clearly a symbiotic relationship between
effective governance, peace, security and development.
The lessons we have learned across our continent have
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

given us experience in managing conflicts, given the
intricate connections between the absence of the rule
of law, justice, fragility, socioeconomic development
and violence. Our scorecard with regard to governance
and peace and security performance has shown mixed
results. Today it is more vital than ever that we address
the adverse effects of climate change, which are
threatening millions of people’s livelihood, especially
in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. On top of that, the
illicit exploitation of natural resources further robs us
of the ability to provide the necessary public goods for
most of our people. Our continent is also bleeding from
illicit financial flows.
With that combination of challenges, the most
robust solution is to build a strong partnership to
create the requisite capacities to sustain peace, which
we consider fundamental. The African Union and the
United Nations must scale up their collaboration to build
and sustain peace through transformative capacity.
Furthermore, it is important to emphasize the need for
improvement in our collaboration. The partnership for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is well articulated
and appreciated, but we must go further and build and
develop the requisite capacity for peace enforcement,
which is the issue facing Africa today in terms of
defeating terrorism and violent extremism. Our existing
capacities have shown us that we can build a stronger
continent. We have been drawing lessons over the years
at the continental, regional and national levels.
The first lesson is that we must improve the linkages
between the implementation of the African Governance
Architecture and the African Peace and Security
Architecture. That can provide us with a springboard
for engagement in improving the effectiveness of
governance, peace and security. In addition, the African
Union’s vision of the Silencing the Guns initiative and
its blueprint for development, our Agenda 2063, sets
out the areas where attention and effort must be focused
if we are to build a stable and secure continent. The
nexus between those two frameworks is critical to our
pathway to the desired level.
When we assumed office, a year ago, we articulated
five critical pillars, one of them being the need to
enhance governance, peace and security through
building the requisite capacity. I believe that will
put Africa in a strong position to realize Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 16. We are working hard
to re-energize the African Union Continental Early
Warning System, based on building the requisite

S/PV.9106

capacities in the mediation and conflict-prevention
sectors. It is also essential to anchor our countries’
structural vulnerability assessments in the African
Peer Review Mechanism. As we develop that emphasis,
we need to focus on the capacities of women and young
people in building and sustaining peace. It is for that
reason that we are working to operationalize the African
Standby Force and the capacity support necessary
to counter terrorism and violent extremism. We are
drawing lessons from the Horn of Africa, the Sahel, the
Lake Chad basin and, more recently, southern Africa,
in view of the challenges in Cabo Delgado.
As we build on those lessons, we must also look
at the stabilization policies that will help build a more
sustainable Africa. Let me emphasize that post-conflict
reconstruction and development are another source that
we can focus on. The African Union has just launched
its Centre for Post-conflict Reconstruction and
Development in Cairo, which we envisage as a capacity
boost for post-conflict management on our continent.
In the African Union Commission, we have also just
established the Interregional Knowledge Exchange on
Early Warning and Conflict Prevention in partnership
with regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms. The capacity challenges that we have faced
over the years must be addressed collectively at all three
levels. I would like to end by drawing the Council’s
attention to a number of critical recommendations.
First, we must emphasize the need for demonstrable
joint transformative leadership between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. For Africa, the focus should be on building an
integrated capacity for peace-enforcement operations,
based on both a military and a whole-of-society
approach. In that regard, the African Union will hold
its first-ever lesson-learning forum on peace support
operations aimed at the full operationalization of the
African Standby Force. It is equally important that we
work to unlock the financial challenges associated with
peace operations.
Secondly, the African Union is ready to recommit
to the implementation of SDG 16, on building peace,
justice and strong institutions, which is of the utmost
importance in the quest for inclusive, effective and
accountable institutions in the peace sector.
Lastly, as we strengthen democracies, a capacity
for political transitions that is inclusive and fully
participatory is another key area.

22-453843/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, I stress that the African Union
Commission stands ready to continue its implementation
of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. By doing that,
we will be building capacities to sustain peace in a
multilevel endeavour with international, continental,
regional and national implications.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Duarte.
Ms. Duarte: I would like to thank the Chinese
presidency for convening this open debate, entitled
“Peace and security in Africa: Capacity-building for
sustaining peace”, and for inviting me to brief the
Security Council on the topic.
The concept note (S/2022/592, annex) for today’s
open debate proposes three objectives for the meeting.
The first is understanding why capacity-building
is important for peace and security, the second is
discussing the challenges that capacity-building
efforts must overcome and the third is exploring ways
forward. I will therefore touch on those three points in
my briefing.
The first concerns the impact of capacitybuilding on peace and stability. Capacity-building
has traditionally been approached as the epitome of
development cooperation. As a result, it has usually
been ignored as a tool for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, except when referring to the building
of capacities in the security sector, whether military
or policy components. However, capacity-building
has a direct and, I would say, fundamental, impact on
delivering sustainable peace.
Africa’s peace and security are threatened by
a combination of external and internal factors that
undermine the capacities of African countries to
prevent and address violence. Factors such as external
competition for a country’s natural resources have been
fuelling instability in Africa. Porous borders fuel black
markets and facilitate the emergence of transnational
crime and the proliferation of illicit weapons. Global
terrorist networks increasingly find footholds in various
pockets of Africa, and conflicts between State and
non-State actors continue to cause death, displacement
and destruction. Those external factors are part of the
agenda and focus of the Security Council.
4/33

08/08/2022

In that regard, today’s meeting provides an
opportunity to assess how internal factors, such as
governance and national control over economic flows,
endemic poverty, inequality, marginalization and
respect for human rights, interact with those external
factors. Understanding that interaction is relevant
as, internal factors, if properly addressed, are the
foundation of a State’s resilience and will to fight,
prevent and mitigate violence. If disregarded, those
factors might become the triggers and fuel of conflict
and violent extremism. From that perspective, even if
internal factors are not the focus of the attention of the
Council, it is important to take them into account when
assessing how to prevent and mitigate external factors,
given that addressing the structural root causes of
conflict is indispensable for building sustainable peace.
The joint study by the United Nations and the
World Bank, entitled Pathways for Peace: Inclusive
Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict, already
noted a link between peace and the capacity of a State
to provide public services. For the past two years, my
Office has analysed that link in implementation of
our mandate to address gaps and initiate reports on
critical issues affecting Africa, with the support of an
extrabudgetary project funded by the United Nations
Peace and Development Trust Fund. That analysis fed
into the 2021 report of the Secretary-General on the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa (S/2021/562). The report identifies four ways
in which public service delivery can become a trigger of
conflict and instability. Four factors are closely linked
to the capacity of African countries to provide effective
and efficient public services.
The first is vertical and horizontal exclusion — that
is, discriminatory service delivery along socioeconomic
lines or group affiliation. I would like to underscore
that, most often, exclusion is not the result of a decision
to exclude. Furthermore, exclusion can act as a trigger
even if the service is not directly provided by the State.
An example of that is access to education in Africa
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Education is a public service from which millions
of children are excluded due to the lack of access to
electricity or technological tools. In fact, COVID-19
has further shrunk the already limited fiscal space
in African countries, which, in many cases, has led
to the deprioritization of certain public services in
order to have the budgetary capacity to respond to the
pandemic. It is a necessary decision, but one that can
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9106

have unforeseen and undesired consequences in the
middle term.

in Somalia, for example, and is a growing problem for
the continent’s stability.

Those potential consequences — those risks — are
linked to the second factor — namely, non-transparent
or non-inclusive planning and budgeting processes.
The lack of capacity by African countries to conduct
open-planning processes risks creating undesired
exclusion, or even false perceptions of exclusion as a
consequence of the scarcity of funds. In a context of
limited public budgets and growing expenditure needs,
which is the scenario that most African countries
face, planning processes are not just a tool for good
management. They also become a crucial instrument
for explaining to citizens the decisions that were made
in the prioritization of expenditures and for involving
them in decision-making processes so as to prevent
their exclusion from public services, which results in
grievances and social disengagement.

Service delivery is a key component of development,
but it is an aspect of development with a crucial political
impact because service delivery is the sheer expression
of the social contract, and violation of the social contract
is a breeding ground for unrest and instability.

The third factor is corruption — a global value chain
made up of local, national and regional and international
actors. Corruption not only diverts funds that should be
used for service delivery, but it is the most effective
factor in delegitimizing the State. Corruption is not
just an ethical or legal problem. At the national level, it
reflects the absence of the State or, at least, the absence
of an effective State and the lack of capacities. The
national component of corruption is made possible due
to non-existent or very limited institutions, including
strong national revenue authorities and tax services, due
to the absence of capacity among public institutions to
use technology to, for example, fully digitize customs
and tax administrations. Corruption cannot be dealt
with only through administrative bodies and goodwill.
The best way to limit its impact is to build the capacities
of a country to trace the economic transactions that are
conducted in its national value chain. A global compact
to fight corruption is needed. Commitment 6 of Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) deals with that issue.
Those three factors compound a fourth one — the
absence of the State and its substitution in service
delivery by non-State actors, including criminal and
terrorist groups. When the State does not provide
services, either because there is no State presence in the
territory or due to inefficiencies and some of the factors
I mentioned, someone replaces the State. With time,
that someone earns the legitimacy of the population and
questions the existence of the State. That is not theory.
That is a reality that has been reported with Al-Shabaab

Addressing the challenges of building capacities
in Africa takes us to the second question. What are
the main challenges that prevent capacity-building in
Africa? The concept note for today’s debate underscored
those challenges — policy and financing. The building
of capacities cannot be understood just as creating
administrative bodies or training civil servants. Those
are important aspects that will not be sustainable or
effective, however, if clear, objective and just planning
and monitoring systems and policy frameworks are
not put in place. Institutions are a set of policies with
bodies to implement them and mechanisms to monitor
their correct implementation. However many bodies
we create or training sessions we deliver, without
policies and oversight mechanisms those four factors
will continue to undermine our efforts to achieve peace
and development.
With regard to funding, our ability to build
institutions and develop capacities for the delivery of
public services requires sustainable financing, and
that can be achieved only through strong systems for
mobilizing domestic resources. Of all the ways of
mobilizing domestic resources, the most urgent from a
peace and security standpoint is dealing with the issue
of illicit financial flows. Curbing illicit financial flows
in Africa would not only generate the same amount of
revenue as official development assistance and foreign
direct investment put together, but it would also address
one of the main sources of financing for transnational
crime and terrorism. What, then, is the way forward?
How can we address those challenges? I would like to
provide three recommendations and one example.
First, investing in institutional infrastructure is
essential in order to build the capacities needed to
tackle the internal causes of violence. Institutions have
the power to catalyse holistic solutions. Institutional
capacity-building should therefore be the cornerstone
of efforts to achieve sustainable peace.
Secondly, technical cooperation in creating
policy and institutional capacity should be a priority
in all conflict situations. That entails both increasing

22-453845/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

cooperation and coordination among the various
areas of work of the United Nations and informing
the deliberations on peace and security issues with
analysis of countries’ socioeconomic conditions and
institutional capacity.
Thirdly, in many countries, peacekeeping
missions reach areas where the State is absent. Closer
cooperation with national and local authorities — from
the perspective of institution-building as well as from
a security perspective — could create opportunities
for increasing the presence of the State and enhancing
the delivery of services, preventing gaps that can be
leveraged by terrorist groups and non-State actors.
Against that background, school feeding programmes
are an example of a public service with great potential
to contribute to long-term peace and stability. Their
main goal is addressing low educational attainment,
school dropout rates, malnutrition, stunting and, above
all, food insecurity. But school feeding also helps to
promote local economies and women’s empowerment,
to strengthen local food systems and create cohesive
communities. When children are retained in school,
they are at a lower risk of being captured by terrorist
groups and non-State actors. All in all, school
feeding is a cost-effective way of strengthening trust
in public institutions through the delivery of basic
services — again, fulfilling the sixth commitment of
Our Common Agenda. In that regard, the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa has launched an initiative
entitled “A pen for a gun”, which fosters the role of
school meals in promoting social cohesion and peace
on the continent and seeks to strengthen the capacities
of African countries to deliver peace and security
through development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Ms. Duarte
for her briefing and for her insights, recommendations
and ideas on the topics under discussion.
I now give the floor to Mr. Muhith.
Mr. Muhith: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to
brief the Council on the important topic of peace and
security in Africa, with a focus on capacity-building
for sustaining peace.
With the onset of a global pandemic, an economic
downturn and changing conflict dynamics, the
challenges to peace and security have multiplied.
There has been increased interest from countries and
regions in Africa in engaging with the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in expanding and strengthening
6/33

08/08/2022

their capacities for peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Since its inception, the Commission, in line with its
mandate and through its country- and region-specific
engagements, has consistently supported Africa and
provided a platform for discussing their national
peacebuilding priorities and garnering support for
strengthening the capacity of institutions. I would like
to share some of the PBC’s engagements in Africa in
the field of capacity-building.
In the Central African Republic, the Government
has prioritized the fight against impunity and the
reinforcement of access to justice. During a PBC
meeting in April on the rule of law and transitional
justice mechanisms, the Minister of Justice, Human
Rights Promotion and Governance of the Central
African Republic presented the initiatives of his
Government in the field of peacebuilding. He informed
the Commission about reforms and measures that
have been undertaken in the judicial and penitentiary
sectors, noting the adoption of a justice-sector policy,
the convening of criminal sessions at the Bangui
Court of Appeals and the creation of a rapid response
unit within the police and gendarmerie to investigate
sexual and gender-based violence. The PBC used the
meeting to mobilize resources and address the impact
of budgetary constraints for the country’s Special
Criminal Court and its Truth, Justice, Reparations and
Reconciliation Commission.
In Liberia, significant efforts have been made
to help build capacity for inclusive peacebuilding,
especially by ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in social, political and
economic life. Liberia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Minister of Gender, Children and Social Protection
briefed the Commission in June, highlighting notable
progress in gender equality through the adoption of a
revised national gender policy for the period from 2018
to 2022, a second national action plan on women and
peace and security for the period from 2019 to 2023 and
a gender-responsive local governance and land-rights
act. The Chair of the Liberia configuration recently
visited the country and noted an encouraging trend and
efforts within political parties to ensure the increased
representation of women in party leadership and their
broader participation in elections, as well as the role
played by women-led peace huts in building social
cohesion at the community level.
In Burundi, the Government has promoted the
decisive role that young people can play in their country’s
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

socioeconomic development. Advancing young people’s
empowerment and economic inclusion has been
operationalized in Burundi’s national programme for
peace capitalization, social stability and the promotion
of economic growth, with initiatives in support of youth
entrepreneurship and job creation as well as education
and training. In November, the Administrator and
Director-General of Burundi’s Youth Investment Bank,
which was formed in 2020, addressed the Commission
and informed it about the Bank’s efforts in financing
youth enterprises and cooperatives owned by more than
1,800 young members. The Commission also heard
from several young men and women entrepreneurs who
emphasized how transformative the capacity-building
support had been in their lives.
In the Lake Chad basin, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission has been making consistent efforts
to translate its regional strategy for stabilization,
recovery and resilience into an implementable plan.
The Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission updated the Peacebuilding Commission in
April on newly created coordination and management
structures and the building of both vertical and
horizontal partnerships, including with a civil society
platform and a task force of implementing partners.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission has also helped
governors in Boko Haram-affected areas of the basin to
articulate their locally owned initiative, the territorial
action plans, in support of the regional strategy.
Based on those and other PBC engagements in
Africa, I wish to share several observations.
First, it is critical to support nationally owned and
led efforts to build effective, accountable, inclusive
and responsive institutions at the national and local
levels for reducing vulnerability and protecting
and empowering citizens. There is an abundance of
examples globally, as well as in Africa, of how the
pandemic has exacerbated governance gaps, affecting
the health, economic and social sectors and causing
additional strains on social cohesion, with potential
implications for the peace and security landscape. In
view of that, the Peacebuilding Commission recognizes
the need to increase collective efforts in order to
strengthen effective, accountable and inclusive public
service institutions, within the framework of the rule
of law, cutting across all the Sustainable Development
Goals in an integrated and coordinated manner. In that
regard, the Commission will continue to encourage
partnerships with international financial institutions,

S/PV.9106

including the World Bank and the regional development
banks, which have leveraged resources, expertise and
capacities in order to help build national and local
institutions in conflict-affected countries.
Secondly,
enhancing
capacity-building
for
sustaining peace is indeed a complex process, one
that must be carried out in a step-by-step manner
with measures tailored to the specific conditions of
each country and region. However, as experience has
shown, measures that are not inclusive ultimately
risk sustainability, leaving the drivers of conflict
unaddressed. In view of that, the Peacebuilding
Commission emphasizes the importance of ensuring
that women, youth and those in vulnerable situations
be included in capacity-building efforts at the local,
national and regional levels. The Commission
emphasizes that inclusivity is key to advancing national
peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to
ensure that the needs of all segments of society are
taken into account. The Commission also stresses that
civil society can play an important role in advancing
efforts to build and sustain peace.
Thirdly, capacities for sustaining peace are
enhanced with the sharing of lessons learned, the
identification of scalable good practices and innovative
solutions and the exchange of expertise. In that regard,
the Peacebuilding Commission promotes the role of
regional, South-South and triangular cooperation in
addressing common challenges to peacebuilding and
advancing the long-term goals of economic recovery and
sustainable development in Africa. The Commission
also wishes to promote the sharing of best practices, as
and where applicable, across the continent.
Fourthly, the importance of the African Union and
other regional and subregional organizations in Africa
in addressing peacebuilding challenges and fostering
regional strategies in support of regional capacities
to sustain peace cannot be overstated. For its part, the
Peacebuilding Commission is committed to working
more closely with the African Union and its Peace and
Security Council in support of those strategies and in
mobilizing peacebuilding tools to sustain peace.
Lastly, the Commission acknowledges the
invaluable contributions of the Peacebuilding Fund
in supporting the strengthening of inclusive national
and local institutions and organizations, including
in the rule of law, transitional justice, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, political dialogue,

22-453847/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

electoral frameworks, democratic governance, human
rights, security sector reform, State capacities and the
extension of State authority. Noting that the continuing
demand for Peacebuilding Fund support has significantly
outpaced available resources and stressing that capacitybuilding requires timely and effective financial and
technical support, the Commission reiterates its calls
for adequate, predictable and sustainable financing for
peacebuilding and promotes the confluence of various
funding streams towards shared objectives in the spirit
of good peacebuilding financing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Muhith for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
I thank Commissioner Adeoye, Special Adviser
Duarte and Ambassador Muhith for their briefings.
Their insights are all very enlightening. I also warmly
welcome representatives of all countries, especially
African ones, to today’s meeting.
Africa is the birthplace of human civilization. On
that great continent, the industrious and brave African
people have created splendid African civilization.
But it has also been a land long-steeped in hardships
caused by the slave trade, racial discrimination,
colonial rule and foreign interference. Guided by panAfricanism, African countries and peoples have united
to win national independence and restore their dignity.
They have also worked hard to explore developing
policies suitable to their national conditions and have
made remarkable achievements. They are playing an
increasingly important role on the world stage.
At the same time, in the face of an unfair and
unjust international political and economic order and
all kinds of global crises and risks, African countries
have always suffered from collateral damage and have
even become the main victims of conflicts outside
their region. In some countries, peace processes have
been repeatedly interrupted and hard-won development
gains have been reversed.
The Security Council needs to do some deep
thinking. In helping Africa achieve lasting peace, has
the international community rightly addressed the root
causes and met the real needs of African countries?
China and Africa have always supported each
other and shared the same fate. Africa’s experiences
and needs resonate with us as a developing country.
8/33

08/08/2022

Considering China’s own development experiences
and experience from China-Africa cooperation and the
historical lessons from all over the world, we believe
that, to help Africa achieve long-term stability, it is
imperative to sustain and increase investment, think
long-term and build a strong foundation for Africa to
strengthen its own development capacity and improve
its resilience to external shocks. Capacity-building is
critical to that end.
First, we should support African countries in
strengthening governance. In terms of maintaining
peace and security, African Governments, as
representatives of their own people, are the most
important actors. They must respond to conflicts and
crises, promote development and reconstruction and
rally social solidarity.
The success stories of many African countries
fully demonstrate that point. Kenya, Uganda, Senegal,
Rwanda, Cameroon, Gabon and others have rapidly
recovered from the pandemic, while Burundi, Sierra
Leone and Côte d’Ivoire are progressing smoothly
in development and reconstruction. Nigeria and
Mozambique have had some major wins in combating
terrorism. Those achievements have a lot to do with
the strong leadership and efficient administration of
their Governments.
To enhance Government capacity, we need to
maintain the right course and respect the development
pathway and social system independently chosen by
their peoples. When Governments from around the world
help African countries, they should respect and trust
African Governments, direct cooperation priorities and
aid resources to Government departments, strengthen
Government authority and support Governments in
playing a leading role. Political conditions should not
be attached to aid, nor should there be interference in
internal affairs of African countries or efforts to replace
the role of local governments.
In post-conflict countries or countries in political
transition, preparing for and holding elections are only
the first step. More important is to deliver on the many
tasks that come after elections. We should support
the newly established Governments in their exercise
of State authority, help them establish themselves as
soon as possible and improve gradually rather than
target them with endless criticism and fault finding, let
alone attempt democratic transformation or rely on the
habitual use of sanctions to exert pressure.
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, it is important to support African
countries in improving their security sectors’ capacity
to perform their duties. Some African countries face
security threats from terrorists, violent extremism and
intercommunal conflicts, inter alia. Only with their
own professional, efficient and strong security sectors
can they effectively respond to these threats. External
security forces cannot and will not be a substitute for
their own efforts.
In recent years, some peacekeeping operations
deployed by the United Nations in Africa have been
expanding in both size and budget, having been
tasked with increasing number of mandates. As
the security situations in host countries have not
improved much, complaints from their Governments
and their people are on the rise. We believe that we
should carefully heed the voices of African countries,
conduct comprehensive reviews of these peacekeeping
operations, reform practices not fit for the situation
on the ground, develop sound mandates and enhance
peacekeeping performance.
Arms embargoes imposed by the Council in such
countries as the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have had a negative
impact on these countries’ capacity-building in the
security sector. They need to be adjusted and lifted
in time.
The funding of African Union-led peace operations
has been a persistent difficulty and calls for a solution.
Secretary-General Guterres suggested that funding to
this end be provided from the United Nations regular
budget or peacekeeping assessments. This is an
important proposal, and the Council should carefully
consider it.
Thirdly, we need to support African countries
in
improving
their
sustainable-development
capacities. Development is a cornerstone of peace
and security. In post-conflict countries, political
transition, reconstruction, development and livelihood
improvement require significant financial support
and resources. External humanitarian assistance is
indispensable, but the key to development is to make
the pie bigger so that these countries can have more
resources and means with which to maintain security.
China has proposed its Outlook on Peace and
Development in the Horn of Africa, supported
connectivity infrastructure projects including the
Mombasa-Nairobi Railway and Ethiopia-Djibouti

S/PV.9106

Railway and worked to promote development of local
industries in Africa. These are all based on the crucial
idea that development promotes peace.
At present, the African continent is beset with
economic, financial, food, energy and other challenges.
These are related to the turbulent international
situation, but the underlying cause is the unjust and
unfair international economic order. African countries
are trapped in the low end of the global industrial chain
and do not have enough resources and capacities to
withstand the risks.
When major economies change their monetary
policies out of their own needs, the spillover effects can
trigger a financial tornado in Africa. While Africa is
experiencing a shortage in food and energy, the main
grain traders and oil companies in developed countries
are experiencing windfalls. African countries have
expressed their strong desire for such unfair treatment to
end, and the international community has the obligation
to support them by helping Africa industrialize,
accelerate
industrialization
and
infrastructure
modernization, achieve financial autonomy and
increase economic independence. Developed countries
should honour their commitments on climate financing
as soon as possible and make up for what they owe to
Africa historically.
Fourthly, we need to support African countries
in building a bigger talent pool. Human resources are
the basis of capacity-building. They represent future
prospects, since over half of the population in Africa are
young people, which means the continent has a talent pool
of the greatest potential in the world. The international
community should help African countries train more
talent based on their urgent needs in reconstruction
and social and economic development. There is a
particular need to encourage countries affected by
conflict to enhance policy support and resource input
for youth and children and expand targeted assistance
in development and education. There is also a need to
enhance education and vocational training for young
people and provide them with greater job opportunities
and support for entrepreneurship so that they can live
lives free of poverty. Africa also needs our support in
deradicalization efforts to protect young minds from
terrorist and extremist ideology.
Secretary-General Guterres has said that Africa
was a source of hope for the world. We cannot agree
more. Peace and development in the world cannot be

22-453849/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

realized without Africa. Greater progress in Africa will
also bring more hope and light to the world. Helping
Africa to build capacity is a shared responsibility
of the international community. No matter how the
international situation evolves, we should keep our
focus on and commitment to Africa.
We should not ignore the issues in Africa. We must
not allow African issues to be marginalized. China
always upholds the principles of pursuing the greater
good and shared interests as well as the principles of
sincerity, real results in amity and good faith in our
relations with Africa. We are ready to work with African
countries to stay committed to a vision of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security
and defend the international system, with the United
Nations at its core, safeguard international fairness
and justice, and seize the opportunity to implement the
Global Security Initiative to promote sustainable peace
and security in Africa.
President Xi Jinping proposed the Global
Development Initiative a year ago, which focuses
on urgent challenges in the development of African
countries. We are ready to actively promote the Global
Development Initiative and the outcomes of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation by working together with
African countries to implement the nine programmes of
China-Africa cooperation. We plan to deepen practical
cooperation with Africa to deliver more benefits to
the continent. China would also like to cooperate with
international partners to contribute further to lasting
peace and development in Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya’s delegation
appreciates China for convening today’s open debate.
I thank Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Ms. Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Africa, and Ambassador
Muhammad Abdul Muhith, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings.
Africa’s energetic and young population, its
abundance of resources and its diversity can catapult the
continent to become an immense driver of global peace
and prosperity. To do that, it will have to strengthen its
10/33

08/08/2022

ability to prevent and respond to dangerous conflicts
and insecurity.
Africa’s Agenda 2063 is a blueprint for transforming
the continent into a global powerhouse in economic and
political terms. Key pillars in its achievement include
the successful implementation of the Silencing the Guns
initiative’s road map for peace and the Continental Free
Trade Area for prosperity So far, Africa has deployed
its Peace and Security Architecture to try and resolve
conflicts. It has also sought the structural strengthening
of governance through instruments such as the African
Peer Review Mechanism. The successes are notable,
but so are the continuing challenges.
In almost all its regions, militant and terrorist groups
are challenging States and destroying many innocent
lives. Climate change is exacerbating the conflicts,
as well as undermining livelihoods and economies.
External actors are adding to the continent’s crises, as
they use every means to win access to its rich mineral
and hydrocarbon resources. Rarely in recent history
has the African State been under greater pressure as
citizens’ expectations continue to increase.
For Africa to overcome those challenges, all sectors
of the African State, including governance and, more
broadly, its economic sectors, need strong capabilities.
Indeed, without competent Governments, including
security services that are credible and legitimate to
citizens, it will be impossible to achieve Agenda 2063.
Capacity-building is therefore the most important
priority today. Kenya is a strong supporter to countries
in conflict or emerging from it. Since 2007, Kenya has
offered training and mentorship to more than 5,000 South
Sudan civil servants in areas of public administration,
immigration, policing and civil aviation. We supported
Burundi and Somalia in rebuilding institutions of
governance and public service. More recently, we
offered the Democratic Republic of Congo and Haiti
training in our State institutions. We believe that, if
more countries embrace South-to-South capacitybuilding in Africa, a great deal can be achieved.
I
will
share
three
observations
with
recommendations for capacity-building that directly
concern the Security Council and are linked to Africa’s
Agenda 2063.
First, peacekeeping is not working as it should.
After tens of billions of dollars spent in several
countries under Chapter VII mandates, the guns have
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

still not been silenced. In several countries under the
purview of the Security Council, there is palpable
and damaging tension between the population and
United Nations peacekeeping missions. The United
Nations must rethink, and recalibrate, the role
and functioning of special political missions and
peacekeeping operations. They must respond to the
actual political and security dynamics more than
they do to the perceptions or interests of external
actors. Performance by peacekeeping missions and the
various troop contingents must be monitored with high
standards, and the findings should lead to appropriate
adjustments. Africa deserves the highest-quality
performance by the United Nations. There is a need
for Africa-led enforcement capabilities. Those should
be provided with adequate, predictable and sustainable
financing. They should also be undertaken alongside
well-designed and credible political processes that can
deliver inclusive dialogue and legitimate governance.
The United Nations engagement with African countries
must be guided by the principle of national ownership.
Secondly, as we have observed in the past year and a
half, there are sanctions and embargoes, imposed by the
Security Council, that have compromised the capacity
of States to provide adequate security to citizens. It is
critically important that sanctions and embargoes be
realistic and practical. For that to be the case, they need
to be aligned with the capabilities of the State to deliver.
That means that all sanctions should be accompanied
by dedicated capacity-building and implementation
support for the States in question. Benchmarks, linked
to State processes in a transparent way, that respect
State sovereignty, even in conditions of great fragility,
are a fundamental value in the United Nations.
Thirdly, we must leverage all our instruments,
including the Peacebuilding Commission and other
peacebuilding initiatives that are part of peacekeeping
globally. We have the opportunity to expand our impact
in a positive sense by agreeing on an ambitious draft
resolution on financing for peacebuilding by the end
of the seventy-sixth session. We continue to argue
that the World Bank and the United Nations, working
together more effectively, can deliver significant
gains in peacebuilding. The Bank’s fragility focus, its
development knowledge and its resources should work
closely and operationally with the United Nations,
whose experience in humanitarian aid, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, as well as its ground presence, is
equalled by no other organization. The two can make

S/PV.9106

inroads in delivering peace and resilience through
capacity-building for African countries.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank China
for convening this important discussion. I would also
like to thank Commissioner Adeoye, Ambassador
Muhith and Special Adviser Duarte for their briefings.
Ambassador Muhith is very welcome to New York, and
we look forward to working with him in his capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
As we heard, many regions in Africa are facing a
multifaceted crisis. Countries that are already reeling
from the impacts of conflict, the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the climate crisis are now also facing
food and energy crises, exacerbated by Russia’s war
on Ukraine.
As always, such crises impact the most vulnerable
first. In the Sahel, where civilians live in constant threat
from extremist violence and acts of terrorism, drought
and displacement now threaten their livelihoods. In the
Horn of Africa, where the population is facing a historic
drought, more than 18 million people are acutely food
insecure. In the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, where there has been persistent
violence and insecurity, a staggering 27 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance.
The local populations in many subregions bear
the brunt of such crises, and it is at the local level
where solutions can be found. It is critical that we
listen, and pay heed, to women leaders, young people,
human rights defenders and civil society. By providing
capacity-building for those local peacebuilders and
enabling their work, we can promote inclusion, better
governance and lasting peace.
As we work together in a global effort to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals, compliance by
all States with their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, is vital.
The international community can support African
partners in building sustainable peace by addressing
the root causes and drivers of conflict. That includes
mitigating against the shocks of climate change, which
undermine community resilience. It includes investing
in education, particularly of women and girls, as
well as health-care and food systems, to build longterm resilience. It also includes the development and
strengthening of national human rights frameworks,

22-4538411/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

adherence to international law, support for democracy,
good governance and national dialogue initiatives.
Today’s complex and interconnected challenges
require a holistic and inclusive response, coordinated
across all three pillars of the United Nations work:
peace and security, human rights and development. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is uniquely placed
to guide those collective efforts. Indeed, as we heard
today, it is already doing so. Through its important
convening role, the PBC brings together diverse actors
and provides the Security Council with comprehensive
advice on country and regional situations on our agenda,
such as the Central African Republic and the Great
Lakes region. It is high time that we heed that advice.
The African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations play a vital role in bringing those
three pillars together, including by promoting good
governance and responding to the alarming number
of coups d’état in recent years. I want to particularly
commend the preventive diplomacy and efforts to
promote dialogue, democracy, good governance and
regional stability of the Economic Community of West
African States in that respect.
The AU-European Union (EU) partnership shows
how regional organizations can work together for peace
and security. We are proud to support the transition
from the African Union Mission in Somalia to the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia and the
strengthening of the national security and defence
capacities of our African partners through EU missions
and operations. United Nations peacekeeping missions
also play a vital role in that regard. Security support
must be consistent and continuous. Adherence to
human rights due diligence policies is key to effective
capacity-building, and we call on the Council to ensure
that those policies are implemented.
Since 1960, when Ireland’s first Embassy on
the African continent opened in Lagos and Irish
peacekeepers were first deployed in Africa, sustaining
peace has been central to Ireland’s partnership with the
continent. We proudly stand by that partnership today.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank China for
organizing this important and timely open debate focused
on capacity-building for sustaining peace in Africa.
I thank the briefers — Ambassador Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security; Ambassador Muhammad Abdul
Muhith, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, in
12/33

08/08/2022

his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and Ms. Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser on Africa
to the United Nations Secretary-General — for their
contributions to today’s debate.
The potential of Africa is infinite, and opportunities
in the continent are enormous. There can be no debate
on those issues. Africa is the second-largest and secondmost populated continent, with exuberant youth, which
is projected to account for nearly one fifth of the world’s
population by 2030. Over the years, life expectancy
has increased, while rates of infant and maternal
mortality have fallen consistently. With its rich and
diverse cultures and vast natural resources, Africa is an
attractive destination for trade and investment.
As compared to a decade ago, and despite the
challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the African continent is more peaceful than
ever. While there may be a few exceptions, governance
institutions have become stronger and overall economic
growth has increased. Infrastructure and connectivity
continue to improve, and economies are slowly and
steadily becoming diversified. India welcomes the
evolution and rise of Africa as an important player in the
contemporary world order. We support peacebuilding
in Africa and establishing capabilities and capacities
that help meet challenges, while ensuring progress.
Despite that positive outlook, peace remains
elusive in some parts of Africa, particularly in the
Sahel, the Horn of Africa and Central Africa. The
countries in the region continue to face complex
challenges. The principal driving factors are chronic
political instability, the role of external players with
vested interests in the regions, weak governance
structures, institutional weaknesses, ethnic divisions
and the presence of terrorist and armed groups. The
overexploitation of diminishing resources, mainly in
the Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region, are
also exacerbating instability.
In today’s Africa, democratic values are driving
efforts to effectively address the challenges of peace,
security and development. In the pursuit for peace
and security, the critical importance of capacitybuilding cannot be overemphasized. The countries in
Africa, owing to their colonial past — much like the
majority of the countries of the global South — suffer
from an undeniable historical disadvantage in terms of
institutional capacity.
22-45384

Peace and security in Africa

08/08/2022

The international community and the United
Nations must continue to look at longer-term efforts for
expanding African capacities and enhancing collective
cooperation. Human resource development and
capacity-building should be at the core of efforts of the
international community in Africa. In order for peace
to endure and be sustained, the legislative framework
and the governance structures need to be strong. The
Sustainable Development Goals and the African Union
(AU) Agenda 2063 serve as useful rallying points for
the international community.
In that context,
following observations.

allow

me

to

make

the

Africa’s growth can be facilitated by partnerships
that genuinely address its economic sustainability,
without conditionalities, and in line with African
expectations. National Governments must steer
priorities and strategies for sustaining peace at all
stages of conflict. The international community needs
to pay close attention to Africa’s voice and wisdom. No
one knows Africa better than Africans themselves. We
have seen from history that offering external solutions
to African problems without African involvement has
not served the interests of the African people. That
skewed approach needs to change.
Several of the conflict situations in Africa are a
result of some areas becoming proxy staging grounds
for competing external forces. In that regard, the
Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, while
addressing the Ugandan Parliament in 2018 stated,
“As global engagement in Africa increases, we
must all work together to ensure that Africa does
not once again turn into a theatre of rival ambitions,
but becomes a nursery for the aspirations of
Africa’s youth.”
If we were to let our African brothers and sisters find
African pathways for themselves, we would see the
frequency of African conflict zones gradually reduced
in the near future.
A democratic framework based on the rule of law
and credible State institutions are essential ingredients
for successful post-conflict recovery. Capacity-building
must therefore be geared towards strengthening
institutions from the grass-roots level up. There is no
substitute to fundamentals.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the Ukraine conflict
have impacted Africa, just as they have impacted the rest

S/PV.9106

of the world. The continent’s vulnerabilities are greater,
and, in many respects, its capabilities remain in the
making. The world must stand by Africa during these
trying times. Capacity-building in critical areas, such as
education, health, agriculture and infrastructure, is the
need of the hour. In order for Africa to take advantage
of its demographic dividend, capacity-building in those
identified sectors is critical.
The spread of terrorism in Africa has increasingly
exposed the gaps in mandates between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Terrorists are taking advantage
of the gap and unleashing terror that conflict-ridden
States are unable to combat, owing to the lack of
capacity. That is increasingly becoming apparent in the
Sahel and other parts of Africa. We need to strengthen
States’ capacity to fight terror. In that context, India has
consistently supported the call of the Secretary-General
for a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations to support African counter-terrorism
operations with sustained financing, including through
assessed contributions.
In its pursuit towards a peaceful and prosperous
Africa, the African Union has been ably supported
by the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the East African Community, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We need
to be cognizant of that reality, and the spirit of burdensharing must continue to drive the peace and security
agenda. There have been path-breaking initiatives at the
AU, such as the African Continental Free Trade Area,
that critical for capacity-building and employment
generation in Africa. Such initiatives should receive the
wholehearted support of the international community,
particularly that of international financial institutions.
Let me now speak about the India-Africa partnership.
The strong and deep solidarity and partnership
between India and Africa reflects the bonding of the
global South, which has been forged over several
centuries. The underlying philosophy of India’s
partnership with Africa is to empower Africa for a
future that is founded on principles of inclusivity,
sustainability, peace, prosperity, dignity and respect
for one and all. That is mirrored back home in Prime
Minister Narendra Modi’s call for sabka saath, sabka
vikas, sabka vishwas and sabka prayaas. African
priorities will always guide all our initiatives in the

22-4538413/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

African continent. India’s support for Africa is also
expressed through its long history of participation in
United Nations peacekeeping.
India’s partnership with Africa is based on building
instruments of empowerment that will enable Africa to
find African solutions to its problems. Indeed, human
resources and capacity-building are at the heart of our
relationship. African youth have availed themselves of
more than 32,000 scholarships out of the allotted 50,000
that have been offered through the Indian Technical and
Economic Cooperation Programme, announced at the
India-Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi in 2015.
Thousands of African students are currently pursuing
their higher-education studies in various Indian
universities under self-financing schemes, as well.
The Government of India has also been providing
support to African countries to address the digital divide
through the Ministry of External Affair’s flagship
schemes — the e-VidyaBharti for tele-education and
the e-ArogyaBharti for telemedicine — by offering
scholarships to 15,000 African students under the
scheme to pursue online education in undergraduate,
postgraduate and diploma courses. So far, 19 African
countries have partnered in that initiative.
During the India-Africa Forum Summit in 2015, in
order to strengthen our partnership, the Prime Minister
of India announced $10 billion in concessional credit
for the following five years. So far, India has extended
concessional loans totalling more than $12.3 billion to
various projects in Africa. With support from African
nations, Exim Bank of India and relevant stakeholders,
we have completed 197 important projects, and we are
currently executing 65 projects, while 81 projects are
under examination.
Significant development projects, such as drinkingwater schemes, irrigation, rural solar electrification,
power plants, transmission lines, cement, sugar
and textile factories, technology parks, railway
infrastructure and so on, have contributed to Africa’s
socioeconomic development. We have also extended
our support in the form of humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, often as a first responder. During the
coronavirus disease pandemic, our leaders remained
in touch through excellent and warm telephone
conversations that further cemented our relationship
at the highest levels. India provided medical assistance
worth more than $5 million to more than 25 African
countries. We supplied 39.65 million doses of Indian14/33

08/08/2022

made coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines to 42
African countries. We are now exploring the possibility
with some African countries of joint manufacturing
facilities for COVID-19 and other vaccines.
As far as education is concerned, and also
resonating with Sustainable Development Goal 4,
India has established seven information-technology
centres in Egypt, Ghana, Lesotho, Morocco, Namibia,
South Africa and Tanzania to promote digital literacy
among African youth. Eight vocational training
centres, two centres for geo-informatics applications
in rural development in Madagascar and the Niger
and an upgraded technology centre in Zimbabwe
have assisted Africa in its digital transformation
and skills enhancement. India has also partnered in
the establishment of defence institutions in Nigeria,
Ethiopia and Tanzania. Our training teams have been
deployed in Botswana, Namibia, Uganda, Lesotho,
Zambia, Mauritius, the Seychelles and Tanzania. We
are also actively engaged in capacity-building for
security forces in several countries in Africa. Counterinsurgency and counter-terrorism training is one of the
significant areas of our defence training programmes.
Finally, any talk of capacity-building for Africa
would be meaningless if we were to continue to turn
a blind eye to the core issue of the lack of permanent
African representation on the Security Council. While
this body focuses more than half of its work exclusively
on the African continent, the systematic exclusion
of our African brothers and sisters in the permanent
category of Security Council membership is a blot
on our collective credibility. India fully supports the
aspirations of our African partners in their pursuit of
the principles outlined in the Ezulwini Consensus and
the Sirte Declaration. India is willing to walk the talk
on that count and calls on the permanent members of
the Council to do so too. Africa’s priorities are and will
remain India’s priorities as well.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank China for convening today’s important
debate, which is of particular importance for Africa.
I thank Commissioner Bankole Adeoye, Special
Adviser Cristina Duarte and Ambassador Muhammad
Abdul Muhith for their enlightening briefings, while
reiterating my country’s support to them as they
discharge their respective mandates.
As we in the Council consider the issue of capacitybuilding in Africa for sustaining peace, we are
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

reminded of one of the key elements of its mandate,
which is exploring the wide range of challenges
affecting the African continent and addressing their
root causes, while considering ways and means of
supporting greater resilience in Africa. If we are to
respond to the various crises and hotspots that persist
in the Great Lakes region and in a number of countries
in Central Africa, the Sahel and the Horn of Africa,
it seems clear that it is essential to adopt a holistic
approach that brings concrete multidimensional
responses at every stage of the peace process — from
the end of a conflict through peacebuilding, including
post-conflict reconstruction — so as to capitalize on
the achievements of peace efforts in Africa. In that
regard, through its Agenda 2063, the African Union
has developed a framework for action in response to
the challenges of achieving an Africa living in peace
and security — a continent where the values of good
governance, democracy, respect for human rights,
justice and the rule of law are at the centre of peace
and security strategies. That vision is in line with the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular
SDG 16, which is dedicated to promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
ensuring access to justice for all and building effective,
accountable institutions that are open to all.
As we all know, peace has a price. Responding to
the challenge of development is essential to sustaining
peace, particularly for States in post-conflict situations.
The fact is that a durable peace process is possible only
if we address the root causes of a conflict. It is clear
that the effectiveness of many peacekeeping operations
is very far from meeting expectations, and that they
should be reconsidered. It should be possible to allocate
financial resources that are adequate to the needs of the
relevant sectors in order to address root causes of conflict
over the long term. Special attention should be paid to
education, poverty eradication and the employability of
young people so as to shield them from the ills plaguing
our continent such as radicalization. Furthermore, it is
the international community’s responsibility to support
States and regional and subregional organizations by
encouraging them to adopt and implement strategies
designed to strengthen political, social and economic
institutions and systems in meeting the challenges of
sustaining peace. Institutional stability is indeed a
prerequisite for development and peacebuilding.
In that regard, international financial institutions
play an important role, in particular in funding

S/PV.9106

training programmes, creating jobs and implementing
quick-impact projects, as well as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. To that
end, all stakeholders in the public and private sectors
and in civil society must play their part. In addition,
women and young people should not be left out but
should be systematically included at every level of the
peacebuilding process. It is also important to support the
predictable and adequate funding of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, as well as of peacekeeping
operations conducted by the African Union. African
forces are often on the front lines and the first on the
ground. In 2008, at the height of the Central African
crisis, the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the
Central African Republic, followed by the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic in 2013, was able to ease tensions prior to the
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in 2014. In Somalia, with the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which became the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia, and in the Sahel, with
the Group of Five for the Sahel, there has been no
lack of robust responses in Africa to the challenges
of insecurity, terrorism and violent extremism. Those
efforts deserve the support of the Council, which the
Charter of the United Nations has mandated with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Peacebuilding is an ongoing process, fuelled by daily
action aimed at strengthening cohesion among States.
It is difficult to reconcile it with the punitive policies
of embargoes and sanctions that have been imposed on
several African countries that are going through the
painful stage of post-conflict reconstruction.
In conclusion, I believe it is important to
underscore that although States must exercise their
sovereign right to ensure peace on their national
territory, peacebuilding, amid the coronavirus disease
pandemic, climate change and the surge in terrorism,
concerns the entire international community. In that
regard, partnerships between the United Nations and
the African Union should be strengthened and adapted
to situations that are often volatile and vary from one
region to another. The United Nations system should
support the strategic objectives set by countries and
regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, to ensure the maintenance of peace and promote
sustainable development. The Council’s duty is to

22-4538415/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

foster the operationalization of United Nations funding
mechanisms for Africa so as to provide fair and realistic
responses to situations on the ground and mobilize
resources over the long term to support the robust
political commitment of the international community.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the Chinese presidency for
convening this debate. We welcome Mr. Bankole
Adeoye, African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security; Ms. Cristina Duarte,
Special Adviser on Africa to the United Nations
Secretary-General; and Mr. Muhammad Abdul Muhith,
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, whom we wish
every success at the helm of the Commission and in his
new functions. We thank them all for their briefings.
My country considers it is essential to adopt a
comprehensive approach to achieve sustainable peace.
Our efforts must be geared towards responding to the
needs of the people, in line with presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/22, which was adopted in November
under Mexico’s presidency of the Security Council and
unequivocally states that exclusion and inequality can
be aggravating factors in conflict situations.
It is therefore necessary, when it comes to the creation
and strengthening of capacities and institutions, that
preventive actions be contemplated and the underlying
causes of conflicts be addressed — hence the importance
of eradicating poverty and inequality, as well as
strengthening the rule of law, inter alia. Consolidating
the link between security and development provides
a foundation on which to advance towards good
governance and sustainable peace and development.
We are aware that, in certain countries and regions
of the African continent, various challenges to peace and
security and their development are multidimensional in
nature. One of the main challenges is political stability.
In the past two years, for example, we have noted
with concern the disruption of the constitutional order
in countries such as Chad, Mali, Guinea, the Sudan,
Burkina Faso and, most recently, Guinea-Bissau.
Furthermore, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
stood as an additional barrier to progress in meeting
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Feasible responses from a capacity-building
standpoint are equally cross-cutting in nature. I will
focus only on four aspects that are relevant to our
debate today.
16/33

08/08/2022

First, one of the current challenges faced by the
entire world but which affects some regions of the
African continent in particular is climate change and
its consequences. Capacity-building for mitigation
and adaptation, as well as for agricultural processes
and energy generation, is urgent. The twenty-seventh
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
to take place in Egypt, will be a good opportunity to
review ways in which to close the investment gaps that
constitute a real and unresolved problem.
Secondly, it is critical that capacity-building be
fully, equally and meaningfully inclusive of women,
guided by the women and peace and security agenda.
Areas such as mediation and conflict prevention and
resolution can be strengthened by women’s skills
and leadership.
Thirdly, illicit arms trafficking continues to
pose security challenges and fuel cycles of violence
in that region and elsewhere in the world. Therefore,
Mexico reiterates once again that priority must be
given to capacity-building among customs and border
authorities, as well as, and above all, to strengthen legal
mechanisms and international commitments to contain
that grave phenomenon.
Fourthly, strengthening the rule of law and
accountable and transparent institutions is fundamental
in promoting sustainable and inclusive development.
That goes hand in hand with security sector reforms,
the implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes and the strengthening
of justice institutions. In that connection, the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission referred to a concrete
example in his briefing, namely, the establishment of
a justice sector policy in the Central African Republic
that includes, inter alia, a judicial and penal component.
Projects of that nature are welcome and should be
replicated, as they improve access to justice and actions
to combat impunity.
Mexico recognizes that, as part of their capacitybuilding efforts, African countries have revitalized
their regional economic integration initiatives. We
reiterate the importance of taking advantage of
those synergies in regional collaboration to promote
greater integrated planning and operation in projects
that combat exclusion, injustice, gender inequality
and corruption.
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Practice has shown that peace cannot be sustainable
without development. In turn, sustainable peace is
indispensable for preserving the development gains.
For those reasons, it is also important to increase efforts
to meet official development assistance commitments,
which remain far below the target set for that purpose
by the United Nations.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this meeting, and I thank all of our
briefers today for their valuable remarks. I will make
just three points.
First, as our Kenyan colleague said, Africa is a
continent with great potential. Yet the United Kingdom
shares the deep concern expressed by others with
regard to the scale of the challenges that many countries
in Africa are facing today. The coronavirus disease
has made it harder to consolidate development gains.
Many countries have had to grapple with the impact of
climate change and related humanitarian pressures. The
drought in the Horn of Africa and flooding in South
Sudan are just the latest tragic examples. On top of that,
the global economic consequences of Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine have hit the continent hard, jeopardizing
hard-won peace and development progress.
Secondly, the United Kingdom remains committed
to doing its part to support African countries in
fulfilling their potential. Through our new international
development strategy, we are working with Governments
and civil society to help partners get on track to meet
the Sustainable Development Goals. That includes
capacity-building to strengthen institutions that work
for the well-being of their citizens.
The United Kingdom remains a strong supporter of
efforts to promote peace and manage conflicts across the
continent. We take our responsibilities in the Security
Council seriously. We work in close partnership with
the African Union (AU), for example, to reconfigure
the AU Transition Mission in Somalia. We trained over
3,000 African peacekeepers in the past financial year
through the British Peace Support Team in Africa. In
July, we hosted the second United Kingdom-Ghana
security dialogue, where we agreed to support regional
approaches to tackling growing risks of instability in
coastal West African States. The United Kingdom is
the second-largest donor to the Elsie Initiative Fund,
having provided over $6 million since 2019 in order
to increase the participation of uniformed women in
United Nations peace operations.

S/PV.9106

Thirdly, there are no shortcuts. Development
gains and fragile peace will be lost if large parts of
a population are marginalized, or if human rights are
abused. Internationally, we need a model of cooperation
that prioritizes the values of openness and inclusion.
Peacebuilding and development must be people-centred
if they are to be sustainable. And as the Council has
made clear, the meaningful participation of women in
peace processes is central to building sustainable peace.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains fully
committed to peace and development in Africa. We
look forward to the continued partnership between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
the wider United Nation membership and regional
organizations — to advance peace and development
in Africa.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking China for organizing this open debate and for
its commitment to keep the collaboration between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) as a central topic on our agenda. I also thank
Ambassador Adeoye, Under-Secretary-General and
Special Adviser Duarte and Ambassador Muhith.
Capacity-building is indeed a fundamental pillar
of sustainable peace. In my statement, I will focus on
three main aspects.
The first one is a much-needed overview of the
basic aspirations shared in Africa by all of its people
concerning their peace and security. A useful point
of departure is Agenda 2063, the pioneering report
published by the African Union Commission whose
subtitle is simply “The Africa we want”. It is refreshing
to note in this study that the people of Africa and its
diaspora have committed to act together to achieve — as
two of their main aspirations — a prosperous Africa,
based on inclusive growth and sustainable development,
and a peaceful and secure Africa. In fact, they also
recognize that a prosperous, integrated and united
Africa based on good governance, democracy, social
inclusion and respect for human rights, justice and
the rule of law are necessary preconditions for a
peaceful and conflict-free continent. Therein lies the
very core of the issue we are debating today. Security
and development are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. Sustaining peace therefore requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach in order to
address the economic, political and social dimensions
of conflict.

22-4538417/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

The second aspect is the means to reach those
aspirations that I quoted from the from Agenda
2063. In that regard, we must recognize that the
conditions for economic and social development have
been denied to the societies of Africa, as indeed to
the majority of the developing countries. Official
development assistance — be it multilateral or bilateral,
humanitarian- or development-driven — is important,
but essentially a stop-gap solution. What developing
countries, and those in Africa in particular, need is a
global economic, financial and trade architecture that
allows them to fulfil their potential.
In that context, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is uniquely placed as an enabler to mobilize
international attention and support to nationally
defined peacebuilding priorities, both in terms of
financing and expertise. Technical cooperation,
notably South-South cooperation, plays a key role in
capacity-building. Members elected from the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, in addition to top financial and troopcontributing countries, conferred legitimacy on the
PBC. The PBC’s accumulated experience in promoting
national ownership, inclusivity and institution-building
also provides useful guidelines for societies that seek
prosperity and security as their way forward.
The third aspect is the challenge of sustaining
peace. A comprehensive approach to sustaining peace
encompasses all efforts to prevent relapse into conflict.
We therefore have solid reasons to place strong emphasis
on conflict prevention as a key guideline for peace and
security capacities in Africa. We welcome the steps
taken to deepen the partnerships between the United
Nations and the African Union on peace and security.
We also encourage further collaboration among the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
bodies in conflict prevention.
In States and societies that have managed to
overcome war and widespread conflict, a common
thread has been the ability to adopt effective public
policies through solid national institutions. And
the fabric of the institutions is made up of shared
values. Hence the respect for ethnic and cultural
diversity, growing participation by women in peace
and development efforts, the advancement of material
well-being, the protection of political rights and civil
liberties and the adaptation of the national security
architecture to ensure that the safety of all citizens are
some of the values that underpin effective institutions.
18/33

08/08/2022

Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely debate, and the
briefers for their insights.
To effectively support the African Union (AU)
in delivering sustained peace and security, we need
look no further than the aspirations of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, which outlines an Africa of good
governance, respect for human rights, justice and the
rule of law, full gender equality in all spheres of life
and caring for children. The key challenge now is how
we, as partners, can more effectively pool resources and
coordinate our efforts in support of Africa’s aspirations.
Global challenges are disproportionately affecting
Africa — from the sharp rise in acute food insecurity,
hunger and malnutrition to the climate crisis becoming
increasingly evident, affecting livelihoods and
multiplying the risk of further conflict.
While the Black Sea Grain Initiative, if
implemented, can ensure that grain fertilizers and other
food-related items are available at reasonable prices,
the long-term solution is to increase sustainable food
production in Africa. Africa has the potential to become
the world’s bread basket. Alongside humanitarian
efforts, therefore, we must scale up our investments in
food production and resilience in Africa, in and outside
conflict zones, in a climate-smart way.
Our shared goal is to prevent and contain conflict.
We welcome the African Union’s leadership on African
conflicts, demonstrated repeatedly by the firm actions
of the AU’s Peace and Security Council, including in
response to unconstitutional takeovers.
The United Nations and the AU have also made
great strides in promoting more structured and strategic
cooperation. Norway is pleased to support these efforts.
But we need greater political support from Member
States, as well as predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding, including for AU-led and regional missions.
Norway has backed the Secretary-General’s call for a
United Nations support office for the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, and we remain open to
using assessed contributions to AU and regionally led
missions when conditions are right.
From decades of engagement in, and support for,
African-led peace processes, including in the Sudan,
South Sudan, and Somalia, Norway has learned
that peace and reconciliation require a long-term
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

commitment. Signing peace agreements alone does not
bring peace.
In addressing root causes and drivers of conflict,
necessary political will is key, and that is most
effectively generated by the region itself. But support
from strategic partners is also important, and we believe
cooperation and coordination on conflict resolution and
peacebuilding can be improved. In fragile contexts,
it is vital that we deliver as one, including in efforts
to reform the security and justice sectors, and in the
prevention of violent extremism.
By exchanging analysis, views and possible
messages earlier — and countering disinformation
campaigns that incite violence and fuel conflict — we
may prevent conflicts from erupting or spreading. In
this regard, strengthened cooperation and more frequent
interaction between the Security Council, the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission would be useful.
Africa is home to a young and growing population
yearning for stability, economic and social progress; it
also yearns for Africa to fulfil its true promise. Peace
and stability are the most important building blocks to
realizing this ambition, and African countries hold the
critical experience and insights.
Cooperation with Africa is paramount in dealing
with security issues on the continent, which is why
the Security Council must also reflect the geopolitical
realities of today. Norway supports efforts aimed at
expanding the Council and increasing the number of
permanent and non-permanent seats for Africa.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Since this is my first time in the Security
Council since China took up the presidency, I would
like to thank Brazil for a successful month in its
presidency of the Council in July and welcome China to
the presidency and wish it a successful month as well.
I would also like to thank China for convening
today’s open debate on capacity-building for sustaining
peace in Africa. I thank African Union Commissioner
Adeoye and Special Adviser Duarte for their briefings
on some of the keys to ensuring sustainable peace.
We also warmly welcome Ambassador Muhith and
thank him as he takes on his new position as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I would also like
to welcome other members of the Council who are
participating in this debate today.

S/PV.9106

Today I would like to discuss three core areas of
focus that can move us toward a more sustainable and
peaceful Africa: first, the importance of development
and human rights in our work; secondly, continued
cooperation on conflict prevention and resolution; and
thirdly, our collective efforts to address the dire spike
in global food insecurity.
All of the foregoing is top of mind for me because
last night I came back from a trip that took me to
Uganda, Ghana and Cabo Verde. During my visit I laid
out a vision for peace and food security in Africa. In
my remarks I quoted one of my personal heroes and a
founding father of the United Nations, Ralph Bunche,
who said,
“If peace is to be secure, long-suffering and
long-starved, forgotten peoples of the world, the
underprivileged and the undernourished, must
begin to realize without delay the promise of a new
day and a new life.”
This is a message I wanted to bring to this Chamber
today as well. Peace cannot wait in Africa. It must
come from African leaders and African institutions,
and it must be for Africa’s people.
We have an opportunity to step up our support, and I
join many in this room in highlighting our commitment
to development, peace and security and human rights as
equal interlinked pillars of the United Nations Charter.
One example of an interlinked approach to these pillars
is our implementation of the United States strategy to
prevent conflict and promote stability over the next 10
years. I also join many in this Chamber in calling for
advancing development in pursuit of the Sustainable
Development Goals, which, as the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights notes, are firmly
anchored in human rights principles and standards.
It is this kind of human rights-centred development
and security agenda that we look forward to prioritizing
at our upcoming United States-Africa Leaders Summit,
which will take place in Washington this December.
Together we can work to strengthen trade relations,
economic development and prosperity in Africa.
In line with what Secretary Blinken said today in
Pretoria while launching the United States strategy for
sub-Saharan Africa, we believe Africa will shape the
future — not just the future for African people, but for
the world. African countries have the resources and
the will to do just that. African institutions are already

22-4538419/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

08/08/2022

leading the way by facilitating the resolution of crises
and conflicts in the Great Lakes region, Mozambique
and Somalia, and by serving as major contributors to
United Nations peacekeeping efforts around the world.

that added disruption of global supply chains, soaring,
surging fuel prices and suffering lies squarely and
solely with the Russian Government, and we know that
the effects are hitting Africa particularly hard.

The United States is using diplomacy to support
these efforts. As just one example, during my visit to
Uganda just last week, I underscored our support for
African mediation efforts in the conflict playing out
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secretary
Blinken will do the same in his visits to the Democratic
Republic and Rwanda in the next few days. We are
urging an end to support for non-State armed groups,
as well as a de-escalation of violence.

In the case of food, as in many other areas, we are
partnering with African Governments and leaders to
address immediate crises, while also connecting those
short-term efforts with a longer-term imperative of
bolstering Africa’s ability to solve global problems.

Let us also acknowledge the fact that the African
Union is key to Africa’s peace, as we heard from the
Commissioner earlier. The African Union can continue
to mediate conflict and support its regional economic
communities during political transitions and civil
conflicts. We applaud the progress that the AU has made
in developing its own human rights and international
humanitarian law frameworks. We are committed to
continuing to work with the AU to further the financing
of the AU peace support operations envisioned in
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).
Additionally, when we talk about peace in Africa,
we must recognize the important role United Nations
arms embargoes play in sustaining peace in Africa.
On that point, exemptions to arms embargoes ensure
that Governments have the ability to procure what they
need, while arms embargoes provide transparency in
weapons flows into conflict areas. Arms embargoes
limit the ability of belligerents to engage in hostilities,
and ultimately they do save lives. These kinds of arms
embargoes are integral to the AU’s Silencing the Guns
initiative, which was extended to 2030.
But for all the hope that I have, and that I believe
we should all have, we cannot discuss sustainable
peace in Africa without acknowledging the tumultuous
times in which we find ourselves. Spikes in energy
prices, the coronavirus disease, the climate crisis and
conflict — all mentioned by each of us today — have
all led to a dramatic rise in food insecurity. That was
a constant drumbeat when I was on the continent
last week. Two hundred million people are now food
insecure, unsure of where they will find their next meal.
If one adds Russia’s war of choice in Ukraine on top of
all of that, there is the worst food security crisis that
we have seen in our lifetimes. The responsibility for
20/33

Let us work together, under the leadership of
African countries, to forge a more peaceful, more
prosperous, more secure future. And let us do so, as
Ralph Bunche urged us, without delay.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security; Ms. Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser on
Africa to the Secretary-General; and Mr. Muhammad
Abdul Muhith, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their
informative briefings. We particularly thank our
Chinese colleagues for organizing an open debate on
such a topical subject, especially for our African friends.
There is no doubt that African States need
international support to build national capacities to
resolve the problems of the continent. There are many
of them: ongoing armed conflicts, the increase in
terrorist threats, the weakness of State institutions,
poverty and epidemics. In a number of cases, the wellbeing not only of individual countries but also of entire
regions has been dealt a particular blow by external
foreign intervention, as was the case with the events in
Libya in 2011.
Despite that, we cannot fail to pay tribute to the
efforts being made by the Africans themselves in
terms of the sustainable development of their political
and social systems and strengthening the institutions
of the African Union and subregional organizations.
The African Agenda 2063 was adopted; the African
Continental Free Trade Area was launched; work is
under way to implement the flagship initiative of the
African Union to end armed conflicts on the continent;
and a continent-wide Peace and Security Architecture
is being developed.
At the same time, African issues still account for
more than half of the Security Council’s agenda. For
our part, we are convinced that effective assistance
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

to Africans can be carried out only on the basis of
mutually respectful dialogue, with strict respect
for their sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity. Yet we very often hear views in
this Chamber, and they are expressed in an admonitory
tone, that African States need democratic transitions,
timely elections, reform and the strengthening of State
institutions. In many cases, that is true. However, the
question arises as to what extent those issues are the
business of the Security Council and what exactly it can
do in order to help effectively.
We invariably proceed from the fact that African
States have their own historical and cultural paths
and that many contemporary problems are linked to a
colonial past, arbitrarily drawn borders and a complex
ethnic, tribal and religious structure. Under such
conditions, the imposition of third-party, primarily
Western, State and economic models on them may prove
counterproductive. In most cases, prescriptive actions
are limited to pressure and the threat of sanctions. In
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
legitimate restrictive steps can be applied by the
Security Council only to curb threats to international
peace and security, primarily to end violence. But those
tools should not be used to ensure political dominance,
and it is all the more unacceptable for them to be
supplemented by economic blackmail.
If we talk about the United Nations as a whole,
the main focus in helping to strengthen States should
be on socioeconomic assistance, creating favourable
conditions for the development of society, building
effective national education and health-care systems
and preventing a brain drain. At the international level,
it is important to achieve concrete results in eliminating
financial and technological distortions, overcoming
discrimination and double standards in the provision
of funds through the institutions of the Bretton Woods
system. Without a qualitative breakthrough in those
areas, fragmented State-building and peacebuilding
efforts cannot produce sustainable results.
In speaking about stability in Africa, one cannot
avoid the question of silencing the guns. Recently,
there has been a growing understanding that regional
efforts are preferable, and in some cases irreplaceable.
Africans, as a rule, have a better and deeper knowledge
of the local context. Unfortunately, we have seen many
examples of African mediation efforts being sidelined
or deliberately thwarted by external actors. That
includes Libya, South Sudan and many other files. In

S/PV.9106

the recent past, there was an unwillingness to take into
account the clear position of the African Union and
subregional organizations on lifting the arms embargo
on South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic. Those steps are long
overdue, as they prevent national security forces from
effectively stabilizing their own States.
We believe that it is justified for African countries
to raise the issue of providing material and financial
assistance for the maintenance of international peace
and security, including through the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union. We agree that
it is important to enhance predictability, reliability and
flexibility in terms of funding for African operations
and joint missions. As a matter of principle, we do
not object to considering the possibility of expanding
United Nations participation in such missions, and
we are ready for further constructive dialogue in that
regard. However, we note that this discussion has been
going on in the United Nations for many years, and it
is well known which countries oppose the adoption of
significant decisions. At the same time, as a pretext,
distrust of African efforts is often mentioned, or special
demands are put forward related to human rights and
the like.
There is no need to look far for examples of the
active role of Africans in maintaining peace and
security on their own continent. The African mission
in Somalia continues to operate. The joint actions of
Mozambique, the Southern African Development
Community and Rwanda in countering terrorist threats
in Cabo Delgado, the African Union regional effort
to eliminate the Lord’s Resistance Army in northern
Uganda and the fight against Boko Haram have all
worked well.
However, it is important to emphasize that the key to
the success of regional efforts is a common assessment
by the countries of the region of the existing threats and
ways to overcome them, a genuine readiness to bear
the risks of addressing them and the establishment of
a well-coordinated command-and-control system. As
far as funding modalities are concerned, whichever
is appropriate, it is important that host countries have
room to make their own policy decisions on countering
the threats. In that regard, agreeing on a common
African position on the modalities for financing their
operations and the use of the African Union Peace Fund
is key.

22-4538421/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

Russia has always supported African States, and
today we continue to contribute to their capacitybuilding. We do not impose anything on anyone; we do
not instruct others and we do not force them to be friends
against anyone. We are satisfied that our assistance is
highly appreciated by the countries of the continent. At
the same time, we believe that African States have the
sovereign right to choose their partners. Moreover, the
diversity of those partners makes it possible to strike a
political balance in many regions and break the oftenenslaving dependence on former colonial Powers.
Given the increasing terrorist threat, we believe
that it is important to develop the potential for
cooperation with African partners on counter-terrorism
issues, both in a bilateral format and in regional and
international forums. We are working on the possibility
of cooperating with the African Centre for Study and
Research on Terrorism in Algiers, which is affiliated
with the African Union, and we are ready to continue
sharing our experience in that area.
We continue to devote considerable attention to
training the continent’s personnel. Police officers and
military personnel from African countries, including
future peacekeepers, are trained in Russian educational
institutions every year. We also provide substantial
support for civilian specialties. Approximately 27,000
African students are currently studying in Russia,
including more than 5,000 whose expenses are paid
through Russia’s budget. We hope that the RussiaAfrica summit planned for next year will enable us to
discuss current areas of cooperation in depth and aim
at developing our cooperation on a friendly, equal and
forward-looking basis.
We constantly hear Western countries making
the same accusations that Russia is, to coin a phrase,
exporting hunger. These utterly groundless allegations
represent their attempt to dress up the real reasons
for rising food prices, which are the results of the
coronavirus disease pandemic and stupid policies,
including those related to Western countries’ currency
issuance and their own channelling of commodity and
food flows towards themselves. Of course, in order
to hide their guilty consciences, they say absolutely
nothing about the negative effect that the illegal
unilateral sanctions on Russia — a vital supplier of
food and fertilizers — are having on the food market,
disrupting established financial, transport and other
supply chains, while claiming that agricultural
products and chemicals are not subject to sanctions. At
22/33

08/08/2022

the same time, they slyly gloss over the fact that those
transport, financial and insurance chains are a key
object and factor in the export of agricultural products
and fertilizers. Meanwhile, they are travelling around
Africa to dissuade Africans from cooperating with
Russia and threatening them with secondary sanctions
if they do.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate China on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and thank Brazil for its able stewardship during
its presidency last month. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, Special Adviser Cristina
Duarte and Ambassador Muhammad Abdul Muhith for
their comprehensive briefings.
The United Arab Emirates commends China for
dedicating its first signature meeting to this vital topic.
The focus on capacity-building for sustainable peace
in Africa requires us to actively engage with African
perspectives, practices and voices. Since its founding,
the United Arab Emirates has steadily expanded
its relationships with partners across the continent.
Today our partnerships have flourished into dynamic
cooperation in critical fields such as renewable energy,
food security, counter-terrorism and public health.
Those ties are built on a rich connection between our
two regions, as exemplified by the welcome in ancient
African States extended to the first Muslims who
came seeking safety from persecution on the Arabian
peninsula. Against that historic backdrop, we strongly
believe that discussions like ours today can and must
be enriched by centring African experiences. With that
in mind, the United Arab Emirates would like to share
three key points.
First, one of the most consistent conclusions
that can be drawn from the more than 75 years of
the Council’s work on peace and security is that
local contexts must shape every effort to sustain
peace. That truth has been repeatedly reaffirmed by
experiences in Africa, the Middle East and beyond.
For instance, the restorative-justice approach at the
heart of South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation
Commission reflected the ubuntu tradition, with its
emphasis on community, empathy and cooperation.
The Panel of the Wise of the African Union (AU) is
rooted in the customary institution of the Council of
Elders, which has been central to resolving conflict
and keeping the peace throughout history. African
solutions to African challenges must begin by engaging
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

the continent’s repertoire of conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding practices.
Secondly, while our immediate focus is on
challenges in the continent, we must remember how
often their origins and implications extend beyond its
borders. Equally, the Council must recognize that it is
African solutions, and not just its challenges, that have
global dimensions. Global peacebuilding approaches
that incorporate communal dialogue, women’s networks
and reconciliation borrow extensively from African
practices. Supporting capacity-building to sustain
peace in Africa is therefore not charity. It is both a
moral imperative made more urgent by our complex and
growing interconnectedness and a strategic investment
that directly benefits the entire world.
Finally, sustainable peace necessarily implies
sustainable development. Multidimensional crises in
various African settings risk reversing the hard-won
progress on the Sustainable Development Goals and
the AU’s Agenda 2063, which could in turn exacerbate
security challenges and existing vulnerabilities. The
pandemic, the food security crisis and commodity
price increases have put public sectors and economies
under immense strain. Protecting and ensuring access
to basic goods and services and stabilizing food and
energy prices must be central to any effort to sustain
peace. It is crucial to ensure that the approach of the
international community, including the Security
Council, incorporates those dynamics, especially in the
light of rising global tensions.
In conclusion, in order to sustain peace in Africa,
the United Arab Emirates firmly believes in the
importance of supporting all capacity-building efforts
that are grounded in the continent’s local, national and
regional perspectives.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): The narrative about
Africa that has often been given prominence in the
global media is one of a continent full of conflict,
misery and pain. That narrative, which is only partly
true at best, belies Africa’s resilience and determined
effort to consolidate peace, unleash its socioeconomic
transformation through continental integration and
realize the aspirations of a prosperous continent for
its youthful population. We therefore believe that
the international narrative and understanding of the
complexities of the problems of Africa should be aligned
with the continent’s aspirations and efforts, in order
to link global partnerships more effectively together

S/PV.9106

in support of sustainable African solutions. In that
context, Ghana welcomes the convening of this open
debate by China to facilitate reflections on how best the
wider international community can support the African
continent in its efforts to consolidate peace and security
through the development of African capacities and
institutions. We thank Commissioner Bankole Adeoye,
Special Adviser Duarte and Ambassador Muhammad
Abdul Muhith for sharing their rich perspectives and
views in the context of today’s open debate.
The African context, particularly as it relates to the
search for durable peace and sustainable development,
is often characterized by a combination of both
accomplishments and unresolved challenges. Despite
the continent’s many achievements, a wide array of
threats to its peace and security continue, including
those related to terrorism and violent extremism,
maritime insecurity, cross-border and transnational
crime, cybercrime and unconstitutional changes
in Government.
Underlying those threats are factors such as
increased youth unemployment, the effects of climate
change, institutional fragility, food insecurity and
poverty, which are exacerbated by structural challenges
such as the imbalance in global development and
national governance and institutional deficits, as well
as major global crises such as the situation in Libya
since 2011, the coronavirus disease pandemic and the
knock-on effects of the prevailing aggression against
Ukraine. Those unfortunate situations provide fodder
for the recruitment of young people into terrorist
organizations and armed groups, fuel intercommunal
clashes and ignite farmer-herder conflicts, among
other things.
In our view, the way to support the capacity of
Africa to build sustainable peace and security does not
lie in externally driven objectives but should remain
anchored around the strengthening and effective
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, as well as the African Governance
Architecture. In today’s debate, we would like to share
four key messages on how we can increase the capacity
of both the African Union (AU) and African countries
to ensure durable peace and security on the continent.
First, the coordination mechanisms between the
AU and the United Nations, such as the Joint United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security and the annual joint consultative

22-4538423/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

meetings between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, should be enhanced
through a more regular exchange of information, joint
briefings by special representatives and envoys of
the two organizations and joint field visits by senior
officials. Such measures would help to avoid duplication
of effort, improve complementarity and reinforce the
coherent implementation of actions for peace and
security, based on continental priorities and actions.
Secondly, global support for an effective African
Peace and Security Architecture, including its
mechanisms for early warning, conflict prevention,
mediation, peace support operations and post-conflict
reconstruction, has a much better chance of creating
sustainable peace, given the nature of the intra-State
conflicts we are beginning to witness involving
terrorist and extremist groups. While significant
progress has been achieved since the turn of the century
in harmonizing continental doctrines and strategy,
as well as planning and managing peace support
operations, our ability to sustain such operations under
the African Standby Force continues to suffer, owing
to logistical and financial constraints. In responding to
the capacity needs of Africa, it is therefore important
for the Council to determine, sooner rather than later,
the conditions under which African regional forces
acting under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations can meet the requirements for predictable,
adequate and sustainable financing, especially from
assessed contributions.
Thirdly, in line with Sustainable Development Goal
16, the current context of Africa requires enhanced
support for the implementation of the shared values of
the AU, including those outlined in the African Charter
on Democracy, Elections and Governance, as well as
core governance functions in the areas of the delivery
of public services and public financial management. We
underscore the responsibility of African Governments
to build trust with their populations and put in place the
requisite institutions and structures that can strengthen
the social contract and reduce public frustration,
exclusion and inequality. We especially urge that
youth, women and girls should be fully integrated
into all aspects of decision-making and public-policy
implementation in order to address deep-rooted public
grievances and prevent violent public outbursts and
disturbances to peace and security.
Fourthly, in recognition of the fact that peace is more
than the absence of conflict, we urge real international
24/33

08/08/2022

commitment and support to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
AU’s Agenda 2063 in Africa. Within that development
framework, the international community can assist
African countries in mobilizing new and additional
financial resources, adapting to climate change,
attracting innovative investment and financing,
transferring environmentally sound technologies
and strengthening national systems for more resilient
societies that have a greater capacity for sustaining
peace. In all such partnerships, we encourage the
involvement of African civil-society networks, as well
as networks of women and youth groups, as an effective
tool for ensuring accountability and peace.
In times of national and regional turmoil, African
countries and regional organizations, including
the African Union and Africa’s regional economic
communities, such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Southern African Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the East African Community, have
mobilized available capacities and demonstrated a
commitment to restoring calm and order. Despite the
strengths that have been demonstrated, we still need
enhanced collaboration between the United Nations
and the AU to ensure that the capacities of both the AU
and our subregional organizations are strengthened.
Let me therefore conclude by reiterating that
capacity-building is of the utmost importance in the
consolidation of peace and stability in Africa. We
encourage that support, mindful of the need for African
leadership and ownership over such processes.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Today’s open debate, which
is focused on Africa, is important and timely, and we
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing it.
Many regions in Africa, and not only on that
continent, are experiencing rough times and facing
additional challenges caused by conflicts and
instability, including the seizure of power by force,
exacerbated by the pandemic over the past few years
as well as the increasingly dramatic effects of climate
change, problems that have now unfortunately been
followed by severe food insecurity as a result of the
war in Ukraine.
I thank Commissioner Adeoye, Special Adviser
Duarte and Ambassador Muhith, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, whom I welcome, for
their insightful briefings. They confirm that despite
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

the continent’s immense potential, many African
States continue to face a multitude of challenges at
the national, regional and global levels, which are
seriously jeopardizing the progress that has been
made in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The coronavirus disease pandemic has
further highlighted the chronic and pervasive issues of
institutional weakness, the need for better capacity to
formulate and implement policies, donor dependency
and the drain of qualified human capital from the
continent as some of the major problems. They are
not unique to Africa but are common challenges faced
by many developing countries that call for serious
and continued national and international efforts to
strengthen institutional capacity for development.
Meeting people’s needs for basic services is key to
peace and security, and infrastructure and services are
vital to delivering results. Albania is deeply concerned
that public goods and services, including schools and
health facilities, continue to be targeted in armed
conflicts across the continent. We must never forget
that when education is under attack, the future of a
nation is under threat.
We applaud the increasing leadership of the African
Union and individual States in contributing to peace
operations and fighting terrorists and insurgent groups.
That is a direct contribution to stability and development
and calls for the recognition and better integration of the
direct links between peace and security, disarmament
and reconciliation, the rule of law and respect for
human rights and democratic institutions and effective
governance in delivering results.
It is crucial to recognize and respect the pivotal role
that civil-society organizations and young people play in
public life, including in peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconciliation, but also in tackling climate-change
challenges. We welcome the continued commitment
of African countries to fully implementing the women
and peace and security agenda and its priorities. We
continue to believe that a genuine commitment to
achieving gender equality and empowering women
contributes to the success of peace talks and the
achievement of sustainable peace, accelerates economic
recovery, improves humanitarian assistance, helps
counter violent extremism and prevents human rights
violations. As the Special Adviser rightly highlighted
earlier, there is a need for vertical and horizontal
inclusion. In order to properly address some of the root
causes of conflict in Africa and intensify our efforts

S/PV.9106

in the implementation of the objectives outlined in the
African Union’s Agenda 2063, I will briefly highlight
some key points.
First, sustained development and progress will be
difficult without the contribution of all active forces
of society. There is no better way to achieve that than
by investing in good governance. That is achieved by
organizing free and fair elections, building institutions
that are accountable to the law and with open and
participatory societies. Good governance helps fight
corruption, strengthens institutions, builds capacity
and increases the trust of citizens. Good governance
does not rest on promises, it delivers results.
Secondly, in conflict and post-conflict countries,
it is important to work for more inclusive and effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, including for the reintegration of children
formerly associated with armed groups or armed forces.
Thirdly, there can be no lasting peace without
reconciliation, but there can hardly be genuine
reconciliation without justice and accountability. Those
responsible for crimes, who overthrow legitimate
Governments and are responsible for human rights
violations, must be brought to account, nationally or
internationally. If not, the violence will not end. It
will only be postponed until the next strongman rules,
with the dire consequences we have seen so many
times before.
Fourthly, to better help African States deal with
their multitude of challenges, including climate change,
trade relations should be strengthened and diversified,
with a clear view to supporting the economies of
the future. It is therefore crucial to promote public and
private investment with a greater emphasis on the green
and blue economies in Africa.
My fifth and final point relates to the nexus between
climate and security. The Horn of Africa is one of the
areas most severely affected by that nexus. The impact
of droughts and the increasing economic pressures in
several parts of the continent is deepening the severity
of needs and driving countries to the brink of famine.
Droughts have and will continue to devastate the lives
and livelihoods of those who are most vulnerable and
who are marginalized, including women, children and
minorities. That issue is of paramount importance for
Africa and the entire world. A lack of quick, robust
and appropriate responses will become the sign of a
collective failure.

22-4538425/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

Let me conclude by reiterating the gravity of the
food insecurity caused by the war in Ukraine. We
need no explanation of what it has already unleashed
worldwide, including in many parts of Africa. It is
further undermining economic growth and causing
macroeconomic instability, as explained in the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General. It is dreadful to
imagine what it may bring in the months to come if
the war is not quickly brought to an end. It is a matter
of urgency if we want to avoid the exploitation of
grievances, either by the armed groups already active
in many States in Africa or by those who might be
waiting for a pretext to topple legitimate Governments
and throw countries and nations into turmoil.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I too would like to thank all the briefers today
for their extremely comprehensive presentations. For
my part, I would like to emphasize three points.
Only national capacity-building, supported by
solid, long-term training, can achieve lasting results
and create the conditions necessary for a withdrawal
of peace operations. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes must continue to support
local authorities in Tanganyika and the Kasais, from
which the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
withdrawn. We are following the course that we have
set for the United Nations in that regard in terms of our
own national efforts.
In the Sahel, France will continue to provide
support to countries in the region at their request,
alongside our European and especially our African
partners. We will continue to support the development
of exemplary security forces that are capable of ensuring
security throughout their territory and are respectful of
constitutional order and human rights. That is vital to
ensuring that the most vulnerable countries are not at
the mercy of mercenaries such as those belonging to the
Wagner Group, who multiply their abuses and plunder
their resources.
Capacity-building should also enable national
authorities to control the spread of arms, which is a
precondition for lifting the embargo measures adopted
by the Security Council. Embargoes do not impede
capacity-building, because exemptions are provided for
that purpose. Capacity-building should also be based on
a partnership of trust and good governance. It is a long26/33

08/08/2022

term, costly investment that requires the deployment
of unusual expertise, and it cannot be made without
political commitment and accountability from the State
benefiting from it. Establishing professional security
forces and fighting corruption are therefore essential
in that regard.
The allocation of sufficient resources to all State
services is also imperative. While of course I am
referring to internal security forces, this also includes
the justice system in the fight against impunity, as
well as all other basic public services. That approach
cannot be effective if it is not inclusive, and the full
participation of women and young people must be
guaranteed. We can do more to build those partnerships,
and the Peacebuilding Commission, with the support
of the Peacebuilding Fund, can do more to create the
conditions for sustainable peace.
Finally, we must continue to seek innovative
solutions in our partnerships. The coronavirus disease
has also led to the emergence of unprecedented
cooperation between the European Union (EU), the
African Union (AU) and their member States, for
example, South Africa and Rwanda, in the production
of messenger RNA vaccines. We also committed to
renewing and strengthening the partnership between
the African Union and the European Union at the sixth
EU-AU Summit in February. That partnership has
strengthened the standards of African operations in the
area of human rights in particular, for example through
the compliance framework within the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the work under way
with the African Union.
France is ready to resume discussions on the
financing of African peace operations from United
Nations assessed contributions as soon as the relevant
conditions are met. As many of my colleagues have
underscored, we must more clearly recognize the
link between climate change and insecurity on the
African continent and understand all the related
implications. Increasing the financing available
for adaptation to climate change contributes to
conflict prevention and is perfectly in line with a
sustainable-development perspective.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Senegal.
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend and thank the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s debate on an issue to which we attach particular
importance in the context of Senegal’s chairpersonship
of the African Union (AU). I would also like to thank
all the members of the Council, as well as our three
briefers, for the quality of their interventions.
Our debate is taking place in a context where
situations in Africa continue to dominate the Council’s
agenda, despite all the efforts that have been made to rid
the continent of the scourge of security threats. We see
that in the resurgence of political crises, armed conflicts,
terrorism, organized crime and intercommunal conflicts
and their disastrous humanitarian consequences.
That demands that we all not only take stock of the
international community’s actions aimed at promoting
peace and security in Africa, but above all that we
optimize the enormous potential of the African Union
and the regional economic communities in that area. In
that connection, the African Union has established the
African Peace and Security Architecture and has also
demonstrated its ability as a first responder in conflict
situations, as has been the case in Mali, the Central
African Republic and Somalia.
Similarly, the tangible results of the operations of
the Economic Community of West African States in
resolving a number of crises, including the deployment
of its Ceasefire Monitoring Group in numerous theatres
in Liberia, Guinea-Bissau and the Gambia, attest to
the crucial role that African subregional organizations
can play in promoting peace on the continent. I should
not neglect to mention in that regard the significant
contributions of other initiatives such as the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Multinational
Joint Task Force fielded against Boko Haram and the
Accra Initiative. Those efforts, however, have had to
face a number of challenges related to the complexity
of security threats and to African peace and security
initiatives’ lack of financial and operational capacity.
My delegation therefore believes that the following
actions are crucial to strengthening African peace and
security capabilities.
First, it is imperative to strengthen the response
capabilities of national, subregional and regional
defence and security forces, which are operating
in an increasingly volatile environment. The
same requirement also applies to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in which African countries

S/PV.9106

play a major role as contributors of troops and police
personnel. However, given the importance of the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
Africa, the issue of strengthening African capacities
must also be addressed through the United Nations-AU
Joint Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, adopted in 2017. In that spirit, the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council must intensify their dialogue in order to ensure
a common understanding of security dynamics and
challenges in Africa and to define the best modalities
for supporting African initiatives in that area.
At a time when Africa is taking on more
responsibilities in peacekeeping, it is worrying to
note that the lack of predictable and sustainable
financing is still a reality. That is why, in the spirit
of resolution 2320 (2016), my delegation echoes
Africa’s call for predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding mechanisms for African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we call on all Council members to support the
proposal to create a specialized United Nations support
office, funded through mandatory United Nations
contributions, in order to provide the Group of Five for
the Sahel Joint Force with sustainable, predictable and
reliable funding commensurate with the seriousness of
the security challenges it faces.
At the same time, capacity-building must contribute
to the full empowerment of Africa in the management
of armed conflicts on the continent, in accordance with
the principle of African solutions to African problems.
In that regard, the revitalization of the AU Peace Fund,
an essential mechanism for the full operationalization
of the African Standby Force, is essential to provide
Africa with a collective, autonomous and fully
operational security system.
Security alone cannot be the solution. It is imperative
to give more support to preventive approaches, which
have the merit of taking into account the root causes
of crises, to the detriment of the doctrine of military
interventionism, which has already shown its limits.
From that perspective, the proposal to broaden the scope
of intervention of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the consultations under way to improve peacebuilding
financing are beneficial and deserve everyone’s support,
given the fundamental role that that body plays in
supporting prevention and post-conflict reconstruction
in several African countries.

22-4538427/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

Finally, the coherence of partners’ assistance
to African peace and security initiatives is a major
challenge that must receive greater attention from
the international community. In many of Africa’s
trouble hotspots, a multitude of actors with varying
mandates, and sometimes competing interests, are
operating without achieving all the expected results.
This problem demonstrates the need to define a
coordination framework that clarifies the relationships
among stakeholders and takes into account the intrinsic
links between the different forms of threats. The risks
of importing terrorist activities from the Sahel to
coastal countries and the potential links between those
activities and maritime crime in the Gulf of Guinea
reinforce our belief in the relevance of an integrated
approach to responses to threats to peace and security
in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks China for organizing this open
debate, and the speakers for their contributions.
“There is no peace without development, there is no
development without peace, and there is no lasting
peace or sustainable development without respect
of human rights and the rule of law.”
Jan Eliasson, former Deputy Secretary-General,
expressed that sentiment in 2013. Today sub-Saharan
African States remain among the most affected by
armed conflicts and other situations of violence, often
exacerbated by the impacts of climate change on human
security. Switzerland is committed to sustainable peace
through several actions.
First, a holistic approach with diverse partnerships
is essential to address the root causes of conflict and
build sustainable peace. Switzerland shares its expertise
related to peace, humanitarian aid and development.
It works closely with multilateral, regional and local
actors in Africa in support of Member States’ priorities
and in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Peace
and the African Union’s Agenda 2063. For example, in
Mozambique, Switzerland supports improved access
to land by strengthening dialogue between local
government, civil society and the private sector. We
have also intensified cooperation between the Swiss
justice system and that of certain African States,
particularly in the Central African Republic. Finally, as
we are aware of the role of civil society in peacebuilding,
28/33

08/08/2022

we have worked directly with rural communities, for
example in Burkina Faso, in adapting herd management
to climate and security challenges.
Secondly, the Security Council and the United
Nations have a responsibility to support the
peacebuilding capacities of regional and subregional
organizations. The Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security is a good practice that promotes close
cooperation. Switzerland also welcomes the work of
African regional organizations on food security and
climate change. Furthermore, Switzerland calls on the
Security Council to systematically take into account
the essential contribution of women and youth in
peace processes and to provide them with increased
support — for example, through United Nations
regional mandates such as the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa.
Switzerland will therefore support UNOWAS in the
organization of a seminar for the prevention of violent
extremism in West Africa in early 2023.
Thirdly, Switzerland supports the establishment
of sufficient, predictable and sustainable funding for
peacebuilding. Switzerland is one of the top 10 donors
to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). Working in tandem
with other funding mechanisms and partners, the PBF
is particularly well-placed to serve as a catalyst for
peace, especially in Africa. However, experience has
shown that funding is still insufficient to address the
causes of conflict in a sustainable manner. Switzerland
will therefore participate actively in the negotiations,
facilitated by Kenya and Sweden, on a draft resolution on
peacebuilding financing, as well as in the negotiations
in the Fifth Committee on the possibility of statutory
contributions to the Fund. Only with sufficient resources
will we be able to support sustainable development and
peacebuilding in Africa. In that respect, Switzerland
also contributes to the Green Climate Fund and the
Climate Change Adaptation Fund, which focus on
Africa and conflict prevention.
Sub-Saharan Africa continues to grow in its role
as a political, economic and global player. Despite
many challenges, its rapid transformation offers new
opportunities. As an elected member of the Security
Council, Switzerland will continue its long-term
partnership with African countries and the African
Peace and Security Architecture in order to build and
consolidate lasting peace together.
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council during the
month of August. I wish you every success. I also thank
you for holding this debate on an extremely important
topic for the African continent.
I also take this opportunity to thank the
briefers — the African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security, the Special Adviser on
Africa to the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh and Chair of
Peacebuilding Commission — for their valuable input.
Egypt appreciates China’s continued efforts to
highlight important issues on the African continent and
the debates of the Security Council. Today’s meeting
allows us to build on the debate that took place last
year (see S/2021/490) under the Chinese presidency
of the Council on dealing with the root causes of
conflicts in Africa while promoting recovery from
the coronavirus disease pandemic. That debate was
prepared through an interactive, informal dialogue
between the Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by
Egypt, and the Chinese presidency of the Council at the
time, and led the Commission to the submission of an
advisory opinion during the meeting. Today I am happy
to see that the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
is taking part in this meeting. I note that this positive
practice enhances cooperation between the Council and
the Commission.
Egypt attaches top priority to building capacities of
national institutions and taking into account diversity,
tolerance, dialogue and peaceful coexistence among
all segments of the society. Building the institutions
and capacities of countries emerging from conflicts
is essential to promoting the principle of national
ownership and efforts leading to reconstruction
and peacebuilding. In that context, Egypt has been
contributing effectively at the international and African
levels through the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace
and Development by promoting capacity-building and
supporting effective national institutions, thereby
enabling States to address the complex challenges they
face and meet the needs and aspirations of their people.
Egypt has put forward an initiative on achieving
reconstruction and development in the African Union
(AU). The initiative includes a vision to revive the relevant

S/PV.9106

AU policy and align it with contemporary developments.
We also host the Cairo International Centre for Conflict
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding in Africa.
At the international level, one Egypt’s priorities
during its chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission last year was building national institutions
and capacities, given the dire need amid the coronavirus
disease pandemic to build effective and responsible
national institutions that protect our peoples’ resources
and promote confidence between the State and the
society leading to establishing foundations of stability
and development. In that context, I would like to make
the following points.
First, in accordance with its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council should continue paying attention
to African issues and pursue its efforts to prevent
conflicts in the first place. The Council should also
work on settling conflicts in Africa, while avoiding
polarization and narrow self-interest, which have
hindered the Council from living up to its responsibility
in line with the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, I should also note that the current global
geopolitical situation must not result in diminished
attention on Africa.
Secondly, the Council should attach importance
to a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding that
prioritizes the principle of State sovereignty, protects
peoples’ interests and supports State institutions
against destructive ideas that cause division and strife
within a country and its people. We also stress the
importance of peacebuilding efforts and addressing
transborder challenges. It is also important to support
building local capacities to provide basic services to
citizens in rural and border regions. All those efforts
are crucial in promoting a State’s sovereignty over its
territory, leading to fighting terrorism.
Thirdly, in order to achieve sustainable peace, it is
necessary to provide adequate and sustained funding to
build the State capabilities and institutions of countries
emerging from conflict. We call upon the international
community to live up to its commitments and provide
sustainable and predictable funding for peacebuilding
efforts. In that connection, I would mention the
governmental negotiations taking place in the General
Assembly on peacebuilding financing. I call upon
Member States to support all peacebuilding tracks
and ensure that peacebuilding efforts have access to

22-4538429/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

08/08/2022

assessed contributions from the United Nations budget.
I was pleased that my brothers the representatives of
Ghana and Senegal mentioned this issue today.

and Stability in Africa, Japan has been supporting
African-led institution-building, capacity-building and
resilient governance.

Fourthly, it is important to promote synergy between
international and regional efforts and peacebuilding
goals to support capacity building, while also provide
sufficient support and resources to much-needed issues,
in accordance with the principle of national ownership.

(spoke in English)

Fifthly, we should also enhance partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union and further
invest in supporting institutional capacity-building
and promoting relevant African tools, especially
the African Centre for Post-conflict Reconstruction
and Development.
Sixthly and lastly, I call upon the Council to
take advantage of the advisory role provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is capable of
galvanizing the support we need to deal with the root
causes of conflicts. The Commission is also a forum for
sharing our respective experiences and lessons learned.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Osuga (Japan) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing today’s
open debate on an important topic: capacity-building
for peacekeeping in Africa, which is so dear to us. By
“us” I mean the participants in the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD), and in
particular its organizers, including the African Union
Commission, the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank.
Owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Africa
is now facing undue complexities that have exacerbated
tensions and security problems. The absence of lasting
peace and stability will seriously hamper Africa’s
development. It is more necessary than ever to address
the root causes of conflict, terrorism and violent
extremism in order to put Africa back on the path to
sustainable development.
Since its inception, in 1993, TICAD has emphasized
the importance of capacity-building in Africa. And
since TICAD III, in 2003, peacebuilding has been added
to its agenda, and the root causes of conflicts have been
discussed, in order to prevent their recurrence and
achieve sustainable development. Since TICAD VII, in
2019, under the banner of the New Approach to Peace
30/33

With this track record in mind, I would like to
explain four key elements that need to be respected in
promoting capacity-building for sustaining peace.
First, Africa’s ownership must be respected.
We should support African-led efforts for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in line with the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 as well as with Sustainable
Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. That would include, inter
alia, efforts aimed at consolidating democracy and
restoring constitutional order, promoting sustainable
development through inclusive growth and addressing
inequality, and achieving a resilient society to ensure
human security and dignity. We look forward to
discussing those issues at the upcoming TICAD VIII,
to be held later this month in Tunisia.
Secondly, institution-building must be our priority
in bringing about stability in conflict-affected countries.
Japan is proud to have provided assistance to African
countries to strengthen their institutional capacity in
the judicial, administrative and legislative sectors
in order to ensure the rule of law. Strong institutions
are essential for delivering socioeconomic services to
people and for building their trust in government. We
are happy to see that our support in strengthening health
and medical systems in Africa has proven instrumental
in their effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Thirdly, investing in people is crucial. Capacitybuilding is needed at the level of individuals who
will engage in the activities for peacebuilding,
nation-building and sustainable development. At
TICAD V, in 2013, then-Prime Minister Abe launched
the African Business Education initiative for youth, also
known as the ABE initiative, which empowers African
youth to contribute to industrial development in Africa
by granting them scholarships and internships. By 2021,
approximately 1,500 young Africans had participated
in the programme.
Fourthly, in terms of effective partnerships,
since the first TICAD meeting, almost 30 years ago,
ownership and international partnership have always
been the Conference’s credo. True partnership to
support national efforts to bring about peace, stability
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9106

and sustainable development in Africa should not be
driven by commercial, financial or other interests of
other countries. Transparency is key. Development
financing must adhere to international rules and
standards. To promote effective partnerships, we
should make full use of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which plays a unique bridging and convening role as a
platform where all relevant actors can come together to
consider specific challenges to sustaining peace.

Secondly, closely linked to sustained economic
development is the role of stakeholders and partners
in ensuring the realization of that objective. Due
to experience in the promotion of post-conflict
reconstruction, development and peacebuilding
activities on the continent, we are of the firm view
that the private sector should play an increased role in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace activities, including
building economic resilience.

In conclusion, Japan looks forward to TICAD VIII
to have fruitful discussions on how to make progress in
African development.

Thirdly, capacity-building goes hand in hand
with the policy space. Capacity-building should not
be viewed in isolation from other issues that concern
sustaining peace. National ownership, context-specific
interventions and agenda-setting should underpin any
peacebuilding support directed towards the countries
concerned. In that context, the inclusion of women and
youth in peacebuilding, and therefore the building of
their own capacities, is key.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We commend the
People’s Republic of China’s presidency for having
convened this timely open debate on prioritizing
capacity-building and sustaining peace in Africa.
Equally, we appreciate the rich insights shared by the
briefers — His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African
Union (AU) Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security; Ms. Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser on
Africa to the United Nations Secretary-General; and
His Excellency Mr. Muhammad Abdul Muhith, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, of which South
Africa has been a member since 2021.
The coronavirus disease pandemic and the
prevailing geopolitical tensions have exacerbated the
vulnerabilities of countries in situations of conflict,
post-conflict or transition. That is more visible on the
African continent, where many countries’ responses to
the pandemic were impaired by capacity constraints,
worsening unemployment, poverty, inequality and
underdevelopment. Countries of the continent are still
grappling with the capacity constraints in the areas of
human resources, finances, infrastructure and publicservice institutions, among others. We believe that the
issue of capacity-building is inextricably linked with
building sustainable resilience. In that respect. we
would like to make the following points.
First, we need to view the issue of capacitybuilding broadly, over and beyond national capacity
in the security sector, human rights and rule-oflaw institutions. More practical measures should be
explored to promote and advance sustained economic
development in conflict-affected, post-conflict and
transition countries.

Fourthly, it is of vital importance for stakeholders
to recognize the significant strides made by the AU and
other subregional organizations in advancing capacitybuilding for peace purposes through the African Peace
and Security Architecture and the African Governance
Architecture. In that regard, the AU efforts to revitalize
the Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Policy (PCRD) framework and the Africa Solidarity
Initiative, which are cardinal in mobilizing PCRD
and peacebuilding activities and resources for the
continent, should be supported. The AU Transitional
Justice Policy Framework, which is important for the
promotion of good governance, democratic and social
economic transformation and achieving sustainable
peace, justice, reconciliation, social cohesion and
healing, deserves a special mention and definite support
among the myriad policies of the African Union.
Fifthly, there is a need to create synergies between
the activities of the AU and the United Nations on
capacity-building on the continent. Cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations on capacitybuilding and sustaining peace can be further streamlined
and strengthened with the harmonization of activities
on the continent between the AU PCRD centre and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the AU liaison
offices and the United Nations missions in Africa.
Lastly, at the core of any capacity-building activities
is access to adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding. A variety of proposals for the financing of
peacebuilding activities in a sustainable way have been

22-4538431/33

S/PV.9106

Peace and security in Africa

08/08/2022

discussed in the General Assembly over the years. Our
position remains that peacebuilding activities, including
capacity-building, should be among other models to be
financed from United Nations assessed contributions.

along with capacity-building as a strategic priority
and a necessary and pivotal tool to address such vast
and complex challenges in order to build just and
comprehensive peace in Africa.

In conclusion, at the core of Agenda 2063 and
the Sustainable Development Goals is for all African
countries to experience sustainable peace and economic
prosperity. That aspiration is contingent on creating
resilient institutions and structures that will address
the root causes and drivers of violent conflict, as well
as the needs of populations. Moreover, a people-centred
approach that includes all national stakeholders, in
particular women, young people and the marginalized,
is another prerequisite for sustained peace. Such
undertakings will, in turn, avert relapses into violent
conflicts, which often set Africa back from realizing
its full potential.

The 2005 World Summit was a milestone in
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in many areas, particularly through the establishment
of an institutional framework aimed primarily at
supporting and building the capacities of States
members of the African Union. It led to the signing,
in 2006, of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union with the United Nations, which
also includes African subregional organizations and
regional economic communities.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the friendly People’s
Republic of China on its presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and I wish you, Mr. President and
dear brother, every success. I would also like to sincerely
thank you for having included an important topic on
the Council’s agenda, namely, “Peace and security
in Africa: capacity-building for sustaining peace”. I
also express our gratitude and thanks to the friendly
delegation of Brazil for its outstanding presidency of
the Security Council last month. I would like to highly
welcome Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security.
I also highly welcome the participation of Ambassador
Muhammad Abdul Muhith, Permanent Representative
of Bangladesh and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, whose presence here shows the close link
between peacebuilding and capacity-building. I also
sincerely thank Ms. Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser
on Africa to the United Nations Secretary-General, for
her valuable and constructive contribution.
The topic of our discussion today, capacity-building
in Africa, is one of the most important topics, which
must be given importance and be seriously addressed,
as it represents the cornerstone of all international
efforts to resolve and address crises, especially across
our continent, Africa. The disputes and conflicts, in
addition to the multidimensional threats facing our
continent, require collective international efforts
32/33

Based on the achievements of the Programme
and our awareness of the magnitude of the increasing
challenges facing the African continent, as well as the
need for complementarity and coordination, the efforts
made were crowned by the adoption, in 2017, of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, based on
an integrated and strategic approach.
In the light of the concept note (S/2022/592, annex)
that you kindly circulated, Mr. President, and the
guiding questions that it raises, I would like to make
the following points.
First, there is no doubt that States of the African
Union have made considerable progress towards national
capacity-building in many vital areas, according to
the human and economic development indicators of
the past several years. However, more than ever, the
increasing challenges require that additional concerted
efforts be made and sufficient support be provided in
capacity-building in order to address the root causes
of multifaceted and multidimensional conflicts, which
call for a comprehensive approach underpinned by
sustainable development. In that context, capacitybuilding support for AU States in addressing the root
causes of conflict is an urgent priority, including by
promoting economic structures and good governance
and with the participation of all stakeholders, in
particular civil society, women and young people.
Secondly, in order to ensure that objective, there is
a need to adopt an ambitious road map that is effectively
implemented and depends on projects and programmes
specially oriented to achieve the mutual goals of the
United Nations 2030 Agenda and the AU 2063 Agenda.
22-45384

08/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

That will be achieved only by utilizing various resources
that ensure sustained security and development.
Thirdly, a genuine implementation on the ground
of the objectives of the United Nations/AU Joint
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security is one of the best means to strengthen the role
of the United Nations in supporting the capabilities of
AU States. The Joint Framework provides a set of tools
and mechanisms to build the capacities of AU States.
Fourthly, taking into account the security challenges
that threaten the African continent, it is extremely
important to strengthen cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the AU, in particular through common understanding
and favourable solutions to those challenges. AU
subregional organizations should also be part of the
efforts towards preventing and settling conflicts.
Fifthly, there should be various cooperation
programmes in place to support capacity-building for
AU States. Such programmes should be continuously
reviewed to address the evolving nature of threats.
However, to achieve the desired goals, the needs
and priorities of each State should be respected,
including respecting national sovereignty and ensuring
non-interference in States’ internal affairs.
Algeria is convinced of the importance of
supporting programmes for capacity-building that lead
to achieving economic development on the African
continent. My country has not hesitated to establish
a multidimensional, future-minded vision in line
with its geographic surroundings, based on structural
projects and programmes for sharing expertise and best
practices in various fields with sisterly AU States.
With regard to peace and security, Algeria has been
working tirelessly to share our experience with States of
the African Union on mediation, national reconciliation
and the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
We have been contributing for many years to support
many African States by providing training sessions on
those issues.
His Excellency President Tebboune has taken
charge of this noble mission to coordinate African

S/PV.9106

Union efforts for preventing and fighting terrorism.
At the extraordinary African Union Summit held in
Malabo in May, President Tebboune presented to his
African counterparts a report, which was adopted, in
which he stressed the urgent need to shift, in the context
of cooperation with the United Nations, to a new model
of peace operations in line with the requirements of
combating terrorism in Africa.
Algeria also hosts important African institutions
on tackling terrorism and organized crime, such as the
African Center for Studies and Research on Terrorism,
the African Union Mechanism for Police Cooperation
and the Integration Unit for the Sahel States. Algeria is
also seeking to strengthen its relationships with those
institutions, particularly in terms of capacity-building.
In the field of economic development, Algeria, as
a founding member of New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, has spared no effort to ensure a forwardlooking vision for the continent by promoting structural
projects that will benefit the States of the continent,
particularly in the energy sector and the trans-Sahara
highway project. We also work on strengthening fibre
optic cable networks across the Sahara to develop the
regional digital economy. Algeria has accomplished
its part of stretching fibre optic cables along
2,548 kilometres.
In conclusion, notwithstanding all the challenges
facing the continent, Africa is capable of building and
developing its capabilities, thanks to its human and
natural resources and the close international cooperation
with the United Nations. That will serve to bolster the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
in a way that leads to sustained peace on the continent
and contributes effectively to achieving security and
peace throughout the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are
still a number of speakers remaining on my list for
this meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, with the
concurrence of members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

22-4538433/33
