S/PV.8181

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8181

st meeting
Wednesday, 14 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04189 (E)
*1804189*

S/PV.8181

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I have come to New York to convey
to the Security Council in person — although I could
have done it by video, as we have many times — the
Secretary-General’s grave concern about the escalation
of violence in Syria, and to urge the Council to
focus on de-escalating that violence and on finding a
political path forward for the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015).
We have seen a string of dangerous and worrying
escalations, including both inside and outside the
de-escalation zones established by the Astana
guarantors. There has been a gradual return to backand-forth competition over territory in ldlib and
Hama. We have seen heavy and sustained air strikes
across the North-West and in besieged eastern Ghouta,
including today. Civilians have been killed on a horrific
scale — reports suggest that more than 1,000 have died
in the first week of February alone — and strikes have
continued to hit hospitals, schools and markets. There
have been several allegations of chlorine attacks, in
Ghouta and Idlib and now recently also in Afrin. We
cannot independently verify those allegations, but
such acts, if confirmed, are outrageous and should not
go unpunished.
In just two months, 320,000 people have been
displaced due to fighting in Idlib — an area that
already hosts more than 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham — Al-Nusra — is active
in Idlib. Meanwhile, there are reports of heavy mortar
2/13

14/02/2018

shelling in residential Damascus, wounding and killing
civilians, damaging infrastructure, such as Embassies,
and falling close to the hotel in which United Nations
personnel reside.
The conflict is also spilling over Syria’s borders in
more than one direction, and there have been increased
military intervention from multiple sources. Over the
past several weeks, a new cross-border conflict in
Afrin has emerged, with no clear end in sight. There
are reports of exchanges of fire between Turkish and
Syrian Government forces in Idlib, and between the
United States-led coalition and pro-Syrian Government
forces in the Euphrates valley, with major loss of life. A
Russian aircraft was shot down over northern Syria and
its pilot was killed. Last weekend, there were Israeli
reports of an Iranian drone entering Israeli airspace,
which have been denied by Iran; Israeli jets striking
targets inside Syria; an Israeli jet shot down by Syrian
Government anti-aircraft fire; and of what Israel calls
large-scale strikes against the Syria air defence system
and Iranian targets. In short, we see developments that
raise questions about the sustainability of the Astana
de-escalation arrangements, in which we placed a great
deal of hope, and threaten wider regional stability.
I have been Special Envoy for Syria for four years
now, and this situation is the most violent, worrying
and dangerous I have observed during my tenure.
I strongly reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal
to all concerned in Syria, the region and beyond to
de-escalate immediately and unconditionally, and urge
all stakeholders, including the Astana guarantors, to
use their influence to help reduce the level of violence.
I also urge that continued attention be given to
maintaining the Amman de-escalation arrangements in
place in the south.
Not only are Syrian civilians being killed and
displaced in large numbers — even greater than before.
They are also being deprived of the humanitarian
assistance they need. There has not been a single United
Nations humanitarian convoy to any besieged area since
28 November, two and a half months ago. Last week,
together with Senior Adviser Jan Egeland, I warned
the Humanitarian Task Force of the International Syria
Support Group in Geneva of a collective failure to enable
effective humanitarian action. At the time, I urged the
co-Chairs — the Russian Federation and the United
States — as well as other States to take urgent action to
ensure immediate and unfettered humanitarian access
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas in particular.
18-04189

14/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

A series of urgent consultations are under way
in Geneva. Thus far, no concrete results have been
reached, except the one convoy I mentioned earlier.
We urgently need genuine de-escalation in order to
protect civilians, evacuate the sick and wounded — in
particular sick children — and allow humanitarian aid
to reach the 390,000 people in besieged and hard-toreach areas. A few minutes ago, we learned that 7,200
people in besieged Nashabiyeh received a partial
delivery today. That is encouraging but let us think
about it — they account for a mere 2 per cent of the
390,000 people in besieged areas. We need much more
sustained humanitarian assistance.
We must also never forget — as underscored
by the people in Syria — the need for concrete steps
on the release of detainees and abductees, and for
the disclosure of information about those who have
been missing since March 2011. The United Nations
will leave no stone unturned to press the issue, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also
remind the Astana guarantors of their own commitment
agreed last December to establish a working group. We
urge them to move ahead on this important issue when
they meet next. What we are seeing in Syria today not
only imperils de-escalation arrangements and regional
stability; it also undermines the efforts for a political
solution. Yet we will not be deterred from pursuing
the Geneva process, which is the only sustainable path
towards the solution mandated by the Council.
Members will recall that in December 2017, when I
briefed the Council (see S/PV.8142), I laid out a number
of parameters and observations regarding baskets 2
and 3 of the agenda — the constitutional and electoral
baskets. Then, on 25 and 26 January, I convened a special
round-9 meeting of the intra-Syrian talks in Vienna,
focused specifically on the constitutional basket.
After intensive consultations with the Syrian parties
and key States, I made a final statement regarding the
constitutional committee to be formed, and stressed
that the final agreement on the composition, mandate
and terms of reference of the constitutional committee
must be reached in Geneva.
For its part, the Russian Federation, which had
invited the Secretary-General, also on behalf of Turkey
and Iran, to the National Dialogue Congress in Sochi,
affirmed that the outcome in Sochi would be brought
to Geneva as a contribution to the United Nations-led
intra-Syrian talks, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). There were intensive consultations among the

S/PV. 8181

Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, the SecretaryGeneral and myself regarding such an understanding.
In Vienna and beyond, I also maintained close
consultations with a number of other States at that time.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General asked me
to attend Sochi. The Congress took place over one
day on 30 January. I attended the opening address by
Foreign Minister Lavrov, and senior representatives of
Turkey, Iran and other States were present. Afterwards,
all internationals left the gathering to enable the
discussion to proceed among Syrians. Only Russia’s
special presidential envoy for Syria, Mr. Lavrientev,
remained in the room as host to facilitate the debate,
which he accomplished effectively, alongside senior
Syrian figures and a presidium of Syrians. I was later
officially informed by the hosts that the final statement
had been adopted, and was made aware of its content.
It has been published on the website of the Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Arabic, Russian and
English, as Foreign Minister Lavrov publicly confirmed
yesterday, following his meeting in Moscow with the
Belgian Foreign Minister.
As the Secretary-General has noted, the final
statement embraced a vision of a future in Syria for
all Syrians — as reflected in the 12 living intra-Syrian
essential principles that came out of the United Nationsled talks in Geneva in November last year. The final
statement agreed in Sochi affirmed that a constitutional
committee should be formed and stated that it should,
at the very least, comprise the Government; opposition
representatives in the intra-Syrian talks, facilitated by
the United Nations in Geneva; Syrian experts, civil
society, independents, tribal leaders and women. The
final statement noted that care should be taken to
ensure an adequate representation of Syria’s ethnic
and religious components. It made clear that the
final agreement on the mandate, terms of reference,
powers, rules of procedure and selection criteria for the
composition of the constitutional committee should be
reached in Geneva, and appealed for the assistance of
the United Nations Office in Geneva in that regard.
Given that important final statement, I joined the
closing of the Congress to welcome it and to affirm
the United Nations intention to proceed speedily and
accordingly so as to assist in finalizing all aspects
of a constitutional committee, thereby enabling its
establishment in Geneva. Furthermore, I publicly noted
to the Congress, as I note to the Security Council today,
that the mandate given by the Council to the United

18-041893/13

S/PV.8181

The situation in the Middle East

Nations in Geneva is to establish a schedule and process
for drafting a new Constitution within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015). We have been assured by
the Russian Federation that it will endeavour to ensure
that the Government of Syria fully supports the official
outcome of the Congress in Sochi, at which many Syrian
Government officials were present. I also take note
that the Syrian negotiations commission — that is the
opposition embracing all those components specifically
mentioned by name in resolution 2254 (2015) — has
issued a public statement that is generally positive with
regard to moving forward on a constitutional committee
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva.
Since the Vienna and Sochi meetings, both of
which were important, I have consulted intensively
on the establishment of a constitutional committee.
I have had initial discussions so far in Geneva with
representatives of the Government of Syria, the Syrian
negotiations commissions and a number of other
Governments. My team remains in touch with a wide
array of Syrian women and men, and I continue to
look carefully at the candidates for the constitutional
committee, which was conceived in Sochi, and other
relevant input. I also continue to pursue the convening
of further formal intra-Syrian talks to make progress
with regard to all four baskets of the political process
in Geneva pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). I am
particularly aware of the need to focus, now more than
ever, on the establishment of a secure, calm and neutral
environment if a constitutional process is to happen
and if United Nations-supervised presidential and
parliamentary elections are to take place under a new
constitution, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015).
From here, I will be travelling to Munich, God willing,
where I will consult with the Secretary-General and
join a number of ministers and other senior officials
who will be present at the Munich Security Conference.
Herewith is the bottom line of my statement. I
intend to strike while the iron is hot and move forward
the Geneva process, in consultation with all concerned.
To do that, I will need all members of the Security
Council — that is, the Council as a whole — and
all those who have influence on the Syrian parties,
including the Astana guarantors, among others, to push
hard on three main points. First, they must work towards
de-escaltion, civilian protection and humanitarian
access. Secondly, they must work to support the United
Nations in Geneva so that the Sochi final declaration
can take effect within the framework of resolution 2254
4/13

14/02/2018

(2015). Thirdly, they must work to support the United
Nations in facilitating the political process for the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), in particular
with regard to advancing real issues in the basket to
promote a safe, calm and neutral environment.
The Syrian people and the United Nations need the
Security Council’s support now more than ever.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and all his efforts
to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria.
The United States fully supports his initiative to bring
the parties back to Geneva and begin work on a new
constitutional committee in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), but we are not going to bring about peace
as the situation on the ground continues to escalate with
dire risks for the security of the entire region.
Earlier this week, Iranian-backed militias in
southern Syria launched a drone into Israeli territory.
It was an egregious and unprompted escalation. Iran
was once again doing what it does: risking conflict and
testing the will of its neighbours and opponents to resist
its aggression. Israel rightly took action to defend itself.
The United States will always stand by its ally when
confronted by provocations from Iran, Hizbullah or the
Al-Assad regime, but that incident shines a spotlight on
the reality in Syria today. We are seeing actors engage
in a dangerous game of pushing boundaries instead of
behaving responsibly and committing to peace.
Last week, pro-regime forces launched an
unprovoked attack against the Syrian Democratic
Forces and advisors from the coalition to defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. This was a large
attack involving numerous tanks, artillery and fighters.
The coalition acted in self-defence to repel the attack,
and the United States will always reserve the right to act
in self-defence. But the attack showed the recklessness
of pro-regime fighters. Parties on the ground need to
adhere to all established deconfliction mechanisms,
and ensure that nothing like that ever happens again.
The Al-Assad regime has become a front for Iran,
Hizbullah and their allies to advance their irresponsible
and dangerous agenda for the Middle East. On every
front of the conflict, we find fighters imported by Iran
18-04189

14/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

from Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan. When we see the
Al-Assad regime starving civilians in eastern Ghouta
or pummelling schools and hospitals in Idlib, we see
advisors from Iran and Hizbullah helping direct those
atrocities. That support for the Al-Assad regime, of
course, is not new, but the drone flight this week was
a wake-up call for all of us. Iran and Hizbullah are
making plans to stay in Syria. When we look out across
the Middle East, we know one thing for certain: when
Iran and Hizbullah move in, instability always follows.
Therefore, when we talk about peace in Syria, we
need to face the reality of what is happening on the
ground. Peace is urgently needed in Syria. All of us
on the Security Council know that, but we cannot offer
support for peace, on the one hand, and ignore the fact
that the chief sponsor of terrorism in the Middle East
and its terrorist militia are digging in, on the other.
Even as we talk about peace at the United Nations,
the fighting is getting worse. Much of the violence is
happening in so called de-escalation zones. Russia was
supposed to guarantee adherence to those de-escalation
zones in order to help the political process, but, then
again, Russia was also supposed to guarantee the
removal of all chemical weapons from Syria. Instead,
we see the Al-Assad regime continues to bomb, starve
and — yes — gas civilians.
All of us on the Council know what it will take to get
to peace in Syria. More than two years ago, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015), which
includes a framework for ending the war. The United
States is committed to seeing the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), which President Trump and
President Putin also reaffirmed when they met in Viet
Nam in November 2017. We also know how peace
talks need to happen. There is no doubt that Geneva
and the United Nations-led political process are the
sole, legitimate venue for coming up with a political
solution in Syria. Special Envoy De Mistura has talked
about setting up a constitutional committee, and he
must be fully empowered to do so. No party should
have a veto over the United Nations decisions about the
composition of the constitutional committee, but it is
hard to see how a peace process will work while the
Al-Assad regime continues to launch all-out attacks
against the Syrian people and Iran and Hizbullah are
entrenching themselves within the country. Ultimately,
we must recognize that the Al-Assad regime does not
want peace unless it is peace on its terms — a peace in
which every person in Syria who opposes the regime

S/PV. 8181

is murdered, tortured, starved, imprisoned or forced to
flee the country. If the Geneva process is going to work,
therefore, we need to see a change. As one of Al-Assad’s
key backers, Russia can change that behaviour. It can
push the regime to commit to seeking a real peace in
Syria — a peace that helps the Syrian people, a peace
that helps ensure the region’s security. Now is the time
for Russia to use that leverage.
The road to peace will come when all of the parties
stop provoking each other and choose the responsible
path. That path is clear: follow resolution 2254 (2015),
support Geneva and, most of all, push the Al-Assad
regime to do what it plainly does not want to do. If we
rally around those goals, we will achieve real peace
in Syria.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing. It
was very interesting to hear his assessment of the results
of the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held in Sochi
on 29 and 30 January. His participation on behalf of the
United Nations lent the event particular significance.
The Congress was a success, and one more important
step was taken towards the restoration of peace and
stability in Syria. A genuine prospect has emerged
for revitalizing a peaceful intra-Syrian dialogue. For
the first time, we were able to bring together in one
hall more than 1,500 representatives of the majority of
domestic forces and from many members of external
opposition forces. While we saw no individual leaders
from the Riyadh opposition negotiation group in
Sochi, a third of its members attended in a personal
capacity. This unprecedented representation attests to
the understanding established by the Security Council
that Syrians themselves must determine their country’s
future, with no diktats from outside.
The Congress participants affirmed their
commitment to a settlement under the auspices of the
United Nations on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and took concrete decisions. The final statement
includes 12 principles for the future Government
structuring of a renewed Syria, formulated under
United Nations mediation. The Syrians agreed to
establish a constitutional committee and called on the
Secretary-General to instruct Mr. De Mistura to assist
in organizing the work of preparation for constitutional
reform and on a definitive agreement about the
committee’s composition and powers. We hope that
this will be conducted transparently and that the United
Nations mediation will make the most effective use

18-041895/13

S/PV.8181

The situation in the Middle East

14/02/2018

possible of the understanding reached by the Syrian
participants in Sochi. However, one thing is clear, and is
the premise we proceed from, which is that the decisions
on every issue related to the Government’s structure,
including the constitutional basket, will be made by
the Syrians themselves, without any external pressure
or any principles or plans drafted on their behalf or in
their place. The Congress also adopted a request to the
international community from the Syrians for help in
ending the crisis and rebuilding Syria’s economy.

from provoking further escalation. By the way, we have
a different view of the incident that occurred in eastern
Syria between Coalition and pro-Government forces.
It was an unprovoked attack. We already said during
consultations that the humanitarian situation in Syria
has different features and causes in different areas. The
reasons for each are different and the approach to each
of them should be differentiated. I am not even going
to bother discussing the unproven allegations accusing
Damascus of using chemical weapons.

Russia will continue to support the intra-Syrian
talks in Geneva. We regret the position taken by some
countries in dissuading some members of the Syrian
opposition from going to Sochi. This small group
is continuing its less than constructive activities by
putting out documents in a narrow platform anticipating
the outcomes of the Geneva discussions on Syria’s
future political arrangements, which does not accord
with resolution 2254 (2015). The 12 principles that I
referred to represent the sole basis for discussions
of constitutional reform issues, as agreed on by the
Syrians in Geneva, approved in Sochi and affirmed in
the Congress’s final statement, which we are circulating
today as an official Security Council document. The
most fundamental of the principles remain respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria, non-interference in its domestic affairs, and
the Syrian people’s right to independently determine
their future.

I would like not to believe that there are still
forces that want to torpedo the progress towards a
political settlement for the sake of dubious geopolitical
advantage. I think that Mr. De Mistura will agree with
us that what both the Syrian people and the United
Nations mediators need now is concerted support. Any
retreat from that would have unpleasant consequences.

We are frankly disturbed by the disrespectful
attitude of some international and regional stakeholders
to the issue of Syrian sovereignty, of which there have
recently been some extremely worrying manifestations.
It is important to understand that this will not help
to normalize the situation in Syria or the region as a
whole, and that it exacerbates the conflict and makes
the prospects for a political settlement less likely. At the
same time, passions have also become inflamed over the
humanitarian and chemical aspects of the Syrian issue,
as was particularly noticeable against the backdrop of
the success of the Sochi Congress. As usual, there are
powerful disinformation resources behind this. Just
today we heard unfounded new allegations against
Syria and Russia from the United States delegation.
There is always some demand being made of Russia.
We are not going to demand anything, but we would like
to ask our United States partners and the other Coalition
partners who can influence opposition members to
persuade them to ensure cease hostilities and refrain
6/13

Mr. Ndonga Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to commend the efforts of
the United Nations, and particularly those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, who has just provided us with a detailed
description of current events in Syria. His briefing was
very alarming and worrying — 1,000 civilians killed in
the space of a week, 1,200 internally displaced persons
and the shelling of residential areas in Damascus are
indeed issues of great concern.
The worsening violence is not only disturbing for
millions of Syrian citizens, with its numerous casualties
and massive displacement, it is also undermining our
shared political and humanitarian commitment. The
situation in Syria is deteriorating rapidly, with civilians
suffering the impact of the political crisis, and in this
chaotic scenario we are likely to be facing yet another
major humanitarian disaster.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea underscores the
need for the parties to the conflict to strictly comply
with the obligations incumbent upon them under
international law. Actions by parties at the national and
international levels should always be carried out within
the framework of Security Council resolutions. In that
regard, resolution 2254 (2015) urges the belligerents to
adopt measures that promote the re-establishment of
lasting peace.
The actions of the warring parties that prevent
access to humanitarian aid constitute a clear
violation of the rules of international law. In the
case of a non-international armed conflict, impeding
18-04189

14/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian assistance violates human dignity,
according to the parameters of Common Article 3 to
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and to Protocol
Additional II, of 8 June 1977. It should be noted that the
attack on humanitarian assistance personnel, facilities,
materials, units or vehicles is considered a war crime
pursuant to the Rome Statute, both in the context of
international and non-international armed conflicts.
Likewise, we join the request made by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in calling
for an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to
guarantee the provision of humanitarian assistance in
Afrin, Raqqa, Idlib, eastern Ghouta, Fo’ah, Kefriya and
the Rukban camp — areas besieged by armed groups
and where the level of violence is critical.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea always advocates
a negotiated solution to problems, however complex
the situation. In order to achieve the desired political
agreement, direct, frank and inclusive negotiations are
an inevitable step, which is what Equatorial Guinea
advocates. For that reason, our Government welcomes
the holding of peace talks in Vienna on the Syrian issue
and is glad that, for the first time since the beginning
of the conflict in 2011, 1,500 Syrian representatives
from all backgrounds, creeds and almost all political
views came together under the framework of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi at the end of
last month.
Although criticized by some countries, the Sochi
conference was unique in being driven, reshaped and
framed by the United Nations. The participation in
that intra-Syrian meeting by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General in Syria, Mr. De Mistura, gave way
to the creation of a constitutional committee. Efforts
must now be made to ensure the effective functioning
of that committee. Equatorial Guinea congratulates
the participants for their efforts to engage in dialogue
through direct and inclusive negotiations and hopes that
the decisions taken in Sochi will lend new impetus to
the United-Nations sponsored negotiations in Genevaon
the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
Despite all of those efforts, it is entirely necessary
to drain the country of all terrorist activity. That must
be a priority for the international community, given
that the presence of terrorists significantly hinders
the possibility of reaching a peaceful and definitive
solution to the Syrian issue.

S/PV. 8181

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this informative meeting ,and
we thank Mr. De Mistura for his complete briefing. We
acknowledge his intense and always prudent work, and
we express our commitment to positively contribute to
the success of his efforts.
We would like to begin by expressing our deep
concern about the new and recent actions by regional
actors and about the escalation of the conflict in Syria.
It constitutes an additional threat to peace and security
in the Middle East and should lead us to reiterate the
need to end the conflict. It is especially necessary to
end the suffering experienced by the Syrian people, as
well as the grave and ongoing violations of international
law and international humanitarian law, including the
use of chemical weapons.
First, against that backdrop, it is now more urgent
than ever to move the political process forward. The
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015) should continue to guide our
efforts; there is no military solution to the conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the fact that the parties
focused on substantive aspects during their recent
conversations, including the holding of United Nationssupervised elections and the constitutional issue.
However, we must express our concern about the
lack of tangible results following the eighth and ninth
rounds of negotiations held in Geneva and Vienna in
December and January, respectively. We believe it is
necessary for the parties involved to work constructively
in determining the mandate of a constitutional
committee, including its terms of reference, selection
criteria and other related matters. In that regard, we
would like to especially highlight the efforts of Mr. De
Mistura to launch, as soon as possible, the constitutional
committee agreed to in Sochi. We would also like to
underscore the importance that initiatives, such as the
one in Sochi, are always complementary to the Geneva
talks process, as Mr. De Mistura also indicated today.
Secondly, there is also a need to address the root
causes of the conflict. To that end, the solution to
the conflict must be comprehensive and allow for
the presence of the State in all areas of the country
to ensure security, safeguard human rights and
promote sustainable development for the entire Syrian
population. It is also necessary to promote increased
participation by women and young people and to

18-041897/13

S/PV.8181

The situation in the Middle East

strengthen civil society organizations, especially in the
drafting of a new constitution.
Indubitably, the Syrians themselves bear the
primary responsibility for arriving at a solution to the
problem. However, the international community and
the Security Council have a moral responsibility to
end that tragedy, and for that reason we must be united
in lending our full support and active engagement to
Mr. De Mistura in the successful discharge of his duties.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy De
Mistura for his briefing. I am very glad to see him
in New York. China commends and will continue to
support Mr. De Mistura’s efforts to promote the political
process in Syria.
Recently, positive momentum has emerged in the
quest for a political solution to the Syrian issue. Major
progress has been made at the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress meeting held in Sochi. The meeting has
played a positive role in advancing the political process
in Syria, and provided new impetus for the resumption
of the talks in Geneva. China commends the Russian
Federation and other countries for their efforts to hold
that dialogue. We support the United Nations in its
work as the main channel of mediation for a political
solution to the question of Syria.
A political settlement remains the only way forward
on the Syrian issue. The international community should
support the Geneva peace talks in making substantive
progress at an early date, as well as the Astana dialogue
in steadily consolidating the momentum for a ceasefire
in Syria, thereby pushing all parties in Syria back to
the negotiating table through a Syrian-led and Syrianowned approach to reach a solution that is acceptable
to all parties — one that accommodates all concerns.
During that process, the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria should be upheld
and respected.
Fighting terrorism is a major aspect in finding
a solution to the Syrian issue. The international
community should step up counter-terrorism efforts in
collaboration, uphold uniform standards and resolutely
combat all terrorist organizations designated as such by
the Security Council.
China has been striving to play a positive and
constructive role in bolstering the quest for a political
solution to this issue. China’s special envoy for Syria,
8/13

14/02/2018

Mr. Xie Xiaoyan, attended the most recent round of
Geneva talks as part of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi, holding extensive communication
with all parties with a view to promoting reconciliation
and facilitating dialogue.
Recently, there have been outbreaks of conflict
in many parts of Syria, about which China is gravely
concerned. China follows closely the humanitarian
situation and the refugee issue in Syria. We are ready
to continue providing assistance to the greatest extent
possible. We stand ready to work with the international
community in pushing for an early, comprehensive, just
and appropriate solution to the Syrian issue.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire would like to thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for the quality of his briefing on developments in the
political process in Syria. It must be acknowledged that
the situation is becoming increasingly alarming and of
concern on the military and humanitarian fronts. My
delegation also congratulates him on his tireless efforts
for political dialogue among the Syrian parties in order
to find a lasting solution to the protracted crisis in
the country.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of intra-Syrian
peace talks in Vienna on 25 and 26 January as part of
the political dialogue of the Geneva process. Likewise,
we encourage the various initiatives that have been
undertaken, in particular in Sochi, Russian Federation,
with a view to calming and definitively resolving the
crisis in Syria in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015).
My delegation regrets the fact that, despite the
declared will of the various stakeholders, the most
recent initiatives in the context of the political dialogue
among the Syrian parties have not led to any significant
progress on the ground. On the contrary, we have for
some time been witnessing a military escalation and an
upsurge in violence, which, if left unchecked, may lead
to a spillover of the conflict.
My delegation would therefore like to call for
a ceasefire and an immediate de-escalation of the
conflict in Syria at the risk of witnessing a greater
humanitarian catastrophe. We once again thank the
United Nations for its ongoing efforts to protect and to
provide humanitarian assistance to the besieged people
of Syria.
18-04189

14/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In particular, my delegation would like to extend
its support to the draft resolution initiated by Kuwait
and Sweden to put in place a 30-day ceasefire in Syria,
which would allow the urgent delivery of humanitarian
aid to the populations in distress. In the light of the
tragic situation in Syria, we call on the members of
the Security Council to show flexibility in order to
reach a compromise that will allow the safe delivery of
humanitarian aid so as to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people.
In order to prevent a further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, my country urges the parties to
the conflict to work together towards a lasting political
solution, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
which is the only way to end the violence and tragedy
being experienced by the Syrian people.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. We
acknowledge the complexity of his mandate and we
would like to once again assure him of our full support
for his work.
Since Bolivia assumed its seat as an elected
member of the Security Council, we have of course
shown our support for the various meetings held in
different contexts and at various levels. Each of those
meetings provided an opportunity for the establishment
of de-escalation zones, a cessation of hostilities and the
provision of humanitarian access. For example, the
work done in Astana, the meetings in Moscow, Cairo
and Riyadh and the agreements on de-escalation zones
between Jordan, the United States and Russia and
between Russia, Iran and Turkey are signs of progress.
Clearly, our primary concern remains the urgent
need to make progress in a political process that allows
for a resolution of the conflict in Syria so that the
population can regain peace. We believe that there has
been a significant step forward. My delegation wishes to
highlight the commitments made at the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress, held in Sochi on 30 January, since
those commitments focus on strengthening the political
process led by the United Nations in the context of
resolution 2254 (2015), particularly through the drafting
of a new constitution by a constitutional committee. We
commend and acknowledge the efforts of the Russian
Federation in that regard.
We also highlight the principles agreed at the
Congress to strengthen the political process. Such

S/PV. 8181

principles would be directly linked to the commitment
of the parties to respect the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria in the context of its right
to choose its own political, economic and social system
without pressure or external interference, as well
as to unify their armed forces in order to defend and
ensure the rule of law and respect for the rights of their
population and to combat the threat of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
A clear sign of the readiness to encourage that
process is the establishment of the constitutional
committee, composed of a delegation of the Syrian
Government and a diverse delegation of the opposition,
broadly represented by civil society, women and tribal,
ethnic and religious leaders. Together, they cover and
represent in an inclusive way most sectors of Syrian
society in order to debate the drafting of constitutional
reform. We emphasize that part of that agreement has
provided that the mandate, the terms of reference,
powers, the rules of procedure and the selection criteria
for the composition of the constitutional committee
should be arrived at through talks conducted by the
United Nations in Geneva.
We believe that that is a significant step in the
political process, and the results of the meetings held in
Vienna and Sochi make it possible for us to acknowledge
it as such. However, we regret the fact that the critical
situation that the Syrian people are still experiencing
with the latest escalation of tensions in recent weeks
shows us that there is still a long way to go. In that
regard, we echo the words of the Secretary-General
when he said: “We must never forget that progress
towards a political settlement needs to be accompanied
by progress on the ground.”
The Security Council now has the challenge of
urgently calling on the parties involved to unite their
efforts and to continue the momentum provided by
the political process in order to promote dialogue and
consensus that facilitate common ground so as to reduce
the violence and allow the humanitarian access that is
so greatly needed at this time. For that, the willingness
of the parties is essential to finding a way out of the
conflict, which, as we know, has continued for more
than seven years.
Finally, we reiterate that the only option for
resolving the conflict is through an inclusive, negotiated
and agreed political process, led by and for the Syrian
people, that allows a peaceful solution among all parties.

18-041899/13

S/PV.8181

The situation in the Middle East

14/02/2018

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

of serious accountability on the part of those who avail
themselves of the law of the jungle.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Article 2, paragraphs 1, 4 and 7, of the Charter
of the United Nations provide for respect for the
principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members
and that all Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. Moreover, no provision of the Charter authorizes
the United Nations to intervene in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State. Likewise, all 29 resolutions on Syria adopted in
the Security Council stress the strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter.

I would like to explain the unprecedented global
terrorist war that my country has been subjected to over
seven years, amid the silence of some, the complicity
of some, the indifference of some, overlooking of some
and conspiring of others. Certain influential countries
on the Council — I mean the United States, the United
Kingdom and France — have done all they can to
destroy Syria, its people and its political standing, in
order to settle scores with my country by manipulating
the provisions of the Charter and violating its
provisions so as to achieve their special agendas related
to interference at the expense of the blood and the fate
of the Syrian people. They have exploited the media,
and unfortunately some United Nations employees
distort reality about what is happening in Syria and to
lie to international public opinion regarding the human
suffering of Syrian civilians.

It is our right today, as it is the right of all peoples
of the world who still believe in the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, to wonder
what the Council is doing to ensure respect for those
purposes and principles wisely established by the
founders, with a view to maintaining peace, security
and prosperity following the wars and tragedies that
they experienced. We in Syria know that our country is
not the first victim of violations of Charter provisions
and international law by certain members of the
Council. However, what Syria has been enduring is the
consequence of silence over the course of decades in the
face of such violations. What did the Council do when
certain Member States undermined the provisions of
the Charter and prevented the Palestinian people from
exercising their right to creating an independent State,
with Jerusalem as its capital? What did the Council
do when those Member States themselves violated the
provisions of the Charter by invading Iraq? What did
the Council do when those same States violated the
provisions of the Charter and destroyed Libya? What
did the Council do when the same States violated
Charter provisions by fuelling terrorism worldwide and
called it the jihadi movement? What did the Council
do when the same States violated the provisions of the
Charter and flagrantly interfered in the internal affairs
of Member States and looted their resources, as is the
case with several African States?
The animosity of certain countries towards Syria
derives from the principle of arrogance of power,
rather than the rule of law. It reflects disrespect to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and a total lack
10/13

With regard to the suffering of Syrian civilians, it
has been inflicted on them by armed terrorist groups
for seven years. Such groups use civilians as human
shields, target hospitals and schools and use them
as military posts, camps and detention centres for
the people they abduct. In the past 20 days, the city
of Damascus has been subjected to 1,000 missile
and mortar attacks. Some Council members have
manipulated the principles of the United Nations
Charter and violated its provisions by giving orders to
their regional partners to invest all they can in media
and materials to support armed terrorist groups, by
issuing Wahabi fatwas for the shedding of Syrian blood,
by opening their borders to facilitate the entry into
Syria of tens of thousands of mercenary terrorists from
more than 100 Member States of this Organization, by
setting up training camps in neighbouring States and
by calling these terrorists moderate Syrian opposition.
Today those mercenary terrorists who come from more
than 100 states are simply called Syrian opposition. It
seems that their DNA has been altered, and now they
are just the Syrian moderate opposition.
It is no secret that this support to the terrorists
has cost those States $137 billion, as confirmed by the
former Prime Minister of Qatar. It is also no secret
that the former United States Ambassador to Syria
confirmed that his country had spent $12 billion over
the four years from 2014 to 2017 in order to change the
regime in Syria, as officials in Washington, D.C., want
to do in Baghdad, Lybia, Syria, Venezuela and Iran.
18-04189

14/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

WikiLeaks documents have revealed the policies of
successive American Administrations and shown that
the United States Government has been opposed to my
country since the American and British invasion of Iraq.
Those countries have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and violated its provisions by giving armed
terrorist groups toxic chemicals to use against innocent
civilians, subsequently manipulating the locales of such
incidents and providing the investigation mechanism
with concocting false information and fake testimony
to accuse the Syrian Government in order to find an
excuse to attack it.
There are 136 letters in the dossier I hold here,
sent to the Member States by the Syrian Government
and containing very important information on the
acquisition of chemical substances outside Syria by
terrorists for their use in Syria. Those chemicals were
indeed used in Syria and, as I just said, 136 letters were
written about them. The Council has the letters, but only
a few of its members were interested in reading them.
One of the most important political magazines,
the American Newsweek, published an article on
8 February written by Ian Wilkie entitled “Now Mattis
Admits There Was No Evidence Assad Used Poison
Gas on His People”. The United States Secretary of
Defence admits in that article that there is no proof of
the use of toxic gas by the Syrian Government against it
people, neither in Khan Shaykhun nor in Al-Ghouta in
2013. The French Minister of Defence, Florence Parly,
also said yesterday, like her American counterpart, that
there is no documented proof of the use of chlorine
gas by the Syrian Government. Yet the words of the
French Minister did not prevent her President from
threatening to stage an aggression against my country,
Syria, as the former United States Administration did.
These countries have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and breached its provisions when they tried
to legitimize the recurring attacks perpetrated by the
forces of what is called the International Coalition, led
by the United States, the most recent of which was this
illegitimate coalition’s attack on 8 February on northeastern Deir ez-Zor, against Syrian popular forces
fighting terrorist Da’esh. This region, which is 30
kilometres wide and 65 kilometres long, and which was
attacked by the Syrian popular forces against Da’esh,
is under United States protection. Da’esh, which we
defeated in Deir ez-Zor and Albuqmal, left these two
cities under American protection and entrenched its
presence in the region along the Syrian-Iraqi borders.

S/PV. 8181

When the Syrian popular forces attacked Da’esh there,
they were shelled by the United States Air Force. This
is clearly yet another example of the Coalition’s real
mission and the role played by Washington, D.C. in
supporting the terrorist organization Da’esh, as it has
done in the past, when the United States targeted Syrian
Arab Army sites in Jabal Al-Thardah, near Deir ez-Zor,
on 17 September 2016, enabling Da’esh to advance and
occupy areas in Jabal Al-Thardah.
The Coalition has deliberately destroyed 90 per
cent of the Syrian city of Raqqa and has failed to uphold
its commitment to defusing tens of thousands of mines
left behind by Da’esh before abandoning the city and
perpetrating terrorist acts under its two umbrellas — the
United States, east of the Euphrates, and Turkey, north
of Afrin. It is unfortunate that in his statement, to which
I listened carefully, the Special Envoy made no mention
of the occupation of various areas in my country by the
United States and Turkey. He did say that there was a
cross-border dispute in Afrin, but did not mention the
illegitimate Turkish presence in my country and the
attack on the Syrian city of Afrin.
These States have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and violated its provisions when they stayed
silent, along with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, with regard to the repeated attacks by
Israel’s occupation forces on areas of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the most recent being their act of aggression
on 10 February, which my United States colleague has
attempted to justify by claiming that it was a response
to an Iranian drone’s flight over occupied Palestinian
territory. That is not true; it is false and misleading. It is
not the first time that we have witnessed Israeli acts of
aggression against the sovereignty of my country. Every
member of the Council is aware that Israel continued
to violate my country’s sovereignty until one of its
military planes was brought down by a Syrian rocket
over occupied Palestine. Israel has consistently violated
my country’s sovereignty — and I would like to remind
the Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of that.
The Council has been prevented from issuing
statements condemning terrorist attacks by military
organizations and their launching of more than
1,000 missiles and mortars, most recently targeting
residential streets and suburbs, diplomatic missions,
infrastructure and churches in Damascus and other
cities. Those acts of aggression have resulted in dozens

18-0418911/13

S/PV.8181

The situation in the Middle East

14/02/2018

of civilian deaths and hundreds wounded, most of them
women and children.

committee. I very much hope that the results that Sochi
has produced will not be misinterpreted.

These States have manipulated the principles of the
Charter and violated its provisions when they talk about
what they call besieged areas in eastern Ghouta and the
Damascus countryside. They have forgotten that the
residents of eastern Ghouta have been besieged from
within by armed terrorist groups that are operating from
there, using civilians as human shields and attempting
to divert humanitarian convoys for the benefit of their
supporters or to sell their supplies to desperate people
at exorbitant prices, as happened in eastern Aleppo.

The final statement, voted on and amended by
the Syrian participants, was adopted unanimously by
a broad majority through a democratic vote, based
on the procedures established for the conference. It
represents the basic pillar of the political process that
will produce future dialogue and discussion, rooted
in a solution that, assuming no foreign interference,
will be entirely Syrian-led. The final statement
represents a legitimate foundation for any political
process, especially considering that it reflects national
principles that have unanimous support in Syria and
cannot be questioned — respect for Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and the Syrian people’s right to
choose their own political and economic system and to
maintain the Syrian Arab Army and armed forces.

At the time when the United States first decided
unilaterally and illegitimately to intervene militarily
in my country, Washington stated that its goal was
fighting Da’esh. After that, it changed its mind, saying
that it was in Syria to establish permanent military
bases for safeguarding the strategic security of the
United States and its allies. It later changed its mind
once again, saying that the purpose of its presence in
Syria was to establish armed militias in opposition to
the Syrian Government and to enable them to exploit
oil, gas, water and hydrocarbons and other resources
in Syria — in other words, they wanted to establish a
mini-State. Subsequently, it changed its thinking once
more, stating that it would remain in Syria even if
Da’esh was defeated. It said the same thing about Iraq,
in order to justify the presence of their forces there. It
has continued to change its mind, saying that it would
leave Syria only if a political settlement was reached
and the security of its allies was assured. Most recently,
it has stated that it is in Syria to fight Iran, Hizbullah
and Russia. It has shifted its nuclear strategy and is
considering the possibility of using nuclear weapons.
Tomorrow, perhaps, it will tell us that it is in Syria to
fight Martians from the Milky Way.
The Syrian Government commends the Russian
Federation’s efforts, and specifically President
Vladimir Putin’s initiative in hosting the Syrian
National Dialogue Conference in Sochi, which was yet
another demonstration of the fact that the only way to
achieve the aims of the political process in Syria is with
Syrian oversight and with no foreign interference of any
kind. The conference participants represented every
sector of Syrian society — political, social, cultural,
economic, and more. Two documents were adopted
by an overwhelming majority, a final statement and a
document calling for the establishment of a constitutional
12/13

Given the principle that the Syrian people
themselves must determine their future and their
Constitution, participants in the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi adopted a resolution to
establish a constitutional committee. Consequently,
the committee should be established according to the
resolution voted on by the Syrians. The resolution
identified the tasks of the committee, and the
participants in the Congress did not grant the Special
Envoy to Syria any tutelage, delegation or authority to
establish the constitutional committee. We in Syria are
committed to the decision taken by the participants of
the Congress. We are not concerned with any committee
set up by foreign stakeholders, and will not deal with
the results of its discussions or with anything related to
it. The constitutional issue is a sovereign one.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
remains committed to any political course that would
end the bloodshed of the Syrian people, preserve
my country’s unity and independence, ensure its
sovereignty and uphold the principle of the Syrian
people to determine their own future through Syrian
dialogue. This firm principle has been underscored
by all relevant Security Council resolutions on the
Syrian crisis.
In conclusion, I would like to respond to my
colleague of the United States, who called for peace in
Syria and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
which was approved by her country. The resolution
underscores the need to maintain the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of my country,
18-04189

14/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Syria. Given that the resolution, which was approved
by Washington, D.C., underscores the need to maintain
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of my country, Syria, then why does the United States
have forces in parts of my country? Has the United
States of America not violated the very resolution that

S/PV. 8181

its delegation voted in favour of in the Council, where it
was unanimously adopted?
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

18-0418913/13
