S/2013/200

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 March 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 25 March 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my special report to the Security Council on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region dated 27 February
2013 (S/2013/119), in which I responded to the request of the Council, in its
resolution 2076 (2012), for a report on options, and their implications, for the
possible redeployment of contingents and additional force multipliers, observation
capabilities and troops to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) within the current authorized
ceiling.
In my report, I outlined a proposal for the deployment of a dedicated
intervention brigade, to be established within MONUSCO for an initial period of
one year, together with additional capabilities for advanced information collation,
analysis and dissemination to enhance situational awareness and enable timely
decision-making, as also outlined in my letter to the Security Council dated
27 December 2012 (S/2013/43).
I wish to inform the Security Council that a preliminary assessment of the
financial implications of the proposals outlined in my special report, should the
Council decide to authorize them, shows that additional costs for MONUSCO would
total approximately $140 million over a full year. The costs associated with the
deployment of the intervention brigade would include the deployment of 2,314 new
troops, within the ceiling currently authorized by the Council. The brigade would be
rapidly deployed to begin operations. Temporary facilities and additional air
capabilities of MONUSCO would ensure that the brigade maintains a tactical
posture. The added costs also include the deployment of an unmanned aerial system
and of other capability enhancements outlined in my report.
Should the Security Council decide to approve the above, a financing proposal
would be presented to the General Assembly for its consideration. Such a proposal
would be prepared with regard to an appropriate funding period, a projected
deployment timeline for personnel and equipment, and a detailed assessment of
operating conditions.
I would be grateful if you could bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

13-27407 (E) 280313

*1327407*
