VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

convention, 123 drawn up in accordance with Commission
on Narcotic Drugs resolution 1 (XXXII) of 10 February
1987, 124 and urges Member States to submit in due course
their observations on the draft revised by the Expert
Group;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, using existing resources, to consider the possibility of convening the Intergovernmental Expert Group for a period oftwo weeks immediately prior to the tenth special session of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs in order to continue the
revision of the working paper on the draft convention
against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances and, if possible, to reach agreement on the convention;
5. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
through the Economic and Social Council, to consider
and, if possible, approve at its tenth special session the
draft convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, and to prepare recommendations on the next measures to be taken with a view to concluding the preparation of the convention, including the
possibility of convening a plenipotentiary conference in
1988 for its adoption;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary administra ti ve arrangements for the convening of any
agreed plenipotentiary conference in 1988 for the signing
of the convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances;
7. Once again urges ali States that have not yet done so
to ratify orto accede to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, and
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/112.

International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking

The General Assembly,
Recallingits resolution 40/122 of 13 December 1985, by
which it decided to convene in 1987, in response to the
initiative of the Secretary-General, an International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking at the ministerial level, at Vienna, with the mandate to generate universal action, and as an expression of the política! will of
nations to combat the drug menace and as a means of
tackling the serious and complex international drug problem in ali its forms,
Recalling also its resolution 41 / 125 of 4 December 1986,
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
decision 1987/127 of 26 May 1987,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the lnternational Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit
Trafficking, 125
Expressing its determination to strengthen action and
co-operation at the national, regional and international
levels towards the goal of an international society free of
drug abuse,
123 E/CN.7/1988/2 (Part 11) and Corr.2 and Add. t.
124 See Official Recards af the Ecanomic and Social Caunci/,

Supp/ement No. 4 (E/1987/17), chap. VIII, sect. A.
m A/42/594.

1987,

211

Noting the need for a review and assessment of the follow-up activities to the Conference,
Noting with appreciation the offer of the Government of
Bolivia to actas host to a second international conference,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, 126 and welcomes the successful conclusion of the Conference, in particular the adoption of the Declaration 122 and the
Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control; f27
2. Affirms its commitment to the Declaration of the
International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking as an expression of the political will of nations to
combat the drug menace;
3. Urges Governments and orgl:\fiizations, in formulating programmes, to take due account of the framework
provided by the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline
ofFuture Activities in Drug Abuse Control as a repertory
of recommendations setting forth practica! measures that
can contribute to the fight against drug abuse and illicit
trafficking;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available,
within existing resources, an adequate number of copies of
the Declaration and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary
Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control;
5. Decides to observe 26 June each year as the International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking;
6. Appeals to Member States to provide additional resources to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control as a priority goal in the follow-up activities to the Conference to enable it to strengthen its co-operation with the
developing countries in their efforts to implement drug
control programmes;
7. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the
principal United Nations policy-making body on drug
control, to identify suitable measures for follow-up to the
International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking and, in this context, to give appropriate consideration to the report of the Secretary-General on the Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/113.

International campaign against drug abuse and
illicit trafficking

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the ad verse effects of the global problem of
drug abuse, illicit production of and trafficking in drugs
and psychotropic substances, both on individuals, in that
it has pernicious physical and psychological effects and
limits creativity and the full development ofhuman potential, and in relation to States, as it is a threat to their
security and is prejudicial to their democratic institutions
and their economic, social, legal and cultural structures,
Considering that the situation continues to deteriorate,
owing, inter alia, to the growing interrelationship between
drug trafficking and transnational criminal organizations
126 Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and 11/icit
Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.87.1.18).
127 !bid., cha p. I, sect. A.
