204

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

4. Once more urgently requests the Chilean authorities
to respect and promote human rights in conformity with the
obligations undertaken under various international instruments and, in particular, to adopt the concrete measures
contemplated in resolution 1982/25 of the Commission on
Human Rights, especially the lifting of the state of emergency and the state of exception and the re-establishment
of democratic institutions, by ensuring the full enjoyment
and exercise of the civil and political rights as well as the
economic, social and cultural rights and fundamental freedoms of the Chilean people, as provided in those international instruments;
5. Urges once more the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of all persons who have disappeared
in Chile for political reasons, to inform their families of the
results of such investigation and to punish those responsible
for the disappearance;
6. Further urges again the Chilean authorities to restore
the full enjoyment of trade union rights, in particular the
right to organize trade unions, the right to collective bargaining and the right to strike;
7. Urges the Chilean authorities to respect, in conformity with the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 119 the right of Chilean nationals to live in and freely
enter and leave Chilean territory, without restrictions or
conditions of any kind, and to cease the practice of "relegation" (assignment of forced residence) and forced exile,
in particular of those who participate in trade union activities, academic life or the defence of human rights;
8. Also urges the Chilean authorities to put an end to
arbitrary detentions and imprisonment in secret places and
the practice of torture and other forms of inhuman or degrading treatment which have resulted on occasion in unexplained deaths;
9. Requests the Chilean authorities to respect fully the
economic, social and cultural rights of the Chilean population in general and of the indigenous population in
particular;
10. Concludes, on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur, that it is necessary to keep under consideration
the situation of human rights in Chile;
11. Calls again on the Chilean authorities to co-operate
with the Commission on Human Rights and its Special Rapporteur and to submit commentaries on his report to the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-ninth session;
12. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to study
in depth the report of the Special Rapporteur at its thirtyninth session, with a view to taking the most appropriate
steps, in particular the extension of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur, and report on its consideration, through
the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session.
I 10th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/184.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala

The General Assembly.
Reiterating that the Governments of all Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1982/
31 of 11 March 1982, 124 in which the Commission expressed
its profound concern at the continuing deterioration in the
situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Gua-

temala under the previous regime and in which it requested
its Chairman to appoint a Special Rapporteur,
Taking into account General Assembly decision 36/435
of 16 December 1981 ,
Expressing its satisfaction at the declared willingness of
the present Government of Guatemala to co-operate with
the Special Rapporteur to be appointed pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1982/31 with a mandate to make a thorough study of the human rights situation
in Guatemala,
Taking note of resolution 1982/ l 7 of 7 September 1982
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, 126 in which the Sub-Commission
expressed alarm at reports of massive repression against and
displacement of indigenous populations,
Disturbed about the large number of missing persons,
who, despite appeals from various international organizations to the Government of Guatemala, remain unaccounted
for,
Noting with concern the state of siege in force in Guatemala since l July 1982, under which basic human rights
are abrogated and serious violations of human rights are
reported to occur,
l. Expresses its deep concern at the serious violations
of human rights reported to be taking place in Guatemala,
particularly those reports of widespread repression, killing and massive displacement of rural and indigenous
populations;
2. Urges the Government of Guatemala to ensure that
human rights and fundamental freedoms are fully respected
by all its authorities and agencies, including its security
forces;
3. Appeals to the Government of Guatemala to allow
international humanitarian organizations to give their assistance to those displaced;
4. Appeals also to all parties concerned in Guatemala
to seek an end to all acts of violence;
5. Calls upon Governments to refrain from supplying
arms and other military assistance as long as serious human
rights violations in Guatemala continue to be reported;
6. Invites the Government of Guatemala and other parties concerned to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights;
7. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to study
carefully the report of its Special Rapporteur and to consider,
in the light of that report, further steps for securing human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all in Guatemala.
I 10th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/185.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador

The General Assembly.
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 118
Conscious of its responsibility in all circumstances to
promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reiterating that the Governments of all Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken under various international human
rights instruments,
