A/63/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

65

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 December 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.

foundation of all religious, ethical and philosophical
traditions.

Agenda item 64 (continued)

Today, we reaffirm that human rights are not the
exclusive birthright of any particular group, class or
segment of society. Civil, political, economic, social,
cultural and environmental rights belong to all people,
men and women alike. Those rights cannot, and should
not, be ranked in a hierarchy. All of them are
important, and all must be treated in a fair and equal
manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis.

Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/63/L.54)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly is holding this plenary meeting to mark the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, in accordance with the decision on the
allocation of items taken at its 2nd plenary meeting and
pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 62/171 of
18 December 2007 and 63/25 of 24 November 2008.
(spoke in English)
On 10 December 1948, the United Nations
adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Today, we celebrate its sixtieth anniversary,
recognizing it as a basic source of rights and freedoms
and an ethical and legal standard that calls on us to
recognize and respect the dignity, freedom and equality
of all human beings, without discrimination on the
grounds of age or for political, social, religious, ethnic
or other reasons.
At a point in history marked by the maniacal and
suicidal selfishness of an increasingly discredited
system, aimed at the ever-increasing concentration of
wealth and power, the Universal Declaration tells us
that the values that should govern the new world socioeconomic order are justice, solidarity, equality and the
recognition that we are all members of the human
family. Those same values have always formed the

I urge you, brothers and sisters, to accept the fact
that human rights are progressive and evolving. As
human beings have become more aware of their living
conditions and have identified injustices, they have
risen up to demand respect for their human dignity. It
is that demand that has brought about the successive
recognition of human rights in each country’s legal
system and in the United Nations system.
There are many examples of the transformational
power of human rights: the abolition of slavery; the
recognition of individual rights, collective rights and
rights of solidarity; the recognition of full equality
between men and women; and the codification of the
rights of the child, of persons with disabilities and of
migrant workers and their families, among others.
We are here today not just for a pro forma
commemoration of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, but to bear witness to the fact that
human rights are a living, dialectical and
transformational force that enjoins us to strive together

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-64055 (E)

*0864055*

A/63/PV.65

to eradicate the ills that plague contemporary society,
such as the converging international crises; climate
change; the deterioration of our Mother Earth; human
trafficking; all forms of violence; all forms of
terrorism, including State terrorism; and abuses against
women and children, among other worldwide scourges.
Human rights are the paradigm for the twentyfirst century. States must, therefore, renew their
commitment to preventing any further massive or
individual violations of human rights. We must stop
such violations and redress the historical damage that
we have caused to all those who have suffered abuses
anywhere in the world.
When we see the world through the lens of
human rights, we cannot tolerate the fact that more
than 1 billion people live on less than one dollar a day
and 2.8 billion live on less than two dollars a day; 923
million people go hungry; tens of thousands of women
and children are victims of human trafficking; 9
million hectares of forest are lost each year;
individuals are illegally detained, subjected to torture
and to cruel and inhuman treatment and deprived of
their right to prompt and impartial justice; and foreign
military bases are established in sovereign nations.
On 14 November 2008, a copy of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was carried aboard the
Space Shuttle in specially protected packaging and will
be stored in space indefinitely. Our challenge is to
instil the letter and the spirit of the Declaration in the
hearts of all people, including political leaders and
decision makers, and in the foundations of the new
world economic architecture.
If human rights are to be the present and future
archetype, then international relations and economic,
educational and institutional models will have to be
consistent with the rights to education, food, health,
housing, secure employment, clean water, selfdetermination and peace, among other rights.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as a
source of international law, should guide us in the
process of adapting and democratizing the United
Nations. All dictatorships must end, including
dictatorship in this House. Power should not be
concentrated in a few, but should be shared by all. So
let us continue to strengthen the “Group of 192”
Member States that make up this General Assembly.

2

In the 60 years since the Declaration was
adopted, we have created many agreements, covenants,
plans, programmes and institutions in the field of
human rights. But that is not enough. We must make
further efforts to strengthen human rights oversight,
monitoring and implementation mechanisms. All States
must take the measures needed for the full and
effective enjoyment of human rights, so that we can
translate legal formulas into real-life plans for our
peoples.
We must work harder to implement human rights
treaties and resolutions. Human rights are allencompassing and holistic. Their enjoyment and
implementation are primarily responsibilities of States,
but all individuals and public, civil and private
institutions share responsibility for promoting and
upholding them.
Article 28 of the Declaration provides, “Everyone
is entitled to a social and international order in which
the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration
can be fully realized.” That requires that we put an end
to the insolent opulence of a few and the extreme
poverty of millions in order to build a just society that
respects all forms of life.
I take this opportunity to urge Member States to
ratify regional and universal human rights agreements
so that these rights will be a commitment shared by all.
Today, we will honour some human rights heroes
and heroines who, as I have said before, are symbols of
persistence, valour and tenacity in their resistance to
public and private authorities that violate human rights.
They constitute a moral force to put an end to human
rights violations and an inspiration to seek another type
of society, another political system, another economic
model, another world where all persons will be treated
as brothers and sisters, without discrimination,
exclusion or the destruction of life in all its forms.
Considering that today is also the tenth anniversary of
the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the
example of those men and women prompts me to call
on States to protect the life and integrity of all those
who promote and defend human rights.
Inspired by resolution 62/171, which proclaimed
10 December 2008 as the beginning of the
International Year of Human Rights Learning, the
human rights education campaigns undertaken by
Member States and United Nations bodies and agencies
should be continued and expanded to create a universal

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

culture of human rights in which everyone expects and
upholds respect for human rights.
We must continue to make headway in the
recognition of new rights such as the right to water and
the right to sustainable development, sovereignty and
multiculturalism for indigenous and Afro-descendent
peoples, among other rights. In the interest of
recognizing new rights, today we will adopt the draft
optional protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. We can build a
better world if we observe and fulfil the human rights
of all individuals and people everywhere in the world.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly will now hear a message
transmitted by video from the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I send my warmest
greetings to the Assembly from Poznań, Poland, where
I am attending the United Nations Climate Change
Conference. I thank the Assembly for gathering in New
York on Human Rights Day to mark the sixtieth
anniversary of a landmark document.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
drafted amid utter destruction and destitution,
following the Holocaust and the Second World War. It
reflects humanity’s aspirations for a future of
prosperity, dignity and peaceful coexistence. It is, and
always will be, a core part of the United Nations
identity. The international community has drawn
enduring inspiration from the Declaration to build a
great foundation of laws that now protect countless
people around the world. We have come a long way,
but the reality is that we have not lived up to the
Declaration’s vision — at least not yet.
Since I took office as Secretary-General, I have
been very humbled and saddened by having seen so
many people whose human rights are being abused and
not properly protected. We see human tragedy, the
exploitation of children and a host of other ills
plaguing millions of people. The global financial crisis
and
development
emergency
have
enormous
implications for the realization of human rights,
including the right to development. The food and
climate crisis are having the most detrimental impact
on those least able to bear such burdens.
After all the lessons we profess to have learned,
shocking acts of brutality against innocent people still

08-64055

often go unanswered. We cannot turn a blind eye to
poverty, bigotry and repression. We have a collective
responsibility to reject indifference. Human rights,
indivisible and interdependent, must hold the whole
world in solidarity.
The struggle for human rights would not be
possible without human rights defenders who risk their
lives to ensure that others are protected. It would not
be possible without human rights experts who
scrutinize country reports or assess complaints. It
would not be possible without lawyers and the press,
and without ordinary people who find extraordinary
courage and stand up for what is rightfully theirs,
yours, mine and ours. We need to keep building up the
edifice of human rights — the treaties, declarations and
other instruments that set global standards and give
people hope. But most of all, we need to implement
these instruments. These are living documents and
should be used as such.
We should work with urgency; there is no time to
rest. The Declaration was created as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations.
We will honour its towering vision only when its
principles are applied fully, everywhere, for everyone.
I thank the Assembly once again for coming together to
mark this milestone. Let us go forth from this
anniversary more determined than ever to uphold the
principles and vision of this great achievement in
human affairs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 63/25 of
24 November 2008, I now give the floor to the
President of the Human Rights Council, His
Excellency Mr. Martin Ihoeghian Uhomoibhi.
Mr. Uhomoibhi (President, Human Rights
Council): As President of the Human Rights Council, it
is an honour and privilege to participate at the
commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on
the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Sixty years is
ample enough time to reflect upon and assess the
achievements of the high instrument and Declaration
adopted unanimously by Member States. This is also a
fitting and appropriate occasion to assess the
challenges and chart the way forward towards ensuring
better implementation of its ideals and objectives.
Essentially, this anniversary should serve as a unique
means of reinvigorating the commitment of the

3

A/63/PV.65

international community to all outstanding efforts to
ensure the realization and universality of all human
rights for all people.
Therefore, on this solemn occasion of
introspection and retrospection, one is very much
reminded of the circumstances and purposes of the
elaboration of this common and universal Declaration.
The world had just emerged from a horrific and
devastating world war that wreaked untold misery on
societies and nations, as a result of which the United
Nations was established. The need was felt to create
guiding principles and norms to prevent the
reoccurrence of such misery. Quite rightly, therefore,
the Declaration recognized that the inherent dignity
and the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
the human family are the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world. In the body of the
Declaration, that core principle is articulated and
expanded in a number of articles that have since
emerged as the Magna Carta of contemporary
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Simply put, humanity today no longer lacks the
human rights instruments to promote, protect and
defend human rights and fundamental freedoms.
However, what is sorely needed is for States parties to
existing human rights instruments to take the practical
steps necessary to implement their provisions for the
benefit of all mankind.
In that connection, I would agree with the
concern expressed by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
last year, in a message in Geneva at the flagging-off
ceremony of the year of activities that culminate today
in the marking of the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, when he
poignantly said:
“The Declaration remains as relevant today
as it did on the day it was adopted. But the
fundamental freedoms enshrined in it are still not
a reality for everyone. Too often, Governments
lack the political will to implement international
norms they have willingly accepted.

at the core of the denial of many basic human rights.
Children are exploited, the elderly are neglected and
women are still denied their fundamental rights.
Racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance pose huge challenges to establishing a
world of true equality, justice and freedom as was
envisaged in the Universal Declaration. Climate
change, migration, health issues related to HIV/AIDS,
malaria and tuberculosis, and the pervasiveness of civil
and political conflicts present enormous challenges of
their own to the enjoyment of human rights.
It has always been the concern of the United
Nations to provide a forum for sharing the values of
our common humanity and our common destiny. In the
human rights arena in particular, the United Nations
system has played a critical role and made good
progress. It has done that through, inter alia, the
establishment of the treaty body system that closely
monitors the fulfilment of State obligations under the
respective treaties, through the establishment of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
which is the custodian of human rights on the ground
around the world, and, not least, through the Human
Rights Council, the successor body to the Commission
on Human Rights.
Now in its third year of existence, the Human
Rights Council has made good strides in carrying out
its mandate to promote universal respect for all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction of any kind and in a fair and equal manner.
It remains constantly seized of human rights violations
around the globe, while at the same time providing an
invaluable space for voices of defenders of the
Universal Declaration to be heard with the aim of
inspiring change and the improvement of human rights
situations.

“This anniversary year is an occasion to
build up that will.”

Under the mechanism of the Universal Periodic
Review, all United Nations Member States have
committed themselves to undergoing peer review of
their human rights records — a novel and, one might
add, revolutionary initiative, with real potential for
ensuring accountability and commitments by all States
to international human rights standards, including the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Apart from the pernicious crisis of lack of
political will, it is regrettable that the picture of human
rights is dismal and begs for remedy in many other
aspects. The problem of poverty is rampant and stands

The road travelled over the past 60 years to
actualize the protection and promotion of basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms of the individual has
been a long and arduous one. Although over these

4

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

years, a global consciousness of human rights that
inspires people around the world today may have
emerged, we have not yet arrived at the El Dorado of
their full enjoyment.
Breaking the jinx that prevents the full enjoyment
of human rights is a collective responsibility of all
human beings — individuals, civil society
organizations, politicians, diplomats and men and
women, regardless of our race, colour, creed, national
origin, disability or age. In whatever profession we
may find ourselves, it is incumbent upon us to pool our
resources for the defence and promotion of human
rights. Global solidarity is key in all of those
enterprises.
Let us take the opportunity of this unique moment
in our history to reaffirm our commitments to the goal
of the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and
interrelatedness of all human rights. Let us spare no
effort to translate those rights into reality for the
benefit of all human beings.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 63/25 of
24 November 2008, I will now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Ms. Pillay (United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights): I am profoundly honoured to be
here for this commemoration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Six decades ago, on this day, the General
Assembly proved that the ostensibly unachievable was,
in fact, attainable. It affirmed the force of ideas and a
vision of respectful and peaceful coexistence in the
aftermath of utter brutality and destruction.
Indeed, I cannot think of a better place than this
Hall to mark such a defining moment in human history.
And I cannot think of a better way to begin my address
than by reciting article 1 of the Universal Declaration,
which states:
“All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason
and conscience and should act towards one
another in a spirit of brotherhood.”
Those words resonate today as widely and as movingly
as they did in 1948. They speak with the timeless and
unalterable force of both the power of rights and our
kinship in rights.

08-64055

The power of rights made it possible for an everexpanding number of people to claim freedom,
equality, justice and well-being. Thanks to the
Universal Declaration, all human rights — civil,
political, economic, social and cultural — were
recognized as inherent and inalienable entitlements of
all people, rather than privileges magnanimously
bestowed upon them or denied to them at the caprice of
the powerful.
The Universal Declaration made manifest the
relation between fundamental freedoms and social
justice and the connection of both of those elements to
peace and security. It gave impulse to a wide and
growing legal architecture, as well as to advocacy
vehicles for the promotion and the protection of all
rights.
Today, the principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration have found an echo in the constitutions
and laws of more than 90 countries. Dedicated
international, regional and national mechanisms —
including the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, with its
independent experts — have been put in place to be
both the custodians and the monitors of human rights
and of their promotion and their protection. Civil
society everywhere exerts vigilance over rights
implementation with growing capacity and influence.
Reiterating the natural and social bonds of human
destiny anywhere — that is, our kinship in rights — the
Universal Declaration insisted on our common claim to
a life in dignity, on our right to count and be counted
irrespective of our ancestry, gender, colour, status and
creed. It envisaged a world in which every man,
woman and child lives free from hunger and protected
from oppression, violence and discrimination, with the
benefits of housing, health care, education and
opportunity. That vision encapsulates the global culture
of human rights that we strive towards and should
therefore be a unifying rather than divisive force,
within and among all cultures.
Sadly, such vision, from its earliest formulations
to our days, continues to be undermined by repression,
discrimination and inequality. We cannot forget, and
Nelson Mandela has reminded us, that the Universal
Declaration was adopted only a few months after the
formation of the first apartheid Government. But, as he
said, the Universal Declaration gave hope to the

5

A/63/PV.65

oppressed in the darkest moment of their existence. It
was, as Mandela put it,
“a shining beacon and an inspiration to many
millions of South Africans. It was proof that they
were not alone, but rather part of a great global
movement against racism and colonialism, for
human rights, peace and justice.”
His words ring true for all who still suffer from human
rights violations.
I grew up in apartheid South Africa as a secondclass citizen, but in the course of my life I had the
privilege to see and experience a complete
transformation in my country. South Africa now has
one of the strongest constitutions in the world, and
while it struggles as many countries do, to turn legal
rights into reality, watching such amazing change over
a single decade and through a relatively peaceful
evolution gives me great hope. I stand before you
today as a living testimony of rights realized.
At the same time, I am acutely aware that for too
many people in the world, the Universal Declaration
remains an unfulfilled promise, as the political will to
give effect to States’ human rights obligations lags
lamentably behind their pledges. We live in a world
where crimes against humanity are ongoing, where
mass rape and murder continue with impunity and
where the most basic economic rights critical to
survival are not realized and often not even accorded
the urgency they warrant.
The Universal Declaration wisely chose not to
rank rights. On the contrary, it recognized the equal
status of political and civil rights with economic, social
and cultural rights. It did so because all rights are
inextricably linked. Violations of one set of rights
reverberate on other rights and enfeeble them all. As
the Secretary-General noted, the recent food
emergencies, the degradation of the natural
environment, the current financial crisis and the unrest
that they engender all underscore that those who are at
the front lines of hardship are also likely to be the
victims of the ripple effects of human rights violations.
With this in mind, the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights is of singular importance. Approved by
the Human Rights Council in June and by the Third
Committee last month, the Optional Protocol is now
before the plenary for final adoption. Closing an

6

historic gap in human rights protection under the
international system, the Optional Protocol represents a
veritable milestone. It will move us closer to the
unified vision of human rights of the Universal
Declaration. Importantly, it will enable victims to seek
justice for violations of their economic, social and
cultural rights at the international level for the first
time.
Charles Malik of Lebanon, one of the Universal
Declaration’s co-drafters, pointed out that the
Declaration was never intended to be a mere catalogue
of hopes, ringing in rhetoric but limping in deeds. It
was intended to end brutality and destruction, to
protect the human rights of his and of future
generations.
Sixty years after its passage, despite many
advances in the legal elaboration of its principles and
despite progress on many fronts, the promises of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights have yet to be
realized for most people in the world. The challenge
facing us is the implementation of these rights on the
ground.
Eleanor Roosevelt said, “Where, after all, do
universal human rights begin? In small places, close to
home.” Until these rights touch the lives of every man,
woman and child everywhere, our work is not done. As
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
I pledge — and the Secretary-General has personally
assured me of his full support — to do everything we
can to give full effect to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. I hope you will join me in this effort.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In view of the
desire of members to dispose of this item
expeditiously, I should like to consult the Assembly
with a view to proceeding immediately to consider the
draft resolution contained in document A/63/L.54. In
that connection, since the draft resolution has only
been circulated this morning, it would be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees to that proposal.

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
informed that a technical correction should be made to
the English version of draft resolution A/63/L.54. In
the first and last paragraphs of the Declaration set out
therein, “States Members” should read “Member
States”.
We will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.54. The Assembly will take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/63/L.54, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/63/L.54, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 63/116).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now begin the ceremony for the award of the
United Nations Prizes in the Field of Human Rights for
2008.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966, seven prizes are to
be awarded this year to individuals and organizations
that have made outstanding contributions to the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Two of the prizes are special
posthumous awards.
The award recipients are the following.
Ms. Louise Arbour was United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights from 2004 to 2008.
Prior to her role as High Commissioner, Ms. Arbour
served as the Chief Prosecutor for the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and was responsible for the first indictment in
history of a sitting head of State. She has also served as
a judge on the Supreme Court of Canada.
Mr. Ramsey Clark, veteran human rights defender
and rule of law advocate, and former Attorney-General
of the United States, has been a leading voice for peace
and justice at the international level for decades. He
played a key role in the civil rights and peace
movements in his home country, and in promoting
fairness and justice around the globe. He has most
recently been recognized for his principled opposition
to abuses committed in the name of counter-terrorism
and his steadfast insistence on respect for human rights

08-64055

and fair judicial process for all persons, in accordance
with international standards.
Dr. Carolyn Gomes is the Executive Director,
since November 2002, and co-founder of Jamaicans for
Justice. Jamaicans for Justice defends the human rights
of marginalized and vulnerable groups against all
forms of violence, supports victims to seek redress
through the judicial system and advocates for their
protection. Under Dr. Gomes’s leadership, the
organization has become the premier human rights
advocacy group in Jamaica, developing innovative
local and international partnerships to advance the
cause of human rights.
Human Rights Watch was established in 1978 and
has for the past 30 years documented human rights
violations around the globe and advocated for the
promotion of human rights and freedoms. Each year,
Human Rights Watch publishes more than 100 reports
and briefings on human rights conditions in some 80
countries. The organization has played a key role in
major advocacy campaigns, such as for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, the
International Campaign to Ban Landmines and, more
recently, the Cluster Munitions Coalition.
Dr. Denis Mukwege co-founded and currently
operates the General Referral Hospital of Panzi, in
Bukavu, South Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. For more than 10 years he has devoted himself
to helping women and girl victims of sexual violence
in the province, setting up specialized services for their
treatment and training nurses, obstetricians and doctors
so that all those who come to the hospital can be
helped. An average of 10 to 12 women arrive daily at
the Panzi Hospital in Bukavu to be treated, many of
whom require major surgery. Dr. Mukwege describes
the sexual violence in the region as a weapon of war,
destroying entire communities.
The committee is also bestowing two special
posthumous awards on the following individuals.
Ms. Benazir Bhutto was an ardent advocate for
democracy and for the human rights of the most
vulnerable sections of society, particularly women,
children and members of minorities. Ms. Bhutto was
twice elected Prime Minister of Pakistan, in 1988 and
1993. After returning to Pakistan following years in
exile, Ms. Bhutto was assassinated in an attack
following a political rally in Rawalpindi in December

7

A/63/PV.65

2007. Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, her son, will accept
the award on her behalf.
Sister Dorothy Stang, of the Sisters of Notre
Dame de Namur, defended the human rights of the
poor, landless and indigenous populations of the Anapu
region of Brazil for nearly 40 years. She worked
tirelessly together with the farmers of the region to
help them rebuild their livelihoods, cultivate their land
and defend their rights from illegal loggers and
ranchers. Sister Stang became a symbol of the fight to
preserve the rainforest and to protect the rights of the
most vulnerable groups. She persevered in her mission,
despite numerous death threats. Sister Stang was
murdered in 2005 in Anapu, Brazil. Mr. David Stang,
her brother, and Sister Joan Burke of the Sisters of
Notre Dame de Namur will accept the award on her
behalf.
I will now present the awards. I kindly request
delegations to reserve their applause until the last
award has been presented.
I invite the representative of the Secretariat to
call the recipients to the podium. Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights, and I
will greet the recipients at the podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): I call
to the podium Mr. Kenneth Roth to receive the award
on behalf of Ms. Louise Arbour, who could not join us
today.
Mr. Kenneth Roth was escorted to the podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
you in recognition of your outstanding contributions to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
I now call to the podium Mr. Ramsey Clark to
receive the award.
Mr. Ramsey Clark was escorted to the podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
you in recognition of your outstanding contributions to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

8

I now call to the podium Dr. Carolyn Gomes to
receive the award.
Dr. Carolyn Gomes was escorted to the podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
you in recognition of your outstanding contributions to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
I now call to the podium Mr. Kenneth Roth to
receive the award on behalf on Human Rights Watch.
Mr. Kenneth Roth was escorted to the podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
Human Rights Watch in recognition of your
outstanding contributions to the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
I now call to the podium Dr. Denis Mukwege to
receive the award.
Dr. Denis Mukwege was escorted to the podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
you in recognition of your outstanding contributions to
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
I now call to the podium Mr. Bilawal Bhutto
Zardari to receive the award on behalf of the late
Ms. Benazir Bhutto.
Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari was escorted to the
podium.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
Ms. Benazir Bhutto in recognition of her outstanding
contributions to the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
I now call to the podium Mr. David Stang and
Sister Joan Burke to receive the award on behalf of the
late Sister Dorothy Stang.
Mr. David Stang and Sister Joan Burke were
escorted to the podium.

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
behalf of the United Nations, this award is presented to
Sister Dorothy Stang in recognition of her outstanding
contributions to the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
The winners of the United Nations Prizes in the
Field of Human Rights for 2008 are hereby presented
to the members of the General Assembly.
I request representatives to remain seated while
the President escorts the recipients of the awards. The
65th plenary meeting will then stand suspended so that
the Assembly can take action at its 66th plenary
meeting on the recommendation contained in the report
of the Third Committee issued in document A/63/435.
At the resumption of the 65th plenary meeting,
statements by representatives of regional groups and
others will be heard.
The meeting was suspended at 4.25 p.m. and
resumed at 4.35 p.m., with Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica),
Vice President, in the Chair.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): The Kingdom of
Morocco is honoured and privileged to speak today on
behalf of the African Group at this historical event
marking the celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This
important meeting gives us an opportunity to reflect on
the legacy of the Universal Declaration to humanity.
It is important to recall at the outset that the
resolution 62/171, entitled “International Year of
Human Rights Learning”, in which the Assembly
decided to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, was an
African initiative. The African Group is proud and
honoured to contribute positively to this event and to
demonstrate once again the commitment of Africa to
the protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms worldwide.
Africa’s commitment is shown through the
achievements of the African Union in the field of
human rights, such as the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights adopted in 1981, the establishment
of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights, the creation of the African Court on Human and
Peoples’ Rights under a protocol to the Charter adopted
in 1998 and the African Peer Review Mechanism,

08-64055

which reviews the progress of African States in the
protection and promotion of human rights.
The achievements that have emanated from the
proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights are undeniable. The Universal Declaration
affirmed the universal values that are shared by all and
established the basic standards in the field of human
rights, which led to many subsequent regional and
international instruments. Human rights are universal,
interdependent, indivisible and interrelated, and
therefore the values enshrined in the Declaration called
for moral, legal and political action to promote the
realization of freedom, equality and dignity for all
human beings.
The African Group reaffirms that the
enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights is essential to the full achievement of
the purposes of the Universal Declaration. In this
context, progress in the field of human rights should be
achieved through cooperation, dialogue and mutual
respect. The exploitation of human rights as an
instrument for political purposes should be prohibited.
In addition, particular attention should be devoted
to enhancing the capacity-building of developing
countries, at their request, in the field of human rights.
Despite all the progress achieved, there are still
too many men and women deprived of their
fundamental rights. Many phenomena, such as
colonialism,
poverty,
underdevelopment,
marginalization, hunger, discrimination, racism and
religious intolerance continue to prevail. All these
issues should be addressed in order to ensure dignity
and justice for all.
The fate of peoples under foreign occupation and
colonial or alien domination should not be forgotten,
and their right to self-determination and its exercise
remains valid and essential.
The African Group expresses equally its full
adherence to the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference. The African Group
attaches great importance to the realization of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and
advocates that economic, social and cultural rights and
civil and political rights should be treated equally.
The New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
known as NEPAD, launched seven years ago, is a
cornerstone initiative towards this purpose, as it aims

9

A/63/PV.65

to promote and protect the social and economic rights
of African people. The African Group seizes the
occasion of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights by the Human Rights Council in June
2008 and today by the General Assembly to celebrate it
as a new achievement in the field of human rights. The
right to development needs to be recognized as an
essential and integral part of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The right to development is an
inalienable human right, from which all countries and
individuals should benefit.
The African Group would like to emphasize that
tolerance and respect for cultural diversity are
important to facilitate the enjoyment of all human
rights by all. The African Group opposes all forms of
intolerance and discrimination based on religion or
belief; it condemns all acts of violence falsely claimed
by perpetrators to be done in the name of religion and
reaffirms that terrorism could not and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group. Overall, inter-religious dialogue and a
culture of peace should be promoted in such a way as
to foster unity for all peoples and mankind, with due
respect to all cultures and religions.
The African Group would like to express once
again the importance of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action and its follow-up. The Group
also expresses its support for the prioritization by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights of the
comprehensive follow-up to Durban and the support
given by her Office for the Durban Review
Conference, to be held in February 2009. The African
Group calls upon all stakeholders to make all efforts to
ensure the success of this important Conference.
The African Group attaches great importance to
the Human Rights Council and its added value. I would
like to welcome the presence of the President of the
Human Rights Council with us today. We also attach
great importance to the Universal Periodic Review and
underline the central role that this new mechanism
should play in bringing about the realization all of
human rights for all.
Human rights education constitutes an essential
contribution to the prevention of human rights abuses
over the long term. It represents an important
investment in the endeavour to achieve a just society,
in which all human rights of all persons are valued and

10

respected. Human rights education promotes values
and attitudes that encourage all individuals to uphold
their own rights and those of others. It develops an
understanding of everyone’s common responsibility to
make human rights a reality in each community. In this
context, the African Group wishes to express its
support for the adoption by the Human Rights Council
of a declaration on training and education in the field
of human rights.
The African Group would like to recall that the
General Assembly has proclaimed the year
commencing 10 December 2008 as the International
Year of Human Rights Learning, to be devoted to
activities to broaden and deepen human rights learning
on the basis of the principles of universality,
interdependency, impartiality, objectivity, non-selectivity,
constructive dialogue and cooperation. The African
Group encourages all Member States, as well as civil
society, to contribute actively to the International Year
of Human Rights Learning.
I should like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming the commitment of the African Group to
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
remains the common standard of achievement for all
peoples. We will continue to support the efforts of the
international community in the promotion and
protection of all human rights around the world.
Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): On behalf of the
Asian Group, I have the great honour of joining people
from around the world in commemorating the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which since its adoption on this date sixty years
ago has served as a common standard of achievement
for all peoples and all nations.
Rising from the ashes of the Second World War,
this historic Declaration was a vivid and defiant
proclamation in recognition of the inherent dignity and
the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the
human family as the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world. Asia, the largest continent with the
largest population and the most diversity in terms of
political, economic, socio-cultural and religious
backgrounds, has embraced this noble ideal for human
dignity and justice for all as enshrined in the
Declaration because it is the ideal that finds resonance
in all social and religious values across the continent.
Sixty years ago, Asian countries had played an
active role in the birth of the Universal Declaration of

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

Human Rights. The Asian Group has observed with
great satisfaction that since then there has been evergrowing awareness of human rights in countries across
the world. Today, human rights has become a common
language in the globalizing world, as it speaks to the
common desire for an equal respect for the human
dignity of every human being. The Declaration has also
inspired the adoption of a great variety of international
human rights instruments that together constitute a
solid body of international law encompassing all
human rights for all: civil and political rights;
economic, social and cultural rights; and the right to
development.
Progress in Asia is notable. Countries across Asia
have become parties to many core international human
rights instruments, while many of them have
incorporated elements and principles contained in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other core
international human rights instruments into their
respective national legislation and institutions. Human
rights consciousness is growing rapidly across Asia.
Human rights education is being actively promoted in
many countries, while human rights civil society
organizations have blossomed throughout the
continent. But Asia knows well that there is still room
for improvement. We believe that the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights offers a unique opportunity for the international
community to reflect upon the current challenges
facing human rights in the world today so that we may
advance a fuller observance of these rights in a just and
balanced manner in the future.
In this context, the Asian Group would like to
share with the Assembly the following key points that
we deem to be of vital importance.
First, the Asian Group reaffirms its conviction
that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated. The international
community must treat human rights globally in a fair
and equal manner, on the same footing and with the
same emphasis. The Asian Group holds firm in our
belief that, while the significance of national and
regional particularities and various historical, cultural
and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is
the duty of States, regardless of their political,
economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms. The processes
of promoting and protecting human rights should be
conducted in conformity with the purposes and

08-64055

principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
with international law.
The Asian Group would also like to stress the
importance of the fundamental and inalienable right of
all peoples to self-determination, as stipulated in the
Charter of the United Nations, in common article 1 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and in the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action.
Secondly, the Asian Group stresses the urgency of
addressing extreme poverty around the world. It is the
belief of the Asian Group that the international
community cannot continue to speak highly of our
success in promoting human dignity while millions of
our fellow human beings are still struggling in extreme
poverty. We cannot continue to talk confidently about
our success in advancing social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom when millions of
people around the world are still struggling daily, in
search of the basic needs, such as food, clean drinking
water, shelter and basic health care.
It is thus very important that the international
community do all it can to advance the right to
development as a process towards the effective
fulfilment of human potential. “Development”, in the
words of Nobel Laureate Professor Amartya Sen, “is
freedom”. It is equally important that we take every
possible measure to address the present world financial
crisis and prevent it from turning into a development
and human crisis. Today, we know full well that the
international community has the ability and the
resources to ensure the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals by countries around the world. The
question is: Do we have the will to help each other
realize the goals that we have set for ourselves and to
unlock the potential of millions around the world?
Thirdly, the Asian Group strongly believes that
constructive dialogue and cooperation on human rights,
based on mutual respect and understanding, is the best
and most sustainable way of advancing human rights.
The Asian Group is firmly convinced that the
international community should avoid politicization,
selectivity and double standards in the promotion of
human rights. Therefore, the Asian Group supported
the creation of the Human Rights Council to address
the past flaws of the key human rights mechanism of
the United Nations.

11

A/63/PV.65

We particularly welcome the establishment of the
Universal Periodic Review mechanism under the
Human Rights Council and believe that it will play an
essential role in promoting and protecting human rights
worldwide. For the Asian Group, it is important that
the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms be
guided by the same principles that gave birth to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: universality,
objectivity, impartiality and the spirit of constructive
dialogue and cooperation.

based on tragic experiences of humankind, particularly
those linked to the horrific crimes of the Second World
War. It was a bold undertaking of bold people,
envisioning, in the aftermath of that horrible global
bloodshed, a world where every human being would
enjoy dignity and justice. The drafters of the
Declaration believed that a world where all individuals
were entitled to truly universal and inalienable rights
and freedoms would be the best guarantee of enduring
universal peace.

Last but not least, it is important to create an
enabling environment for a culture of human rights to
thrive in every society as a contribution towards peace,
justice and tolerance. Therefore, the Asian Group
supports the promotion of human rights education and
efforts to promote human rights awareness in
languages and narratives that are easily accessible to
people of different backgrounds. The Asian Group
believes that knowledge of human rights constitutes an
effective means of achieving the empowerment of the
people in each society. We also believe that when
people recognize that human rights is not something
alien to their lives but a part of their daily life, then a
human rights culture will thrive. In that way, the noble
ideal and aspiration of the drafters of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights — human dignity and
justice for all amidst the great diversity that defines our
world — will be fully realized.

The difficult and challenging task of drafting an
international bill of rights was given to the
Commission on Human Rights, composed of strong
and committed personalities. After two years of work
on the text of the Declaration, they provided the world
with a document establishing a common standard of
achievement for all peoples and all nations, a document
which, as the first global human rights instrument, has
become the source and inspiration for international
human rights law.

In conclusion, the Asian Group believes that we
could pay no greater tribute to those who framed the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights than by giving
practical meaning to their vision. We urge the
international community to use this commemoration of
the sixtieth anniversary of the Declaration to reenergize our collective efforts to turn its noble vision
into effective actions on the ground. Our peoples
deserve no less.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak today on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States.
Today, people around the world are celebrating
the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. The States of the Eastern European
Group continue to be strongly committed to this most
important universal human rights document and to all
the principles contained therein.
It is a painful fact that the elaboration of this
generous code of fundamental rights and freedoms was

12

Today, the Assembly and people throughout the
world applaud the vision and courage to follow the
path towards securing the fundamental values of
humanity for all shown by the persons involved in
drafting the Declaration. Over the course of six
decades, this uncertain venture of visionary idealists
has grown into a firm global commitment. Today,
human rights are firmly embedded in international law,
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has
been incorporated into the constitutions of many
countries.
During the past six decades, the Declaration has
demonstrated a great ability to unite the world’s
people. It has been translated into more than 360
languages and dialects, thus being the most translated
document in the world. The Declaration has proved to
be a living document and a programme of action that
has, during the past 60 years, inspired many nations,
international, regional and national organizations,
non-governmental organizations and individuals. All
core human rights instruments draw their inspiration
from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Credit for providing continuous support for the
principles contained in the Declaration, and thus for
the progress and improvements achieved in promoting
human rights, should go to the international
community, seeking to realize human rights to the
maximum extent, and to States and civil society for

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

their relentless efforts to protect and promote human
rights. All actors at all levels have their particular role
in fulfilling the noble goals of the Declaration.
Especially vital is the defence and promotion of human
rights stemming from the grass-roots level.
On this day, as we celebrate Human Rights Day,
we can perhaps realize the full and continuing
significance of the Declaration only if we think of a
life without these rights and freedoms. It is obvious
that, despite the positive developments, the
Declaration’s ultimate goal, namely all human rights
for all, has yet to be achieved and a lot of work
remains to be done in order to make human rights truly
universally respected.
There are many people deprived of their dignity;
for them, the rights and freedoms enshrined in the
Declaration have yet to become a reality. As the
Secretary-General has repeatedly stated, we must work
together to ensure that the human rights are a living
reality — that they are known, understood and enjoyed
by everyone, everywhere. Indeed, the promotion and
popularization of human rights and human rights
education, especially for the young generation, are
vital for building a better world. Human rights are a
prerequisite for the well-being of individuals and of
humankind as a whole. Words must turn into deeds,
and the formal commitments of Governments must
have a real impact in even the remotest corners of the
world.
The sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights represents an opportunity
to highlight and celebrate achievements and learn
lessons from failures. To this end, Governments
throughout
Eastern
Europe,
as
well
as
non-governmental organizations, have embarked upon
organizing a variety of events to commemorate the
anniversary of this landmark document.
The Declaration has had a tremendous impact on
the recent history of our region. I have the pleasure and
honour to express the adherence of the countries of the
Eastern European Group to the principles of the now
60-year-old Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Those principles have remained vital and they will
remain a source of guidance for the international
community in protecting and advancing human rights
around the world.
Let me, on this occasion, reiterate the
commitment of all States of the Eastern European

08-64055

Group to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which we will continue to fully and actively support
and defend.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
Group of Latin America and Caribbean States
welcomes the commemoration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Since its adoption, the
Declaration has become a common standard of
achievement for all peoples and all nations. The
countries of the Latin American and Caribbean Group
consider the Declaration to be important as the basis of
the recognition, promotion and universal protection of
all human rights for all people.
As an expression of a common understanding of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the
Declaration has strengthened the commitment and
responsibility of States in the promotion of and respect
for those rights and freedoms, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. We also recognize the
fundamental role of the Declaration in the work of the
United Nations, in compliance with the purposes
defined in the Charter, including through international
cooperation in the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction or discrimination of any kind. The countries
of our region have participated constructively in
various processes arising from the Universal
Declaration, which have allowed the creation of
significant national and international political,
legislative and institutional frameworks for the
promotion and protection of human rights.
During those 60 years, the States of our Group
have made significant contributions as committed
actors in the setting of norms and standards. That is
reflected in the covenants, conventions and other
international human rights instruments that are inspired
by and based upon the Declaration. The creation of a
number of thematic human rights procedures was made
possible on the initiative of countries in the region. Let
us recall that in 1968, Jamaica, a country in our region,
initiated the proclamation of the International Year for
Human Rights as part of the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Declaration. That event, in
turn, made possible the broad dissemination of the
content of the Declaration.
The establishment of the Human Rights Council
is one of the most recent achievements of the

13

A/63/PV.65

international community in this field. The countries of
our Group have actively supported its process of
institution-building, in particular the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism. One of our hopes is to be
able to consolidate and strengthen the Council as an
instrument for cooperation, collaboration and dialogue
with a view to improving the promotion and protection
of all human rights.
The Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States reaffirms its commitment to democracy,
development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms as interdependent, mutually
reinforcing elements. The countries of our region
reaffirm their commitment to the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and to the Vienna Programme of
Action, which endorsed the universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelated nature of all human
rights. Moreover, we reiterate the need to consider
them comprehensively, in a fair and equal manner, with
the same emphasis on civil and political rights and on
economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to development.
On the occasion of this anniversary, the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States would like to
emphasize certain thematic areas to which the
countries of our region attach particular importance,
and on which these countries have launched initiatives,
either individually or collectively within the
framework of the United Nations. Our Group
highlights the contributions of, inter alia, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in operationalizing the rights
enumerated in the Universal Declaration.
The States of our Group reiterate the urgent need
to promote effective and concerted actions to eradicate
poverty, which is a major obstacle to the fulfilment of
human rights. In this regard, the countries of the Group
attach great importance to the realization of economic,
social and cultural rights. We underscore the particular
importance of the right to development. More than two
decades have passed since the adoption of the
Declaration on the Right to Development. That right
has been restated and reaffirmed at summits of heads
of State and in resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies. The
countries of our Group stress the need to mobilize the
political will required to strengthen and consolidate

14

current institutional processes and mechanisms for the
effective realization of that right.
The principles of gender equality and women’s
empowerment are also special priorities for the
countries of our Group. The advancement of women
and the elimination of all forms of discrimination and
violence that may affect them are essential objectives
in the realization of human rights for all and in social
and economic development. We reaffirm our
commitment to those objectives and our willingness to
work to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations
to act and cooperate with others on these issues,
especially in support of initiatives undertaken by
States.
The States of the Latin American and Caribbean
Group have worked resolutely to promote the rights of
the child. To that end, we have supported and
sponsored draft resolutions on that topic every year,
which have been adopted by the General Assembly and
the Human Rights Council. In those resolutions,
actions and recommendations are spelled out so that
States can move forward in the protection of children
under the law, with the support of the international
community, including the United Nations. Such actions
must incorporate measures to address situations of risk
so that we can enhance protection, restore the affected
rights, and ensure an environment that fosters the
holistic development of children.
The countries of our Group also attach particular
importance to strengthening the protection of migrants.
Migration, understood as a multidimensional
phenomenon, has contributed to social and economic
development and cultural and political life in various
regions. This issue requires that origin, transit and
receiving States implement comprehensive policies that
include the fulfilment of the fundamental rights of all
migrants. We urge the international community to
broaden the dialogue and joint work to move forward
in this direction. We are also convinced of the
significance of the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, and therefore we call upon
States that have not done so to consider signing and
ratifying that instrument.
Our Group welcomes the recent entry into force
of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. The vulnerability that affects those
persons merits special attention and effective response

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

by States, with the support of the international
community. Our goal must be the promotion of
effective social integration and full realization of the
rights of persons with disabilities on an equal basis
with the rest of the population.
We also underline the adoption of the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a significant
step in the protection of human rights. Prevention,
eradication of impunity, reparations and the right of all
victims to the truth are essential elements in the fight
against that crime.
We reaffirm our commitment to continue working
for the promotion and protection of the human rights of
indigenous peoples at the local, national, regional and
international levels. Recognition of and respect for
their rights, and the implementation of national and
international actions to ensure their inclusion and
participation in economic, social, cultural, civil and
political life, are central elements in the development
process and in the building of equitable and just
societies.
We reiterate the importance of the effective
implementation of the Declaration and Programme of
Action of the Durban World Conference against
Racism. We acknowledge the relevance of
complementary international norms and commitments
that strengthen the existing instruments and actions
aimed at combating this scourge.
We wish to emphasize the importance of human
rights education and learning to instilling in all persons
and social sectors a deeply rooted culture of promotion
and protection of human rights. As the Universal
Declaration states, it is essential to promote, through
both formal and informal teaching and education,
respect for all internationally recognized rights and
freedoms as a foundation for the realization of the
ideals of freedom, justice, peace and respect for the
inherent dignity and worth of the human person.
The States of the Latin American and Caribbean
Group reaffirm the significant role that the
international community plays, including through the
progressive development of international law and
standards, effective assistance and cooperation
initiatives and South-South cooperation, so that all
countries may reach the realization of all human rights.

08-64055

The joint work of States, in the framework of the
principles and purposes defined in the Charter of the
Organization, and the harmonious dialogue aimed at
building consensus must be consolidated as a means to
make progress towards the full implementation of the
Declaration. The Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States affirms its commitment in this regard
and its willingness to continue working with
dedication, as we have done so far, with a view to
achieving this essential goal of the United Nations.
Ms. Shalev (Israel):
“We stand today at the threshold of a great
event both in the life of the United Nations and in
the life of mankind. This declaration may well
become the international Magna Carta of all men
everywhere.”
Those were the words spoken by Eleanor
Roosevelt at the adoption of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights by the United Nations 60 years ago.
They represent the hope and aspiration of the drafters
of the Declaration and of the international community
that human rights are universal and indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated.
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States. In 1945, the
international community was shocked and horrified by
the atrocities of the Second World War and the
Holocaust. Determined to respond to the brutal attack
on human dignity and values, 60 years ago today the
United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, a landmark document that reaffirmed
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person and in the equal rights of
men and women.
Today we pay tribute to those who drafted the
Declaration, who sought to establish a world where
justice transcends oppression and where freedom rises
above tyranny. Indeed, the realization of human rights
and freedoms, a noble cause in itself, promotes all
other basic purposes of the United Nations, including
peace, security, and prosperity for all.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
represents the highest aspirations of mankind and
strives for a common understanding of these rights and
freedoms. Six decades may have passed since the
adoption of this historic document, but beyond its

15

A/63/PV.65

symbolic attributes, the Declaration remains a powerful
beacon of liberty, freedom and dignity.

nationality and culture, of every race and religion
throughout the world.

Since its adoption we have witnessed an
unprecedented rise in the recognition of these rights.
The freedoms enumerated in the Universal Declaration
helped spread the entitlement of individuals to
liberties, including civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights. The Universal Declaration, which
has inspired the adoption of many legal instruments
promoting freedom, upholding dignity and advancing
equality, is the living promise that human rights are not
a luxury for the few but a basic necessity for all.

Sixty years ago today, the General Assembly took
the extraordinary step of adopting the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. It was an historic day
for all people and all nations, recognizing and
enshrining the principle that all human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights.

On this anniversary, however, we must
acknowledge that for millions upon millions of the
world’s most vulnerable and disenfranchised people,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights remains an
unfulfilled promise. For them, it is our shared
responsibility to commit ourselves yet again to the full
realization of the principles contained in the
Declaration. So let us use the beacon of the Universal
Declaration to guide our efforts. Let us reaffirm that
each and every State, regardless of circumstances, must
fulfil its primary responsibility to respect and protect
the rights of all individuals, without distinction of any
kind. Let us continue to promote the work of
non-governmental organizations and human rights
defenders, who have played a critical role in assessing
violations and protection gaps. Let us work towards
supporting international mechanisms, such as human
rights treaty bodies, international and regional tribunals
and courts and the International Criminal Court, all of
which seek to provide effective tools to ensure
adequate redress and respect for human rights.
In an era when we are increasingly
interconnected and at a time when information flows
rapidly across oceans and continents, we must shine
the light of the Universal Declaration to the four
corners of the globe. We must commit our resources
and our collective resolve and determination to secure
human life, dignity and basic rights for all. For in the
end, human rights are not merely legal instruments.
They are expressions of our common humanity, our
common vision for a better, more just world. Today, we
reaffirm our commitment to turn this hope into action
and these ideals into achievements.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
people of the United States join in celebrating this
landmark anniversary with men and women of every

16

The eloquent text reflected the common
aspirations of all mankind for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, for which all Governments
should be held accountable. It was a monumental
achievement. The world was still recovering from the
devastation of the Second World War, which had left
millions dead, wounded, displaced or without homes.
Yet from those trying times arose a strong
determination, courage and inspiration.
In early 1947, nations came together to draft an
international bill of human rights that would meet the
approval of the 18-member Commission on Human
Rights and the General Assembly itself. The group of
drafters unanimously elected Eleanor Roosevelt as
their chair. The United States is tremendously proud of
the work of Mrs. Roosevelt and of the many diplomats,
philosophers and legal experts from around the globe
who worked together tirelessly to forge consensus on
universal human rights and to create a better world for
all of us.
In a world devastated by war and divided by
ideology, sceptics believed there would be little
common ground on the rights of all people. Yet, in
preparing for their task, the delegates found that their
diverse cultures, religions and nationalities had more in
common than many had anticipated.
With her unwavering spirit, dedication and faith
in humanity, Eleanor Roosevelt inspired all who
participated in the Declaration’s creation. She once
asked:
“Where, after all, do universal human rights
begin? In small places, close to home — so close
and so small that they cannot be seen on any
maps of the world. Yet they are the world of the
individual person; the neighbourhood he lives in;
the school or college he attends; the factory, farm,
or office where he works. Such are the places
where every man, woman, and child seeks equal
justice, equal opportunity, equal dignity without

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

discrimination. Unless these rights have meaning
there, they have little meaning anywhere.”

Governments accountable for protecting, promoting
and assuring human rights for all.

Mrs. Roosevelt knew of whom she was speaking.
She had travelled the length and breadth of the United
States during the Great Depression, and she had
journeyed throughout the Americas, Asia, Europe and
Africa. Everywhere she went, she listened to the voices
of ordinary people, and she heard their deep desire and
hopes, for themselves and for future generations, to
live in dignity and freedom.

The Acting President: It is my honour to give
the floor to His Excellency The Honourable Mathias
Chicawe, Minister of Justice of the United Republic of
Tanzania, who will speak on behalf of the African
Union.

For 60 years the spirit and the letter of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights has guided
countless millions of people in their efforts to secure
their human dignity and liberty, to follow their
conscience, to speak their minds, to practice their
religion and to live free from fear of discrimination or
persecution for exercising their rights.
Eleanor Roosevelt, whose dedication to social
justice and human rights remains an example for all
Americans, would celebrate the gains for human rights
that have been achieved, but she would also remind us
of the great work we have left to do. As we honour her
legacy, let us remember that if the promise of the
Declaration is to be fulfilled, the international
community cannot stand silently by as men and women
in any part of the world are condemned to live under
tyranny, deprived of their most basic rights. We must
entrust our citizens with greater freedom so that they
can use it to correct the injustices and violations that
stand in the way of the realization of human rights for
all.
Regrettably, some Governments impose crippling
constraints on the ability of their people to exercise
their fundamental freedoms or deprive them of their
rights altogether. Men and women who have done
nothing more than attempt to act peacefully upon their
rights now languish in jails and labour camps as
prisoners of conscience. There are Governments that
pressure civil society and the independent news media,
including those who publish on the Internet,
Governments that ignore the will of their citizens by
conducting fraudulent elections or simply discarding
election results, and Governments that use urgently
needed humanitarian aid, including food and medical
aid, as a political weapon.
As we rededicate ourselves to the Universal
Declaration, let us join together to hold all

08-64055

Mr. Chicawe (United Republic of Tanzania): I
am honoured to speak before this body on behalf of the
member States of the African Union.
The commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary
of the adoption and proclamation of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights should provide us with
an opportunity to reaffirm our commitments to the
values, principles and standards enshrined in the
Declaration, which provided the moral strength and
platform for African countries in their struggle for
freedom, independence and dignity. The Declaration
continues to be the guiding beacon for the African
Union in advocating and institutionalizing democracy,
the rule of law and good governance in Africa. It is
also the thread that seamlessly weaves the people of
Africa into the global human family.
In retrospect, it may be an understatement to say
the record of human rights in Africa in the postindependence era has been chequered. The excesses of
dictators have blighted the human rights landscape in
Africa, and war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide have happened in Africa under our watch.
That should not be repeated. The African Union is
striving to rise to the challenge and is leading the way
to provide a framework for protecting and promoting
human rights in Africa.
Africa accepts and respects the universality,
indivisibility and equality of human rights enshrined in
the Universal Declaration, as embodied in its various
instruments. The Constitutive Act of the African Union
reaffirms Africa’s commitment to the promotion and
protection of human rights and peoples’ rights, the
consolidation, of democratic institutions and culture,
the promotion of good governance and the rule of law.
Furthermore, the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) unambiguously puts human
rights at the centre of democratic governance, the rule
of law, the creation of environments that enable
sustainable economic development and the attainment
and maintenance of peace and security.

17

A/63/PV.65

The African Peer Review Mechanism, which is
part of NEPAD, is being embraced by more African
countries to institutionalize human rights. It is
gratifying to note that aspects of the African Peer
Review Mechanism have found resonance in the
Human Rights Council, which we fully support. Both
the Constitutive Act and NEPAD underscore social,
economic and cultural rights and the right to
development. We believe that the attainment of human
rights for all has to encompass social, economic,
political and cultural rights, including the right to
development as an integral part of those rights.
The Africa Union has adopted several instruments
for the promotion and protection of human rights. They
include the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights, adopted in June 1981, the African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights, which was established
under the African Charter, and the African Court on
Human and Peoples’ Rights, which my country,
Tanzania, will be proud to host when it becomes
operational. In ensuring that the rights of women and
children are respected, the African Union has put in
place the Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
as well as the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child. The latest African Union
instrument that, among other principles, enshrines
human rights, is the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance, which was adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government in
January 2007.
It is undeniable that the Human Rights
Declaration has had great influence and has been an
inspiration for those that seek human rights for all.
While notable achievements have been made, there are
still many men and women who are denied their basic
human rights. Political will for the implementation of
the Declaration is high. However, our continent and
peoples face many multifaceted obstacles in view of
the still-prevailing political, social and economic
challenges in Africa that make it difficult to realize the
full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It may be a futile exercise to preach human
rights to people steeped in poverty and debilitated by
hunger and disease. We have to address those
challenges simultaneously to make the Declaration
relevant and useful to ordinary people, for the
betterment of their daily lives and out of recognition of
their human dignity.

18

We realize that no country can claim that it has a
perfect record on human rights. We are at different
stages of development and at different levels in
achieving human rights. We should thus work together
and maintain dialogue with each other to ensure that
the standards set forth in the Declaration are achieved
pragmatically and realistically in the different parts of
the world. International cooperation and understanding
should guide our collective responsibility in this
regard. Building a culture of human rights must be a
collective endeavour. The sixtieth anniversary is a
milestone in a long journey. We should continue
beyond it and excel in our resolve to make the
Declaration meaningful to all humanity.
Allow me at this juncture to congratulate the
recipients of the United Nations Human Rights Prizes.
Their achievements and contributions to the attainment
of human rights are a tribute to many others who have
preceded them.
Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment
of the African Union and its willingness to work with
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole in furthering the promotion and protection of
human rights for all peoples.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that the Assembly will consider the reports of
the Sixth Committee as the first item on the agenda for
tomorrow, Thursday, 11 December at 10 a.m. Also at
that meeting, the Assembly will resume its
consideration
of
agenda
item
65,
entitled,
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance”; agenda item
107, “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”; and sub-item (f) of agenda item 114, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”, and to
take action on draft resolutions submitted under those
items. In addition, the election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, sub-item (b) of under agenda item 104,
which was scheduled for tomorrow, has now been
postponed to Monday, 15 December 2008.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I am
particularly happy to speak today on behalf of the
European Union, 60 years after the adoption in Paris of

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. On the
occasion of the sixtieth anniversary, the European
Union would like to reaffirm the primary importance it
attaches to the Declaration. Its universality, and the
need to promote it, have been reaffirmed at the highest
level, in particular at the 1993 World Conference on
Human Rights held in Vienna, at the Millennium
Summit of the United Nations in 2000 and at the World
Summit in 2005.
The Universal Declaration is the cornerstone of
the edifice built after the atrocities of the Second World
War for the protection and promotion of human rights
at the national, regional and international levels, and is
the foundation for advancing and ensuring respect for
human dignity throughout the world. The European
Union welcomes the fact that the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights is being recognized by an increasing
number of States as a major contribution to the
development of customary international law.
The European Union, which is founded on the
principles of respect for human rights, fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of expression and of
conscience, democracy and the rule of law, fully shares
the values in which the Declaration is rooted. Its action
both internally and externally is based on respect for
human rights as enshrined in the European Convention
on Human Rights and the Treaty on European Union,
and is reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union. The universality and
indivisibility of human rights, the responsibility to
defend those rights throughout the world and the
promotion of pluralistic democracy and effective
guarantees for the rule of law are, for the European
Union, essential principles.
The European Union would therefore like to
reiterate that everyone is entitled to the rights and
freedoms set forth in the Declaration without any
distinction as to birth, race, sex, language, religion or
conviction, political or any other opinion, origin,
membership in a minority or any other situation. It
reaffirms that international law in the area of human
rights has a primary vocation to protect persons in the
exercise of their freedoms and their rights. In our view,
no particular provision motivated by tradition or any
national, cultural or religious considerations can
infringe upon the principles contained in the
Declaration.

08-64055

The European Union recognizes and welcomes
progress made since the adoption of the Universal
Declaration. However, it deplores the continuing
flagrant violations of human rights in many regions of
the world, including on the basis of sexual orientation.
It reaffirms that the international community and all
States, acting individually or collectively, have the
legitimate and permanent responsibility to promote and
safeguard human rights throughout the world,
particularly in the context of the responsibility to
protect, a key concept endorsed by all heads of State
and Government at the World Summit of 2005 that
must be promoted in order to protect civilian
populations against the crime of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing. The
European Union, for its part, will continue to denounce
such violations and will endeavour to bring them to an
end wherever they occur. It reaffirms its commitment
and unshakeable determination to make the full
exercise of human rights in their entirety a reality for
all.
The European Union wishes to pay tribute to the
courage of human rights defenders, women and men —
often anonymous — who fight indefatigably to defend
those universal values, sometimes at the cost of their
own security or of their lives, and will continue to
accord them its full support.
The European Union urges all States that have
not yet done so to accede to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as
well as the main conventions relative to human rights
concluded in the context of the United Nations.
As we mark the sixtieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, combating impunity of those
responsible for human rights violations must be a
priority for us. The European Union calls on all States
that have not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court.
Reaffirming
the
interdependence
and
indivisibility of human rights, the European Union
notes with interest the adoption today by the General
Assembly of the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The European Union also welcomes the adoption
on 18 December 2007 by the General Assembly of its
historic resolution 62/149, calling for a moratorium on

19

A/63/PV.65

the use of the death penalty. It reaffirms its strongly
held commitment to the universal abolition of the death
penalty and urges those States that still practise it to
consider abolishing it for good.
Women’s rights merit very special attention, as
they are still all too often flouted throughout the world.
All States are called upon to step up their actions
regarding the place and role of women in areas such as
equality between men and women, the right to have a
family, work, and combating violence against women.
With regard to the rights of the child, the Union
will continue to promote a comprehensive and
consistent approach in all of its policies relating to
human rights, security and development and
humanitarian action.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that the
European Union fully supports international human
rights mechanisms at the global and regional levels,
particularly those within the United Nations. The
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the special
procedures play a major role in the promotion and
protection of human rights. They may count on the full
support of the European Union.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
as a common standard of achievement for all peoples
and all nations.
The theme chosen last year for the campaign for
this commemoration — “Dignity and justice for all of
us” — appropriately reflects the spirit of the wish and
commitment of all members of the Non-Aligned
Movement to contribute to a world free from injustices,
where dignity and respect are a reality for all human
beings without distinction in terms of race, sex,
language, religion or social origin.
Therefore, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries wishes to highlight once again the
importance of implementing all of the human rights
elements contained in the principal documents guiding
the positions of the Movement, in particular the Final
Document of the 14th Conference of Heads of State
and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, which

20

was held in Havana from 11 to 16 September 2006, as
well as the Final Document of the recent 15th
Ministerial Conference of the Coordinating Bureau of
the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Tehran on
29 and 30 July 2008.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms and
underscores its abiding faith in and strong commitment
to its founding principles, one of which is the respect
for fundamental human rights and for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms the great
importance it attaches to the promotion and protection
of human rights and the commitment to fulfil
obligations to promote universal respect for and
observance and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, other instruments
relating to human rights, as appropriate, and
international law, as clearly stated in the outcomes of
its summit conferences and ministerial meetings,
including the Havana Summit.
The Movement further reaffirms that all human
rights, in particular the right to development, are
universal, inalienable, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated. It reaffirms that human rights issues must
be addressed within the global context through an
approach based on constructive dialogue in a fair and
equal manner, with objectivity, respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, impartiality, nonselectivity and transparency as the guiding principles,
taking into account the political, historical, social,
religious and cultural particularities of each country. In
this regard, we reiterate the Movement’s dismay at and
unequivocal condemnation of gross and systematic
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and situations that constitute serious obstacles to their
full enjoyment, as well as violent acts and activities
that infringe upon their full enjoyment.
The Non-Aligned Countries take this opportunity
to re-emphasize that the exploitation of human rights
for political purposes — including selective targeting
of certain countries for extraneous considerations,
which is contrary to the founding principles of the
Movement and the Charter of the United Nations —
should be prohibited. They urge that, in the discussions
on human rights, adequate attention be given to the
issues of poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization,

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

instability and foreign occupation, which engender
social and economic exclusion and violate human
dignity and human rights and which cannot be divorced
from any meaningful discussion relating to human
rights.

with the relevant founding principles of the Movement,
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant
international human rights instruments, consistent with
the obligations of States, regardless of their political,
economic and cultural systems.

The Movement stresses the fundamental and
inalienable right of all peoples, including all non-selfgoverning territories and territories under foreign
occupation or colonial or alien domination, to selfdetermination, the exercise of which, in the case of
peoples under foreign occupation or colonial or alien
domination, remains valid and essential for ensuring
the eradication of all those situations and for
guaranteeing universal respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

The observance of the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration provides an opportunity for the
international community to reflect on the complex
situations that we are witnessing every day in our
world and that affect the full enjoyment of all human
rights. On this significant anniversary, the NonAligned Movement renews its commitment to give
effect to the principles enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
reaffirms that democracy and good governance at the
national and international levels, development and
respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
in particular the right to development, are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. The adoption
of coercive unilateral measures, rules and policies
against developing countries, for any cause or
consideration, constitutes a flagrant violation of the
basic rights of their populations. It is essential that
States promote efforts to combat extreme poverty and
hunger and also foster participation by the poorest
members of society in decision-making processes.
The Non-Aligned countries reiterate the need to
undertake efforts to further strengthen and promote
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
and to establish democratic institutions and sound
economic policies responsive to the needs of the
people. In this context, they also reiterate the need for
the core principles, such as equity, non-discrimination,
transparency,
accountability,
participation
and
international cooperation, including partnership and
commitments in the international financial, monetary
and trading systems, and full and effective
participation of developing countries in decisionmaking and standards-setting.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has
agreed on measures such as promoting and protecting
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
peoples, in particular the right to development, and
providing an effective framework thereof, including
remedies to redress infringements on or violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance

08-64055

In promoting a world of dignity and respect for
all, the international community can always count on
the firm support and commitment of the countries of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to deliver the following statement on behalf of
the Group of Arab States on the occasion of the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
The celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
presents an important opportunity for us to reiterate our
commitment to the Declaration’s lofty principles. The
international community agreed to make those
principles the foundation of collective efforts in the
field of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms. It is also a reminder of our
commitments, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant international
instruments we have adopted, to work towards
reinforcing universal respect for all human rights for
all without discrimination as to race, sex, language or
religion.
Collective international efforts have recently
made serious steps aimed at reformulating the
international drive to effectively address human rights
issues, making them common denominators that unite
all societies, and at setting aside politicization,
selectivity and double standards. Such steps have
already shown success, as reflected in the
establishment of the Human Rights Council, the
endorsement of its institution-building package and,
subsequently, in the launch of the universal review
mechanism and in the review process of the mandates

21

A/63/PV.65

of the special procedures. These steps have ushered in
a new era in which the issue of human rights and of the
rights of peoples are dealt with in a clear institutional
framework based on constructive cooperation and the
avoidance of confrontation and conflict.
The Arab States wish to emphasize that
protection of human rights is primarily the
responsibility of national Governments. Effective
assistance from the international community in the
form of consultation and technical and financial
support is essential to bolstering national capacitybuilding, thereby allowing national Governments to
shoulder their responsibilities to promote and protect
human rights within the boundaries of the full respect
of the principles of non-intervention in domestic affairs
and of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States.
The Arab States also stress the necessity of
focusing on the right to development as one of the
fundamental rights that is intrinsically bound up with
other rights — a matter that would serve to narrow the
gap between North and South — and that allowing for
the creation of better living standards that would lead
to the promotion of human rights. It is imperative to
avoid attaching conditionalities that only aim at
imposing or linking controversial concepts to
development assistance and programmes.
Moreover, the Arab States wish to underline the
importance of reinforcing respect for the institutional
balance that exists between the principal United
Nations organs, with particular respect to the
prerogatives of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in supervising the
activities of the Human Rights Council, the special
procedures and the treaty bodies.
The Arab States reassert their commitment to
continue their serious efforts to promote human rights
at the national level. They also maintain that further
collaborative efforts in the field of human rights are
necessary to address common standards in order to
prevent attempts by some to impose their views on how
to implement internationally agreed standards or to
impose their own standards as internationally agreed
when they are not. That also entails averting attempts
to limit consideration of human rights issues to those
related to civil and political rights at the expense of
economic, social and cultural rights that are paramount
for people in developing countries.

22

In this context, the Arab States wish to stress that
in order to reinforce all these efforts on the national
level, it is imperative that all forms of extremism,
discrimination, racism and xenophobia, in which the
attempts to defame religions and to scorn their symbols
are deeply rooted, be combated with solid
determination. In parallel, it is necessary to enhance
the existing dialogue based on respect for cultural
identities and particularities in order to deepen mutual
understanding, respect and tolerance.
The Arab States believe that a serious
international dialogue should continue in order to
strike the balance necessary for the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of expression in
tandem with the universal right to belong to different
religions in various societies without distinction, to
practise their religious rituals and to freely preserve
their identity without restrictions. That approach
similarly requires a stronger commitment to respecting
human rights while countering terrorism on the basis of
existing international commitments, the least of which
is the commitment to the comprehensive and integrated
implementation of all aspects of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Whereas it is essential to enhance the rule of law
in order to ensure the protection of human rights as
stipulated in the preamble of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, it is incumbent upon the
international community to step up collective efforts to
meet the pledges and protect and realize the inalienable
right of peoples under occupation to selfdetermination.
In this regard, the States members of the League
of Arab States reaffirm that the pursuit of universal
respect for human rights for all and the rights of
peoples will not materialize unless the international
community totally divests itself of selectivity,
politicization and double standards in dealing with the
question of the right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people and other Arab peoples that are
suffering under foreign occupation, including those of
the occupied Arab territories in Syria and Lebanon.
Such rights will succeed only when the international
community acts with firm determination to end
violations by the occupying Power of its commitments
under international law, most importantly the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

The Arab States consider the commemoration of
the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights as an occasion for reiterating the
international commitment to supporting the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to enjoy their legitimate right
to self-determination to the fullest and to enabling
them to establish their independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Rio Group. Our Group associates itself with the
statement made by Colombia on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
The 1948 Declaration was an historic milestone
in recognizing that all human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights and that every individual is
entitled to all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
without any distinction of any kind. The Declaration
also marks the beginning of a profound transformation
of the relationship between the individual and the
State.
The Rio Group recognizes the value of the
Declaration for the work of the United Nations system
in fulfilling the purposes defined in the Charter of the
United Nations, including, through international
cooperation, the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
The Rio Group also recognizes the significant
progress that the international community has made
since the adoption of this crucially important
document, which has been a source of inspiration for
the development of international human rights law, and
which we are convinced will continue to inspire us in
contributing to its progressive development.
We cannot omit mentioning the instruments
adopted more recently by the General Assembly for the
further promotion and protection of human rights —
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, the International Convention for the
Protection
of
All
Persons
from
Enforced
Disappearance, and just today, the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights.
We reiterate our adherence to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and to the Vienna
Programme of Action, which endorses the universality,

08-64055

indivisibility, interdependence and interrelatedness of
all human rights.
It is clear that much still needs to be done, as no
State can claim that human rights are fully and
universally respected. We recognize the role that the
United Nations, and particularly its Human Rights
Council, plays in their promotion and protection. In
this regard, the universal periodic review mechanism is
a significant innovation. We are convinced that this
new mechanism has the great potential to enhance
cooperation, collaboration and constructive dialogue
with a view to improving the promotion and protection
of all human rights, including improving the human
rights situation in all countries and addressing
violations wherever they occur. The Council has begun
to make a contribution in this regard, in addition to all
the international bodies and mechanisms already in
place, in particular through the work of the special
procedures. We must make a special reference to the
work carried out by treaty bodies in assisting States to
implement all of their obligations under the human
rights covenants, conventions and protocols.
At this solemn event, we pay a special tribute to
human rights defenders — to all the women and men
who have devoted or even sacrificed their lives for the
cause of human rights in every corner of the world.
In this context, the Rio Group also wishes to
highlight the importance of addressing and giving
adequate attention at all levels to issues of poverty,
underdevelopment, marginalization, instability and
other aspects that engender social and economic
exclusion as well as violation of human dignity and
human rights.
When we established this Organization, we
reaffirmed our faith in all human rights for all, in the
dignity and worth of every human person. Today, 60
years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration,
the countries of the Rio Group recognize the
challenges they face, but we categorically reaffirm our
unequivocal commitment to fulfilling the objectives set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We are convinced that the recognition of the inherent
dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all
members of the human family without discrimination is
the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for me to speak on behalf of the member States

23

A/63/PV.65

and associated States of the Common Market of the
South (MERCOSUR) — Argentina, Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay,
Venezuela and my own country, Brazil.
We fully support the statements by the Permanent
Representative of Colombia on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States and by the
Permanent Representative of Mexico on behalf of the
Rio Group.
We would like to make additional
comments on human rights issues in our subregion.
Today, 60 years after its adoption, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights remains a living,
inspiring document. It is a framework not only in terms
of the universal recognition of the rights that we all
have, but also because it represents a success of the
international community in establishing common
definitions on an issue of fundamental importance to
mankind.
One cannot speak of human rights in the
international
sphere
without
recognizing
the
fundamental importance of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action of 1993. The acknowledgement
that democracy, development and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing concepts is particularly
important to our region. In this sense, the fulfilment of
economic, social and cultural rights and the eradication
of hunger and poverty have a central place in our
national policies and strategies.
In the last 60 years, the promotion and protection
of human rights, democracy and development have
been fundamental axes of the political and social life of
MERCOSUR countries. We faced and continue to face
many challenges in the historic fight for human rights,
freedom and dignity of all men and women in our
countries.
Nevertheless, we should recognize that there has
been substantial progress on the institutional level and
in creating awareness in our societies of the importance
of preventing and punishing violations of human
rights, ensuring reparation for victims and promoting
and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all, without distinctions or discrimination of any
kind. The importance of this is reflected in the
commitment of States members of MERCOSUR and
Associated States to the absolute preservation of
democratic institutions and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms as essential conditions for

24

the validity and evolution of the integration process of
the countries of the group, as are established in, inter
alia, the Asunción Protocol on Commitment for the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights within
MERCOSUR, adopted by the member States of
MERCOSUR in 2005. As a result, the Protocol
provides that grave and systematic violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in a member State can
be the basis for the suspension of that State from the
integration process.
Other relevant MERCOSUR mechanisms are the
regular meetings of the High-Level Authorities in
Human Rights and related working groups. The
2008-2009 working plan adopted at the 12th Meeting
of the High-Level Authorities in Human Rights and
Foreign Ministries of the MERCOSUR and Associated
States, held in Buenos Aires, in June 2008, sets forth
the goals, inter alia, of coordinating actions in
multilateral human rights organizations; creating a
public policy institute in the area of human rights for
MERCOSUR; combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related forms of intolerance; furthering
issues related to the right to truth, memory and justice;
promoting and protecting the rights of children and
adolescents, including the Niñ@sur initiative;
strengthening and coordinating actions in the fields of
education, training and culture related to human rights;
improving the development of a system of indicators
for economic, social and cultural rights that make it
possible to monitor and evaluate the advancements in
the fulfilment of those rights; drafting, together with
civil society, a MERCOSUR charter for the protection
of human rights and ethnic and sociocultural minorities
in the region; promoting agreements for compliance
with international human rights instruments on
preventing and combating crimes related to trafficking
in persons; strengthening the protection and promotion
of the rights of migrants; enhancing the protection of
the elderly and promoting conditions of economic
security, health, social participation and education;
enhancing the promotion and protection of the humans
rights of persons with disabilities; fostering regional
mechanisms to prevent, investigate and punish torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment; enhancing the protection of the human
rights of and non-discrimination for lesbians, gays,
transsexuals and bisexuals, and promoting antidiscriminatory legislation and public policy in this
field.

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

We recall that MERCOSUR members and
associated States have participated actively in the
international efforts that led to the adoption of the main
human rights instruments. Within the framework of the
Organization of American States, for example,
MERCOSUR countries actively contributed to the
adoption of the Democratic Charter, currently in force,
and are today engaged in the negotiation of the Social
Charter of the Americas on the obligations of States to
guarantee economic, social and cultural rights in the
Americas.
We emphasize our support for international
cooperation in human rights, including South-South
cooperation, as well as the strengthening of the United
Nations human rights pillar, in particular the Human
Rights Council, and its special procedures and
universal periodic review mechanism.
In the context of the Human Rights Council, we
welcome the widespread support expressed by the
adoption in September of a series of voluntary goals in
the field of human rights, inspired by the Millennium
Development Goals. The voluntary goals were
conceived in order to strengthen the existing
obligations and commitments in the field of human
rights, in particular the implementation of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in
commemoration of its sixtieth anniversary.
The members and Associated States of
MERCOSUR today reaffirm their commitment to the
prevention and punishment of all human rights
violations, working for reparation for victims and
fighting impunity, as well as the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all, without distinction or discrimination of any
kind.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): It is my honour to take
the floor on behalf of the five Nordic countries —
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden — on
this important occasion celebrating the 60 years since
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The Nordic countries are pleased to join
countries from all regions of the world in reaffirming
this cornerstone of human rights, which constitutes the
foundation for safeguarding and advancing human
dignity worldwide.
The Nordic countries would like to take this
opportunity to pay particular tribute to human rights
defenders in all regions of the world. Over the years,

08-64055

human rights defenders have been a crucial force in
bringing violations to our attention and pointing to the
ways of improvement. Without their courage and
persistence we would not be where we are today. We
pledge our continued support of their efforts.
For 60 years, the Declaration has inspired
national and international efforts to put the protection
of individuals at the centre of human development. It
has contributed to the development of customary
international law, and the rights enshrined in the
Declaration have been laid down in international
conventions on human rights that have been widely
ratified. Mechanisms have been developed at the
regional and international level to promote and protect
these internationally agreed instruments.
We have come a long way in developing the
foundation established by the Universal Declaration.
Yet this is not only a day for celebration, but also for
reflection and for great concern. Sixty years down the
road, no country can claim to have fully realized the
aspirations of the Declaration. Millions of persons still
suffer violations of their civil, political, economic and
social rights at the hands of their Governments, or
suffer human rights violations that we as Governments
have a responsibility to prevent. In an era when
genocide and other large-scale violations of human
rights should be crimes of the past, they are crimes of
the present.
We must all pledge to do better. As the
international community and as individual countries,
we have a joint responsibility to take this work to the
next level. As Governments, we must do everything in
our power to extend the protection of all human rights
to all without distinction of any kind, including
distinctions as to birth, race, sex, language, religion or
conviction, political or other opinion, origin or any
other status, including sexual orientation.
The ownership of the Universal Declaration must
be shared not only by Governments, but also by the
men, women, girls and boys whom it strives to protect.
In order to realize full ownership, we must undertake
to bring the contents of the Declaration to the attention
of those it concerns through human rights education
and learning.
We, the five Nordic countries, reaffirm our
commitment to engaging with Governments, the
United Nations and civil society with the aim of
making human rights a reality for all.

25

A/63/PV.65

Mr. McNee (Canada): I am honoured to speak
today on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Sixty years ago, in the aftermath of the deaths of
some 70 million people in the Second World War and
the Holocaust, our predecessors came together to build
a better world. They founded a new institution, the
United Nations, to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, to promote social progress and
better standards of life in larger freedom and to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations, large and
small. Soon after, men and women of vision and
goodwill laid the groundwork for the adoption by the
United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
That was an event with no historical precedent —
the nations of the world embracing a global expression
of the basic rights and freedoms to which all human
beings are entitled and a standard that all nations could
adopt and against which they could be held to account.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand played active roles
in achieving the agreement. This landmark Declaration
forms the cornerstone of the international human rights
system. Sixty years on, it remains the global
benchmark for the protection of human rights. It is as
relevant to every person in today’s world of more than
6 billion as it was to the world’s 2.5 billion people in
1948.
The principle enshrined in the Universal
Declaration — that all human beings have fundamental
rights and freedoms — is concrete and remains
undiminished today. Everyone is equal in dignity and
rights. But the Declaration also speaks to our
responsibilities wherever there is a violation of the
human rights of any person for any reason in any part
of the world. It transcends nations, cultures, politics,
personalities, creeds and tongues. Among our
responsibilities is the need to act. It is not enough to
simply promote these rights; they must also be actively
protected and defended.
Yet, despite the global benchmark provided in the
Universal Declaration, discrimination and violations of
human rights persist 60 years after its adoption. There
are still serious and overwhelming gaps between these
universally endorsed standards and the practices of
States in all regions of the world.
(spoke in French)

26

The sixtieth anniversary of the Declaration is also
an opportunity to acknowledge the gap between these
universally recognized standards and everyday
practices and to bridge that gap. It is also an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to respect for
human rights in the United Nations and to lend new
impetus to our efforts in that area. In addition, it is time
to mobilize our collective resources with a view to the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
Universal Declaration and the subsequent human rights
treaties to which a great many Member States have
voluntarily acceded.
As we commemorate the adoption of the
Universal Declaration, we urge all States to redouble
their efforts and to engage in dialogue with national,
regional and multilateral institutions to reduce the gap
between these universally recognized standards and the
everyday realities experienced by millions of people
around the world. We believe that the Human Rights
Council has significant potential in that regard. We
must fulfil that potential in order to support genuine
respect for human rights. Finally, we wish to pay
tribute to human rights defenders working throughout
the world, many of whom are often persecuted
precisely because they defend the rights of their fellow
citizens.
Sixty years after its adoption, the Declaration
remains a defining document in the history of
humankind on the protection of freedoms and human
rights. In the light of the challenges ahead of us, it also
provides an essential guidepost for our actions. Today,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand reaffirm our strong
commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and our resolve to work on behalf of our
countries, Governments and peoples, at the national
level and together with other Governments throughout
the world, to realize those rights for the benefit of all.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): On the occasion of this
sixtieth
anniversary
commemoration
of
the
proclamation and adoption by the General Assembly of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The societies that constitute our Community were
forged in an environment characterized by the most
pervasive violations of human rights. The pernicious
system of slavery and the indentureship that followed
witnessed a visitation of the worst forms of indignities

08-64055

A/63/PV.65

on the forebears of today’s CARICOM citizens. The
colonial enterprise, building on that foundation,
functioned in many respects on the basis of a denial of
fundamental rights, including the right to selfdetermination.
Caribbean peoples have thus paid a heavy price
historically for the assertion of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms that we enjoy today. Our
citizens place a high value on the safeguarding and full
realization of those rights and freedoms. We also
recognize that our present achievements were made
possible not only through our own arduous and
sometimes revolutionary struggles, but also by the
actions of men and women of goodwill from every
nation under the sun. Our own voices have been joined
by those of others against the ravages of colonialism,
racism, apartheid and other injustices of our time. This
joining of efforts across multiple frontiers testifies to
the shared aspiration of peoples everywhere to live
with dignity, free from want and fear and free to aspire,
to achieve and to be full participants in the promotion
of the common good.
For the countries of the Caribbean Community,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is
quintessential in its expression of that shared aspiration
and as a statement of the rights and freedoms to which
each and every individual is entitled. It is a veritable
common standard of achievement for all peoples and
nations, affirming the inherent dignity and equality of
human beings everywhere.
Great progress has been made in our individual
and collective pursuit of that common standard.
CARICOM citizens live in free and open societies
rooted in a tradition of democracy and respect for
human rights and the rule of law, conditions we
consider vital to the development of inclusive, stable
and prosperous societies.
But challenges and gaps remain in our shared
endeavour, at the national, regional and international
levels, to secure the fullest enjoyment by all peoples of
the rights and freedoms to which they are entitled. In
our own region, the enjoyment of these rights is
threatened by poverty, drugs and violent crime, among
other things. In various parts of the world, we continue
to witness persistent and flagrant violations of human
rights. People today still face discrimination based on
their race, gender, religion, language, belief or ethnic
origin. Violence against women is on the increase in

08-64055

many States, even as women become the targets of rape
and other forms of sexual exploitation in situations of
conflict. Moreover, many people remain mired in
extreme poverty and hunger, which are today
aggravated by the conjuncture of volatile food and fuel
prices and the global financial crisis. Deprived of their
human dignity, many are today denied the opportunity
to live lives free from fear and want. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to
articulate and implement measures to effectively
address and overcome such challenges, to potentiate
the right to development and to redress the inequities
that hinder the full realization of the promise of the
Universal Declaration.
In this regard, CARICOM is of the firm
conviction that a comprehensive approach is
imperative, rooted in the universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelatedness of human rights,
whether civil, cultural, economic, political or social,
pursued in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter and founded on the
recognition of the interdependence of our collective
efforts to attain conditions where peace and security,
development and human rights can flourish.
In joining wholeheartedly in this milestone
commemoration, the countries of the Caribbean
Community pay special tribute to the recipients of
today’s United Nations Human Rights Prizes and
pledge to work assiduously for the fulfilment of the
promise embodied in the Universal Declaration, in a
spirit of cooperation and mutual respect.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. I now declare concluded the
commemorative event devoted to the observance of the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
I would like to inform members that the
General Assembly has received a written message from
the President of the Russian Federation, which was
earlier distributed in the General Assembly Hall.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 64.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that the Assembly will consider the reports of
the Sixth Committee as the first item on the agenda for

27

A/63/PV.65

tomorrow, Thursday, 11 December, at 10 a.m. Also at
that meeting, the Assembly will resume its
consideration
of
agenda
item
65,
entitled,
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance”; agenda item
107, “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”; and sub-item (f) of agenda item 114, entitled

“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”, and to
take action on draft resolutions submitted under those
items. In addition, the election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, under sub-item (b) of agenda item 104,
which was scheduled for tomorrow, has now been
postponed to Monday, 15 December 2008.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

28

08-64055
