General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

20

11. Also appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin;
12. Urges all Governments to reproduce the reports and
studies made by archaeologists and explorers from the developed countries, especially if those studies are out of print,
and to make them available to the countries of origin;
13. / nvites once again Member States to sign and ratify
the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
Cultural Property;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to take the necessary measures to alert and
mobilize international public opinion in favour of the return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin,
in particular by mobilizing the United Nations information
media for this purpose;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
16. Reiterates its desire that the second World Conference on Cultural Policies, to be held in 1982, should devote
considerable attention to the question of return or restitution
of cultural property with a view to improving international
cultural co-operation;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Return or restitution
of cultural property to the countries of origin".
74th plenary meeting
27 November 1981

36/67.

International Year of Peace and International
Day of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the promotion of peace, both at an international and a national level, is among the main purposes
of the United Nations, in conformity with its Charter,
Reaffirming that, as set forth in the preamble of the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, since wars begin in the minds of
men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed, that a peace based exclusively upon
the political and economic arrangements of Governments
would not be a peace which could secure the unanimous,
lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and
that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail,
upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind,
Further recalling that, on the basis of similar considerations, the General Assembly established the United Nations
University in 197228 and, more specifically, the University
for Peace in 1980, 29 and entrusted other organs and organizations of the United Nations system with the promotion
of peace, mainly through education in all its aspects,
Noting with appreciation the initiative taken by the International Association of University Presidents at its Sixth
Triennial Conference, held at San Jose from 28 June to 3
2

Resolution 2951 (XXVII).
29
Resolution 35/55.
•

July 1981, to propose the Declaration of a Peace Year, a
Peace Month and a Peace Day, 30
Acknowledging the conclusions of the Conference that it
would be appropriate to devote a specific time to concentrate
the efforts of the United Nations and its Member States, as
well as of the whole of mankind, to promoting the ideals
of peace and to giving positive evidence of their commitment
to peace in all viable ways,
Considering that, through the declaration and proper celebration of an International Year of Peace and an International Day of Peace, it would be possible to contribute to
strengthening such ideals of peace and alleviating the tensions and causes of conflict, both within and among nations
and peoples,
I. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider,
at its first regular session of 1982, the possibility of declaring
an International Year of Peace at the first practicable opportunity, taking into account the urgency and special nature
of such an observance as well as the guidelines for international years and anniversaries adopted by the General
Assembly in its decision 35/424 of 5 December 1980, and
to submit its recommendations to the Assembly at its thirtyseventh session on the basis of appropriate arrangements for
the timing, organization and financing of the Year;
2. Declares that the third Tuesday of September, the
opening day of the regular sessions of the General Assembly, shall be officially proclaimed and observed as International Day of Peace and shall be devoted to commemorating
and strengthening the ideals of peace both within and among
all nations and peoples;
3. Invites all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, regional organizations, nongovernmental organizations, peoples and individuals to
commemorate in an appropriate manner the International
Day of Peace, especially through all means of education,
and to co-operate with the United Nations in the observance
of that Day.
77th plenary meeting
30 November /981

36/68.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 11
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/l I 8
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 35/
119 of 11 December 1980, as well as the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 concerning the question of Namibia and taking

·'° See Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 133, document A/36/197, annex. ·
"Ibid., Thirtv-sixth Session. Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I).
