THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

st
MEETING:

NEW

27 OCTOBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2041

Adoption

of the agenda

) . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .

. , . . ,. ,. . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . .. . ..

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable righls:
Letter dated 13 September 1977 from the Chairman of the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 12399)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . , , . , .. . . . . . . ..

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements ,of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement jn which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

2041ST
Held in New York

MEETING

on Thursday,

President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).

27 October

1977, at 3 p.m.

and extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Committee.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

At the invitation o.f’ the President, Mr. Fall, Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of’ the Bzalienuble Rights of
the Palestinian People, took a place at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter dated 25
October from the representative of Senegal which reads as
follows:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2041)
1I Adoption of the agenda

“I have the honour to refer to the forthcoming meeting
of the Security Council on the question of the exercise by
the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights and to
request that the Palestine Liberation Organization be
invited to participate in the debate in accordance with the
previous decisions of the Council in this matter.”

2. The qugstion of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 13 September 1977 from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 12399)

4. I place before the Council the proposal that the
Palestine Liberation Organization should be invited to
participate in the debate. It should be noted that this
proposal is not being put forward under rule 37 or rule 39
of the provisional rules of proqedure. If it is adopted, the
invitation to the Palestine Liberation Organisation will
confer on it the same rights of participation as those
conferred on a Member State when it is invited to
participate under rule 37.

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights:
Letter dated 13 September 1977 from the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People to the President of the
Security Council (S/12399)

5. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on the
proposal that I have placed before it‘?
6. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): I wish to
state that my Government is not able to agree to the
proposal to invite the representatives of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the dcbale in the
Security Council with the same rights of participation as a
Member State would have. We considered the terms of the
Council’s invitation inappropriate on past occasions,and we
want to repeat our opinion. For this reason we should like
the proposed invitation put to the vote.

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have received a letter dated 24
October from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to refer to the forthcoming meeting
of the Security Council on the question of the exercise by
the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights and to
request you to make the necessary arrangements to
enable me to address the Council in my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.”

7. The PRESTDENT: In view of the statement made by
the representative of the United States and his request for a
vote, 1 put the proposal to the vote.
A vote was taken b.y show of hands.

2. It will be recalled that when the Security Council dealt
with this matter on the last occasion, it P-(tended an
invitation to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I propose therefore, if there is no objection that the
Council should follow the same practice on this occasion

In favour: Benin, China, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Venezuela.
Agaimt: United States of America.
1

Abstaining: Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted by 10 votes to 1, with

8. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representatives of the
Palestine Liberation Organization to take the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi and the other
members of‘ the delegation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

9. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that letters have been received from the
representatives of Egypt and the Syrian Arab Republic in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion. I propose therefore, with the consent of the
Council and in accordance with the usual practice, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
10. There being no objection, I now invite the representatives of Egypt and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt) and Mr. Allay’ (Syrian Arab Republic) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
11. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the letter contained in document S/12399
addressed to the President of the Security Council by the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Ambassador
Mddoune Fall, on whom I now call.
12. Mr. FALL (Chairman, Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) (interpretation from French): Sir, before going into the substance of
the debate, 1 should like to discharge a pleasant’. duty by
conveying to you my warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of this important organ of the
United Nations. Your well-known, eminent qualifications as
a wise diplomat, together with the important role your
great country, India, has always endeavoured to play in
enhancing the efficiency of our Organization, allow us to
hope that this debate will be conducted with equity and
wisdom, because what we all need today is not a new and
futile debating contest but rather a sincere, calm and well
pondered discussion. A futation with unacceptable faits
accompli& postponements and diversionary tactics must
yield to the will to press forward, to the will to make a
positive contribution to a restoration of peace in the Middle
East.
13. The decision of the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session [resolution 311201 to take note of the report of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the

Palestinian People* and to endorse the recommendations
contained therein, as a basis for the solution of the question
of Palestine is one of the major steps taken in this field
since the introduction of this question into the United
Nations over three decades ago.
14. Allow me to recall that those recommendations are
based on two fundamental elements: on the one hand, the
right of return of the Palestinians, in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) and
Security Council resolution 237 (1967); on the other hand,
the right to independence and national sovereignty as
defined in resolution 181 (II) on the partition of former
Palestine under British Mandate, and in resolution 273 (III)
on the admission of the State of Israel to membership in
the United Nations.
15. The sacred principle, enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and in contemporary international law, of the
inadmissibility of the occupation of a territory through war
has also been taken into account in drawing up the
recommendations of the Committee, which are based
entirely on resolutions or decisions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
16. The General Assembly, in taking its decision on the
Committee’s recommendations, did not wish to restrict
itself to the mere adoption ‘of a text; it also expressed its
determination to see those recommendations implemented.
Hence in resolution 31/20, paragraph 4, it urged the
Security Council
“to consider once again as soon as possible the recommendations contained in the report, taking fully into
account the observations made thereon during the debate
in the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, in order
to take the necessary measures to implement the abovementioned recommendations of the Committee so as to
achieve early progress towards a solution of the problem
of Palestine and the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East”.
In the same resolution, the Assembly
“Authorizes the Committee to exert all efforts to
promote the implementation of its recommendations and
to rep@rt thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session”.
17. In order to carry out the mandate of the General
Assembly successfully, the Committee first had to proceed
to analyse the trends that had emerged from the debate on
Palestine in the General Assembly. In that connexion, it
noted the agreement of the opinions expressed in that
debate with the basic considerations which it had presented
in its report. Thus it was able to note that a vast majority of
delegations were in agreement in considering the question
of Palestine as the central element in the Middle East
conflict and that, consequently, a just and lasting peace in
the region could be achieved only if the legitimate rights
and aspirations of the Palestinian people were taken into
account.
1 official Records of the General
SupplementNo. 35.

Assembly,

Thirty-j?rst

Session,

18. The Committee noted also that most speakers had
stressed that a satisfactory and equitable solution to the
Palestinian question could not be achieved outside the
framework of an over-all settlement of the Middle East
problem.

can easily be turned against its advocates, since the theses
they support are not based entirely on decisions unanimously adopted by the United Nations. Moreover, I must
admit that, even if the various persons I spoke to did not
approve of all my ideas, they all none the less showed
attentive understanding.

19. Taking those trends into account and on the basis of
the General Assembly mandate, the Committee took a
number of steps vis-a-vis various United Nations bodies,
particularly in the Security Council. Inasmuch as the
implementation of most of the Assembly’s recommendations requires the active co-operation of the Council, the
Committee wished to undertake all necessary efforts in
order that the Council’s reconsideration of those recommendations might take place in the most favourable
conditions and lead to the adoption of positive and just
measures with a view to the settlement of the cluestion of
Palestine. I speak of a reconsideration because, as Council
members will recall, the recommendations of the Assembly
had already been submitted to the Council last year.
However, although at the time they had the support of the
majority of delegations, they could not be adopted, owing
to the negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
At that time, the recommendations of the Committee were
criticized for focusing on only one element of the Middle
East question and for neglecting the other two elements-to
wit, the question of borders and the right of all States of
the region to exist.

23. Supplementing these direct contacts with the members
of the Security Council, and in order to ensure better
understanding between us, the Committee addressed various communications to the Council expressing its views on
the basic principles underlying its work and stressing the
need for action by the Council. This group of initiatives, of
exchanges of views and of explanations was prompted by
only one concern on the part of the Committee: to
facilitate the Council’s work towards the adoption of a
positive approach likely to lead to the exercise by the
Palestinian people of their inalienable rights.
24. The Committee is firmly convinced that the Council
must take such action, especialty since the Committee’s
recommendations
only ask for the implementation of
resolutions and decisions already adopted by the United
Nations and, at one time or another, accepted by all the
parties concerned.
25. At present the problem does not arise in terms ofnew
resolutions; rather, what is required is sincere political will
based on the implementation of the decisions that have
been adopted and on the feelings that have been expressed
by all the parties.

20. In response to that criticism, the Committee declared
that its mandate was not to deal with the Middle East
question in its entirety, but, rather, to seek ways and means
of implementing the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. In other words, the task of the Committee consists,
above all, in righting the basic imbalance which has always
characterized the various United Nations approaches to the
Palestine question. Far from being an advocate of partiality,
the Committee has tried to redress that regrettable imbalance and to give the question of Palestine its rightful
place and its true dimension.

26. Israel’s right to exist is no longer challenged by
anyone. But Israel in turn must recognize the legitimate
rights of its neighbours. The world is now thirsting for
peace and security. Israel has no right to continue to pose
constant threats to the very survival of our planet for, as the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Grbmyko,
said recently from the rostrum of the
General Assembly:

21, Those are the considerations 1 wished to explain to the
members of the Security Council that did not support the
General Assembly’s recommendations
at the time I approached them on behalf of the Committee. Needless to
say, at that time I also sought to obtain their views on the
question of Palestine, while impressing on them that the
Committee’s only objective was to make a constructive
contribution, within the terms of its mandate, to a
settlement of the problem which is now at the heart of the
Middle East conilict. In order to do that, the Committee
had felt itself in duty bound to obtain the views of all
Member States concerning the most efficient way of
implementing the mandate given it by the General
Assembly.

“A great deal of cambustible material has been accumulated in the Middle East, and in the event of another
outbreak of hostilities no one would be able to predict its
outcome.“*
The present situation cannol go on indefinitely without
bringing about dangerously unforeseeable consequences.
27. That was a rather pessimistic statement by the headof
the Soviet Foreign Ministry. PresidentCarter ofthe United
States replied to it with similar pessimismduring his
statement before the General Assembly on 4 October. He
said:
“Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds
more menace than the Middle East.War there hasalready
carried the world to the edgeof nuclear confrontation. It
has already disrupted the world economy and imposed
severe hardshipson the people in the developedand the
developing nations alike. So true peace-peace embodied

22. I also tried to draw their attention to the dangers of
being selective with regard to United Nations resolutions.
Indeed, to ignore an organ or a decision of the United
Nations on the pretext that they did not vote in favour of
the resolution which brought it into being is dangerous
conduct which, if care is not taken, could impair the
functioning of the United Nations. ‘urthermore, we must
note that such an attitude is a double-edged sword which

2 Ibid.,

para.139.
3

Thirty-second

Session,

PIewry

Meetings,

8th

meeting,

in binding treaties-is essential. It will be in the interest of
the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of the
American people. It is in the interest of the entire
world.“”

That position was affirmed once ag~n by the conference Of
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries held in New York on
30 September last (see S/12410/.
All those statements of position testify to the growing
recognition by the international conmunity
of’ th iWortance of the Palestinian question and to the ilnpkit
acceptanceof the principles and fundamental considerations on which the Conlmittee’s action is based.That broad
international consensusis, in the cofrm%ttee’s opinion, the
platform on which the councjl can build a positive
approach with a view to the exercise by the Palestinian
peopleof their inalienable rights.
32.

28. The inactivity that has been noted in the development
of the question of Palestine is even less understandable
when we remember that the members of the Security
Council-or
their Governments-have
all at one time or
another come out in favour of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
29. Most recently, the leaders of States playing an
important role in the Middle East have made statements
that the Committee has found most encouraging. As
members of the Council arc doubtless aware, I am referring
to the joint Soviet-American statement issued on 1 October. In that statement we read the following:

33. Action by the Council in this sphere is the more
imperative becausethe situation in the field is deteriorating
daily. The covert annexationist poIicy of the Israeli leaders
is daily building up fresh frustrations and cOmPro]nising
more and more the chances for a peacefd settlement. The
logic that lies behind the establishment of Israeli settlements in the illegally occupied Arab territories is very clear:
the intention is to create irreversible situations, by meansof
faits accomplis,and above all to compromise the possibility
of the creation of an independent Palestinian State. This
policy, which has been condemned by the entire international community, cannot contribute to peace.But Israel
continuesto display its complete contempt for decisionsof
the United Nationsand for international law.

“The United States and the Soviet Union believe that,
within the framework of a comprehensive settlement of
the Middle East problem, all specific questions of the
settlement should be resolved, including such key issues
as withdrawal of Israeli anned forces from territories
occupied in the 1967 conflict; the resolution of the
Palestinian question, including ensuring the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people . . .
“The Unitctl States and the Soviet Union believe that
the only right and effective way for achieving a fundamental solution to all aspects of the Middle East problem
in its entirety is negotiations within the framework of the
Geneva Peace Conference, specially convened for these
purposes, with participation in its work of the representatives of all the parties involved in the conflict, including
those of the Palestinian people. . .“.

34. Onceupon a tirnc a clistihguished figure, representinga
great country in the Council, had the habit of larding his
statementswith a wealth of personal comments. I am aware
that my personal comments will certainly not be as
interestingashis. Nevertheless, I shall venture to crave the
Council’sindulgenceasI make some personal remarks.

30. On 26 September, Mr. Simonet, speaking from the
rostrum of the General Assembly on behalf of the nine
States members of the European Economic Community,
stated:

35. On 16 August fast, I went to Beirut in response-of
course with the agreement of the Committee--to an
invitation from the President of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, Mr. Yasser Arafat. During that journey, I had
an opportunity to talk to the most highly placed figures in
the Palestinian resistance. I visited refugee camps and
homesfor war orphans. I also went to southern Lebanon,
where I wasableto see for myself the dangeroussituation
prevailingin that region. 1 talked to the fighters, but I also
talked to young people, boys and girls, some of whom were
barely rive yearsold.

“The nine countries also continue to believe that a
solution to the conflict will not be possible unless the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to give effective
cxprcssion to its national identity becomes a reality. This
would take into account, of course, the need for a
homeland for the Palestinian people.“4
I must remind the Council that three members of the
Community are seated here, and two of them have the right
of veto.

36. In the courseof these visits, contacts and talks, I never
detectedthe slightestsign of resentment or animosity in my
interIocutors; on the contrary, I was pleasantly surprisedto
read the following slogan over the entrance to a pioneer
camp: “YOU shallalways fight out of love for the homeland
and not out of hate for the enemy”. Nevertheless, 1 did also
find in everyonea fierce determination to struggleunto the
supremesacrificeto defend the sacred rights of his people.
All this led mc to conclude that 110 peace is possiblein tile
Middle Eastwithout a just settlement of the national rights
of the Palestinianpeople.

31. In August 1976, the llcads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, meeting at Colombo, approved the
Committee’s report and affirmed
“the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
self-determination, including the right of return and the
right to national independence and the establishment of
its independent, sovereign State in Palestine, in accordance with the Charter ofthe Unitecl Nations”.s

37. The tragedy now being played out in the south of
Lebanon may well, if we do vot take care, ignite the fifth
Middle Eastwar, Israel might Well emerge the victor, just as
it might win the sixth war, and even others. But what is

rnccting, para. 35.
4 Gicl., 7th meeting,para.5 I.
3 Ibid.,

18th

5 SW A/31/197,

XUICX

IV, resolution

10.
4

certain is that it will inevitably lose the final war, which

I just mentioned should lead to a comprehensiveand just
settlement of the Middle East problem. That should also
logically make possiblea genuineresumptionof the Geneva
Conference for, as President Carter said--and once againI
am quoting the United StatesChief Executive:

might, unfortunately, be fatal for Israel. For there is no
casein human history where a resolute and determined
peoplehasbeenunable to surmount a momentary weakness
and to recover, in the longer or shorter term, the force and
energy needed to secure the triumph of good and just
causes.That is why we consider that it is in everyone’s
interests,including that of the State of Israel, to searchfor
a peacefulsolution to- this long and painful crisiswhich has
beengoing on for over 30 years. The United Nations hasall
the machinery necessaryfor resolvingthis problem which it
itself created.

“Negotiations cannot be successfulif any of the parties
harbours the deceitful view that peace is simply an
interlude in which to prepare for war.“6
1 may add that these six resolutions are binding on the
parties, since someof them accepted the resolutionsat the
time of their adoption and others supported them subsequently.

38. Of the some200 resolutionsand decisionsadopted on
this subject over those 30 years, I should like to mention
six: three adopted by the General Assembly and three by
the Security Council. I have chosen those six resolutions,
not becausethey are the most important, but becauseall
wereadoptedwith the agreementof Israel or its friends.

43. The question today is whether the Security Council
will allow Israel, under the falsepretext of security, calmly
to continue with its policy of territorial expansion,injustice
and obvious obstruction of the exerciseby the Palestinian
people ofits inalienablerights.

39. The General Assembly resolutions are as follows:
resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 concerned the
future government of the former Palestine under British
Mandate; that resolution, the so-calledpartition resolution,
called for the creation in Palestineof two distinct territorial
entities, one Arab and the other Jewish; it was sponsored,
and voted for, by the United States. Resolution 194 (IJI) of
11 December 1948 was adopted following the report of
Count Bernadotte, the United Nations Mediator in the
Middle East, which called for the return to their homesof
the Arab rcfugcesof Palestineor the payment of compensation to refugeesnot wishingto return home; that resolution
too met with the agreement at the time of the United
States.Resolution273 (III) of 11 May 1949, admitted the
State of Israelto the United Nations. That resolution is of
crucial importance, since it provided that the admissionof
Israel was contingent on two conditions: (a) the undertaking by Israel to abide by the Charter of the United
Nations from the moment of its admission; (b) its acceptance of resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III) already
mentioned. The JsraeliMinister for Foreign Affairs at the
time committed himself on behalf of his Government to
observethose two essentialconditions.

44. On this qlestion of security, 1 wish to emphasizethe
comments made by the Secretary of State for Foreignand
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. Owen,
who, on 27 September, speakingfrom the rostrum of the
General Assembly, said:
“In the debate about occupied territory, security issues
are of central importance and of deep and genuine
concern. Hitherto nations have tended to equatesecurity
solely with the possessionof territories. This is no longer
the only relevant security factor. Sophisticatedelectronic
devices can now give a military security which nations
had hitherto believed could only come from the physical
occupation of territory.“’
45. For us, security of boundariesis inextricably tied to
the establishment of pcacc in the region, and peacein the
region is impossible without a just settlement of the
Palestinianproblem.
46. Before concluding my statement, I should like to
addressan appeal to the mcmbcrs of the Council and in
particular to those who did not vote for the General
Assembly’srecommendationson Palestine,that they should
not once again put oTf to a future dark with storm clouds
the adoption of a positive approachto the questionof the
rights of the Palestinian people. It is no longer enoughto
recognize in private the reality of those rights; they mustbe
vested with the full weight of the Council’s moral authority. Jn approving the recommendations of the General
Assembly as a basis for a solution to the question of
Palestine,the Council will considerablyincreasethe chances
of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East by demonstrating that the United Nations is firmly committed to a
solution that takes due account of the rights and interests
of all parties at issue.It is the duty of the internationa1
community to help thosewho are in despairto breakout of
that situation, to convince them that justice and equity are
not just empty words.

40. The Security Council, for its part, adopted resolution
237 (1967) on the return of refugeesfrom the 1967 war, as
well as resolutions242 (1967) and 338 (1973), of which
there hasbeena bit too much talk of late.
41. Some authoritative and friendly voices will perhaps
rightly be raisedto reproach me for not mentioning some
other pertinent resolutions, particuIarly resolutions
3236 (XXIX), 3375 (XXX) and 3376 (XXX), to mention
only three. But, as I said a moment ago, J wanted to
mention only certain essentialresolutions which even the
most faithful friends of the State of Israel are obliged to
regardasvalid and binding.
42. But even then, we are far from agreeingwith thOSe
who consider that resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
are the only resolutions tha, exist and that those two
resolutions by themselves suffice to cover the whole
problem of the Middle East. For our part, we considerthat
the combinedimplementationof all the six resolutionsthat

6 Uj$ciaZ

Records

of the

Genera2

sion, Plenary Meetings, 18th meeting,
7 Ibid.,

5

9th meeting,

para. 118.

Assembly,
para. 37.

Thirty-second

Ses-

land. This right has been recognizedby the United Nations
as well asby other regional andinternational organizations.
The deprivation that the Palestinianpeople have suffered
for over a quarter of a century as a result of the denial of
these rights are every day becomingmore real andpressing
to the conscienceof the overwhelmingmajority of mankind. The changes in public opinion that have been
occurring in recent years in regardto the deprivation of the
Palestinian people of their exercise of these inalienable
rights reflect the increasedemphasisnot only on the plight
of the Palestinian people but also on human rights, on
national freedom and on United Nations efforts to combat
racism and injustice wherever they may occur. These
changesin internationaf public opinion have beenreflected
in the General Assembly in various resolutionsthat have
affirmed the inalienablerights of the Palestinianpeople to
self-determination, national independenceand sovereignty
in their homeland.

47. The Security Council has never met to consider the
problem of the Middle East in such favourable circumstances as today. The opportunities with which we are
presented must therefore be seized without delay. Historical events always Follow one after another, but they are
never repeated, and lost opportunities often bring bitter
tomorrows in their wake. In the Committee’s opinion, the
recommendations of the General Assembly, since they do
not set out to deny implicitly or explicitly the rights
recognized by the Charter of any of the parties to the
conflict-particularly
the Palestinian and Israeli partiesconstitute an important step in the right direction. They
would help to create a climate in which all the parties
would know that, in a definitive settlement, the fullest
account will be taken of their lawful rights. Any action by
the Council to that end would be of the utmost historical
significance.
48. Mr. KIKI-IIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): In addressing
ourselves to the question on our agenda, my delegation
must first thank and congratulate Ambassador Medoune
Fall of Senegal and the other members of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Jmahenable Rights of the Palestinian
People for their excellent work in the course of the past
year, as well as for their efforts in preparing the report.8

54. Thirdly, their inherent right to choose their own
leadership. This right is recognized today almost universally. The only exceptions are the Zionist racists and
imperialist forces responsiblefor preventing the Palestinian
people from exercising all their inalienable rights. These
forces seekto destroy the Palestinians
and to annihilatethe
just causesfor which they have struggled.Only recently,
from the rostrum of the GeneralAssembly,Moshe Dayan
indulged in the familiar Zionist defiance of the United
Nations and in the USC of myth and tortured logic that will
deceive no one. The Zionists wish to annihilate the just
causeof the Palestinian peopleand the Palestinianpeople
themselvesby, in the words of that statementin the general
debate, their resettlement and integration into the societies
in which they live as refugees. In the final analysis,
however, and becauseof the determination of the Palestinian people to obtain their rights,no so-calledsolutionsor
measuresaffecting them will becomeeffective unlessthey
are arrived at with their full participation and concurrence
through their chosenleaders,namely, the PalestineLiberation Organization. Such solutions and measureswill, in the
words of the PalestinianNational Covenant, be considered
null and void.

49. Although there arc a number of issues and paragraphs
in that report with which my delegation cannot fully agree,
there can be no doubt that, in fulfilment of its mandate,
the Committee has unambiguously defined and enumerated
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and that it
has pointed out the direction that the United Nations must
take if these rights are to be restored and if a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East and in the whole world is
to prevail.
50. The strong interrelationship between peace and security, on the one hand, and the legitimate and inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, on the other, are stated in
almost the first substantive sentence of the report, namely,
in paragraph 10, which reads:
“The Committee studied and analysed the views expressed in the discussion of its report and recommendations at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly.
It noted the concurrence of opinion that the question of
Palestine was a central element of the Middle East
conflict and that, therefore, a just and lasting peace in the
area could be achieved only if the legitimate rights and
aspirations of the Palestinian people were taken into
account.”

55. The Palestinian people have for over a quarter of a
century demanded and struggled in the cause of the
restoration of their inalienablenational rights in their own
country, Palestine.They were deprived of the exerciseof
these rights as a result of actsof oppressionand terrorism
perpetrated by Zionist racist gangsin collaboration with
imperialist, colonialist forces. The Palestinianpeople were
expelled from their homes and lands by acts of massacre
and the deliberate destruction of their homesand prop
erties. They have been compelledto live in refugee camps
and tents, while their homeland has been usurped and
plundered by alien racist elements.The situation was well
described by the late Count Folke Bernadotte, the United
Nations Mediator, who was assassinated
by the Zionists.In
his report to the General Assembly,as early as 1948, he
said:

51. These legitimate rights are detailed throughout the
report. Among the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people enumerated in the report we stress the following.
52. First, the right to return to their homeland. This right
has been repeatedly affirmed in numerous resolutions and,
in fact, its principle is embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
53. Secondly, their inherent right to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty in their own home-

“It would be an offence against the principles of
elementary justice if these innocent victims of the
conflict”-the Arabs of Palestine-“were denied the right
to return to their homes while Jewishimmigrants flow

8 Ibid., TlzirtJj-second Session, Supplement NO. 35.
6

into Palestine, and, indeed, at least offer the threat of
permanent replacement of the Arab refugees who have
been rooted in the land for centuries”9

security, is confronted with an extremely serious and
dangerous situation in the Middle East which threatens
world peace and security. It has long been known and is
daily recognized that the essenceof this situation is the
question of Palestine,which arisesfrom the fact that the
Palestinian people is being deprived of the exerciseof its
inalienable rights. International public opinion and the
imperatives of international peace and justice demand
effective action and programmesfor the full restorationto
the Palestinianpeople of its inalienable rights. The continuance by the Zionists of their occupation of Palestineand
other Arab territories is but a part of an over-all Zionist
policy of a “greater Israel” encompassing
a largeareain our
region.

56. The Zionist racists and their aggressive expansionist
plans have consistently received the full support and
assistance of imperialist colonialist forces. It was the British
who, in violation of their Mandate responsibilities and
obligations, assisted and arranged for the Zionist usurpation
of Palestine. It is significant to note and to recall once again
that when the Balfour Declaration was proclaimed Jews
constituted only 8 per cent of the population and owned
only 2.5 per cent of the land. It is also significant to note
that this was the same Balfour who considered it acceptable
that the indigenous inhabitants of Australia should be
exterminated.

61. The recent taking of power by the terrorist Menachem
Begin in the Zionist entity and his blatant statementsin
regard to Zionist plans remind us of a descriptionof Begin
given in a letter by another racist Zionist, Ben-Gurion,who
said:

57. But the Palestinian people have not surrendered and
will not surrender in their just struggle to recover their
national rights. Their resolve and determination in their just
strugglehas not been diminished by the cruelty of their
deprivations or by the military might of the racist forces
that have usurpedtheir homeland. The Palestinianpeople
are totally committed to their just cause and have total
faith that through continuous struggleand national determination justicewill eventually be done and their rights will
be fully restored.

“Begin is a thoroughly Hitlerite type, ready to destroy
all the Arabs for the wholenessof the country, who
devotes all his efforts to a holy purpose: absoluterule;
and 1 seehim as a great dangerto Israel domesticallyand
internationally. I cannot forget the little I know of his
activity--and it has clear meaning: the murder of tens of
Jews, Arabs and Englishmen-in the explosionof the King
David Hotel, the pogrom in Deir Yassin . . . I have no
doubt that Begin hates Hitler-but his hatred doesnot
prove that he is different from him . . . when for the first
time I heard Beginon the radio, I heard the voice andthe
screechingof Hitler, . .“.

58. International support for the just struggle of the
Palestinianpeople has in recent years beenincreasingand
widening.Such support is of great significance not only to
the Palestinianpeople but also to all other peopleswhich
are oppressedby colonialism, racism, repressionand injustice. At the United Nations this international support has
been expressedin a number of resolutions, of which
perhapsthe most important are General Assembly resolutions
3236 (XXIX),
3237 (XXIX),
3375 (XXX),
3376 (XXX), 3379 (XXX) and 3414 (XXX), especially
3379 (XXX) condemning Zionism as a form of racial
discrimination.These resolutions recognize and affirm the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people to
return to their homeland, to self-determination and to
national sovereignty. The presence here of the Palestine
Liberation Organization as a permanent observer is a
recognition of that national liberation organization as the
sole representativeof the Palestinian people and of the
inalienable right of that people to choose its own
leadership.

62. Optimism arose among some parties when the new
United States Government showed special interest in
human rights principles and when PresidentCarterusedthe
phrase“homeland for the Palestinians”in his speeches
and
statements. This was consideredto be a sign of changein
the American policy, which hascontinuously sponsored
the
Zionist aggressorand given the Zionist entity the assistance
and money it needs in implementing the policy of
aggression,annexation, occupation and expansionwhich it
has undertaken againstthe Arab peoplein Palestineandthe
neighbouringareas.
63. That optimism increasedfollowing the publication of
the joint Soviet-American statement at the beginningof
October 1977 in which those optimists sawpositiveaspects,
especially in what it said about the solution of the Palestine
problem in a manner which would guaranteethe legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people and in the statementthat
the Palestinianpeople should be representedat the Geneva
Conference on an equal footing with the other participants.

59. The condemnation by the international community of
Zionism as a form of racism was also a significant
development.The fact that Zionismand racism areidentical
is everywhere mademanifest, even againstJewsthemselves.
The latest incident was the recent expulsion by the Zionist
authorities of blacks of the Jewish faith solely becauseof
the colour of their skin. The Assembly resolution, morcover, has had the effect of enhancingthe solidarity of all
peace-lovingforcesstrugglingagainstracism, oppressionand
colonialdomination.

64. However, immediately after the publication of that
joint statement another American statement wasissuedin
which it was stated that the expression“national rights”
had been omitted from the joint statement on the
insistenceof the Americans becausethat expressionwould
include the right to self-determination and the right to
establish a State. Thus the substance of the SovietAmerican statementwasmadevoid.

60. The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations primarily responsiblefor international peace and
9 Ibid.,

para.6.

Third

Session,

Supplement

No. II,

Part One, chap.V,
7

65. In addition, only one week after the Soviet-American
statement, a joint American-Israeli statement was issued
which made the first joint statement completely meaningless. In clarification I will quote the first and last paragraphs
of the joint American-Israeli statement:

but indirectly, alsoto liberate the Jewishmajority and the
Amirican massesfrom the dictatorship of the unholy
allianceof Zionist and imperialist financial CirCkS represented by the arch-reactionary elements of the
transnationals.

“The United States and Israel agree that Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) remain
the agreed basis for the resumption of the Geneva Peace
Conference and that all the understandings and agreements between them on this subject remain in force.

71. We are awareof the fact that America’s policy as a
whole is focused and gearedin servitude to the IsraeliZionist establishment.United Statespolicy is in an embarrassing quandary in many parts of the world and on more
than oneissue,so]e]y becauseof a blind commitment to the
Zionist movement,Becauseof that commitment t0 fulfil
the dictatesof Zionists,the United Stateshasbeeninvolved
in problems with the United NationsEducational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization;
becauseof that commitment,
the United Stateshasproblemsin the International Labour
Organisation,in the ConferenceagainstApartheid and with
regardto the Arab boycott of Israel.They havegoneSOfar
as to intervene in the internal affairs of other countries.
Even the policy of detente with the other super-Power
encountersmany difficulties becauseof Zionist pressure
and the propagandacampaignon the so-calledproblem of
Jewsin socialistcountries.

“...
“Acceptance of the Joint US-USSR statement of
1 October 1977 by the parties is not a prerequisite for the
reconvening and conduct of the Geneva Conference.”
66. Moreover, one need hardly mention President Carter’s
speech in the General Assembly, which came only one day
before the American-Israeli statement and in which he
definitely and clearly showed America’s protection of Israel
and their common ties. It is enough to quote one sentence
of President Carter’s speech to demonstrate this special
relationship and this protection: “The commitment of the
United States to Israel’s security is unquestionable.“10

72. The activities of the United Statesin the third world
and its dealingswith the African Stateshave beengravely
influenced by the commitment to the Zionists. Part of
United States activities hasbeendirected towards pushing
the third world--in particular Africa and Latin America-into working for the Zionist-Israelicauseand againstthe
sohdarity of third-world peoplewith the Palestinianpeople.
In someinstanceswe have been left with the impression
that United States policy is wholly in bondageto the
Zionist-Israelicause,We have even seeninstanceswhen the
so-called safety of Israel has taken priority over and
surpassed
vital Americaninterests.

67. The American pull-back from its position shattered
the optimism which some parties had cherished. We, for our
part, arc the last to be optimistic here, since we know only
too well the extent to which the Zionist influence
dominates the American establishment and the extent to
which American policy-makers succumb to that influence.
T/W Christian Science Monitor might havetold part of the
truth when it recently publishedan article which stated
that Menachem Begin could obtain more votes in the
American Congressthan the United StatesPresidenthimself.

73. An eminentand highly respectedUnited Statesambassador, as reported by the massmedia, twice this year
declared that African countries were not really against
68. Zionist influence is alsoresponsible
for preventingthe
United States till now from recognizing the Palestine Israel but against the. United States; they opposedthe
American policy in Africa but were unableto do anything
Liberation Organization asthe legitimaterepresentativeof
againsta super-Powerlike the United States; hence they
the people of Palestine.It hasbeenrecognizedassuchby
took out their frustrations on Israel. Wowever, when the
the United Nations, the League.of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the non-alignedcountries United States normalizedand improved its relations with
those countries, he said, they in turn would do likewise
andthe Conferenceof IslamicCountries.
with the Zionist entity. The last time that that strangeand
dangerouslogic wasreportedwason 28 September1977 in
69. It canbe seenfrom all this that the interests,resources the
Jewish-Telegraph.
and freedom of will of the Americanpeoplearedominated
by Zionist influence.
74. Further supporting evidence of Zionist control and
influencewasrecently illustrated in The NewI York Times,
70. America’sunlimited. unreasonable
andtotally unjustiwhich justified the visit of a highly respectedleader of a
fiable commitmentto the Zionist entity iswell known. The
friendly country to Israel by the sole fact that he only
Zionists want us to accept it as a fact of life and alsoto
wanted to gain support in the United States for a certain
conduct our actionsand policiesin accordancewith it. We
draft treaty with the United States.
are among those who will never accept that America’s
policy towards the Middle Easton the questionof Palestine 7s. Wehavebeentold againand againthat America’smost
is irreversible and a sacrosanctreality of international
vital interests,even those relating to its neighbours,must
policy. We believe in the American people and in the
first be cleared and given the stampof approval by the
American masses,
and we fight alongwith our Palestinian Zionist entity in Tel Aviv before American legislationwill
and Arab brothers not only to liberateour land and people get the greenlight to proceed.
10 Ibid., Tldrty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 18th meeting,

76. We feet it is both frightening and highly dangerous
that a super-power,namely the United States, is usingits

para.39.

8

huge possibilities, influence and might to serve the illegal
and irresponsible dictates and goals of the Fascist Zionist
entity in occupied Palestine.

83. The injustice done to the Palestinian people in 1948
and the deprivation which they have suffered since then are
in no way mitigated by the fact that the alien immigrants
and occupants who displacedthem from their homesare
themselves descendedfrom victims of discrimination and
injustice over the centuries in the countries of their origin.
The persecution and ill-treatment of the Jewish people in
the past provides no justification for Israel’s present
persecution and ill-treatment of the Palestinian Arabs.
Israel’s defiance of the United Nations resolutions on the
subject is not only morally reprehensiblebut also legally
indefensible. The decision which made possiblethe cstablishment of a JewishState on Palestiniansoil certainly did
not envisagethe disappearanceof Palestine as such and
provided explicit guaranteesfor the protection of the rights
of the original inhabitants of the country, In defying
United Nations resolutions and decisionson the subject,
lsrael cannot but raise questionsabout the legitimacy of its
own existence. The truth is that Israel’s policy from the
beginning hasbeen one of territorial expansionism,and SO
it remains. Today the conquered territories of the West
Rank are being describedas “liberated lands” and claim is
laid to them, no longer on groundsof security, but on the
ground that these were sites of ancient and long vanishqd
Biblical kingdoms. Such assertionsare totally untenable ln
law, morality or good sense.

77. In conclusion, my delegation would like once again to
thank the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People for its efforts and its
report. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has consistently given
moral and material support to the brotherly people of
Palestine in their just struggle to restore their inalienable
rights. We shall persevere in our total unequivocal support
until the total victory of the Palestinian people has been
achieved, and the struggle will continue to that end.
78. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): My deIegation has listened
with attention to. the statement made by the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. I should like to place on record our
appreciation and gratitude for the lucidity and comprehensive manner with which he has spoken for the Committee and for his dedicated stewardship
of that
Committee.
79. I cannot fail to express disappointment and regret at
the fact that a group of States continues to shun membership of the Committee and declines to co-operate with it in
any manner. Despite that handicap, the Committee-of
which my country is a member-has approached its task in
an objective and constructive spirit, bearing in mind the
need to consolidate positive trends towards a peace
settlement in the Middle East.

84. Resolution 242 (1967), adopted in the aftermath of
the 1967 conflict and of Israel’smilitary victory, stated in
the clearest terms that the acquisition of territory by war
was inadmissible.The resolution called for the withdrawal
of Israel from occupied Arab territories as one of the
essentialelements of a peaceful selllement. Whatever may
be the ambiguitiesof the wording of that resolution, by no
stretch of imagination can it be interpreted asgiving Israel
the right to appropriate and annex any part of the occupied
territories on any ground whatsoever.it gives Israel no say
on how the people of the West Bank, when Israeli forces
have withdrawn, may organize their national existence.The
resolution calls for acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and of their right to live in peacewithin
secureand recognized boundaries,free from threats or acts
of force.

80. In the words of the Committee’s report of last year,
the question of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East
problem and no solution can be envisaged which does not
fully take into account the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
81. Palestine was partitioned by a resolution of the United
Nations, its people were rendered homeless 30 years ago
and their country parcelled out to alien occupants. This
world Organization, if for no other reason than that, bears a
heavy responsibility to redress the injustice and suffering
which the Palestinian people have endured over these
decades.

85. It will be noted that the security of boundaries is
related to the idea of the recognition of boundariesand to
abstention from threats or acts of force. The injunction is
by no meansaddressedonly to one side, although in view
of past history it is lsrael which needslo be emphatically
reminded of the need to respect the independence,sovereignty and security of its Arab neighbours.

82. Three wars have taken place in the Middle East since
the establishment of Israel in Palestine and the consequent
displacement of the Palestinian people from their ancestral
homes and homeland. The continued occupation of Arab
territories conquered in the 1967 war, the attempt to
consolidate this occupation through the establishment of
illegal settlements, and the measures taken by Israel to alter
the status, character and demography of the occupied
territories have superimposed additional complications in
the way of a just and durable solution of the Middle East
problem. But the fundamental issue remains the failure of
the world community to persuade or oblige Israel to deal
with the Palestinian people on a basis ofjustice and equity
and the failure of the United Nations itself to address with
determination the task of restoring to the Palestinian
people the national and legitimate rights which they lost by
the creation of Israel, rights which were enunciated in the
resolution establishing Israel and which have been reiterated
in numerous subsequent resolutions.

86. Above aI1, Israel must be made to face the fact that,
despite all its attempts over the 30 years, the name of
Palestinecannot be obliterated from the world’s map. The
Palestinian, cast out from his home, living asa refugeein
international camps, or an alien in his own homeland,
denied recognition, for long refused even a hearing, has
reachedout for such meansashe could find, and hasmade
hisvoice heard and his presencefelt.
87. The vital importance of dealing with the Palestinian
question is now recognized by all except Israel. We
9

welcome in this context in particular the joint statement
made on 1 October by the United States and the USSR, in
which the resolution of this question, including the
ensuring of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
was enunciated as an essential condition to a comprehensive
settlement of the Middle East problem. We welcome also
the agreement that all parties involved in the conflict,
including the representatives of the Palestinian people,
should participate in the Geneva Peace Conference. For its
part, the Security Council must take cognizance of the fact
that the problem of Palestinians cannot be dealt with as a
refugee problem, but is one concerning the destiny of an
entire nation, It must be made clear that the aim of
negotiations for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
must include the achievement of the legitimate and national
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to
return to their homes and properties, the right to national
self-determination, which includes, of course, the right to
establish an independent and sovereign State of their own,
Nor can a negotiated settlement in the Middle East take
place without the active and direct participation o-f the
Palestinian people through their recognized and legitimate
representatives on a basis of equality with other participants.

to this question at the last sessionof the Cellera Assembly.
During those deliberations, it was also stressed that a
satisfactory and equitable solution to the problem of the
Palestinian people could be achieved only within the
framework of a comprehensivesettlement in the Middle
East, in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions.
91. Developmentsover the past months have, for the first
time, led to a convergenceof opinion among all membersof
the Council on certain essentialaspectsof the Palestinian
problem. This convergence of opinion relates in particular
to public recognition of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, including its right to be represented at
peace negotiations. Indeed, recognition of the I’alestinian
people’s right to self-determination as well as the acceptance of this question asone of the fundamental elements of
a peaceful settlement in the Middle East requires that every
effort should be made to ensurethat the Palestinian people
is represented,on an equalfooting with other parties, at all
peacenegotiations.
92. In our view, the authority which should represent it is
the Palestine Liberation Organization, recognized by the
United Nations and by the vast majority of the States of
the world asthe legitimate rc,prcsentativeof the Palestinian
people. 1 wish to note on this occasion that recent
developments in the Palestinianquestion merely confirm
the basic ideaswhich guided the Committee on the exercise
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian peopIe in
formulating the recommendationswhich it submitted to
the General Assembly at its last sessionand which the
Assembly adopted. This year too, the Committee, under
the competent chairmanship of my colleague and friend
Ambassador Fall of Senegal, who has just opened this
Council debate, has attempted to make its own constructive
contribution to the efforts aimed at bringing about a
negotiated peacein the Middle East.

88. The feeling exists today that conditions are ripe for a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. Israel’s
refusal to deal with the rightful and recognized representatives of the people of Palestine and to acknowledge their
right to a national homeland should not be allowed to
blight the hopes for peace. In considering this item, the
Council should, in my delegation’s view, take cognizance of
all the elements essential for a settlement and seek to
exercise, to the fullest measure, its responsibility
for
promoting a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The
recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian PeopIe have been
drawn up with a view to contributing to the achievement of
a peaceful and enduring settlement of the conflict. The
Council will, we hope, find it possible to endorse these
recommendations and guidelines in the interests of peace,
stability and justice.
89. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French).
This is not the first time the Security Council has been
called upon to considerthe question of the exercise by the
Palestinianpeople of its inalienablerights. If the Council is
today obliged to reconsider this question, it is because
previous initiatives calling on it to exercise its responsibilities under the Charter and to make a positive, active
contribution to the solution of the Palestineproblem have
not yielded positive results.However, the current debateis
taking place at a moment that could mark a turning point
in the development of the situation in the Middle East.
Indeed, efforts at clearingthe way for negotiations are now
being made at severallevels and in various ways by all the
interested parties.
90. It is now unanimously acknowledgedthat a peaceful,
just and lasting settlement is hardly conceivable in the
Middle East unless there is a solution of the Palestinian
problem and unlessthe legitimate rights and aspirationsof
the Palestinianpeople are duly taken into account. That is
the generalopinion that emergedfrom discussionsdevoted
10

93. We are deeply convinced that the true interests of all
States and of all peoples of the region, as well as the
interests of world peace, call for a contribution enhanced
and inspired by a senseof political responsibility on the
part of all those able to play a constructive role, in order
that the present opportunities for a resumption of the
Geneva negotiations should not be missed. The true
security and stability of each of the countries and peoples
of the Middle East can be ensuredonly if there is mutual
recognition of the legitimate rights and aspirations of all to
peaceand prosperity.
94. I take this occasion to voice once again our appreciation of the untiring efforts of the SecretarY-General, who,
through his continuous, discreetand patient contacts with
all interested parties, continues to play a considerable role
in the attempts to overcome the difficulties and to help the
parties to the conflict come to the negotiating table at the
earliest possible date. The Romanian delegation considers
that the United Nations, above all the Security Council, in
the exercise of its responsibilitiesunder the Charter, is h
duty bound to take further and more resolute action to
contribute to a peaceful, negotiated settlement of the
Middle East conflict.

*

95. My country’s position on the Palestinian problem and
on the establishment of a Middle East peace is well known.
In the view of the Rornanian Government-and
I wish to
reaffirm this-the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the region can be founded only on Israeli withdrawal
from the Arab territories occupied after the 1967 war, on a
settlement of the problem of the Palestinian people in
keeping with its legitimate aspirations, including the creation of a free and independent Palestinian State, and on the
guarantee of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all States of the region.

explosive state of affairs in which the Palestinian PeoPle,
3 million strong, is deprived of the inalienable right to
self-determination and to the creation of an independent
State and is reduced to the status of an exiled people.
102. It is the conviction of the Soviet Union that
favourable opportunities for progress towards the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East are now
taking shape, opportunities which should be used. This
requires the earliest reconvening of the Geneva Peace
Conference, which represents the only correct and effective
path to a radical solution of all aspects of the Middle East
problem in its entirety, including of course the Palestinian
question, one of the key issues in such a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East.

96. Romania, as always, remains ready to co-operate fully,
here and elsewhere, in the achievement of a peaceful,
equitable settlement of the present problems in the Middle
East, a settlement that would lead to the final establishment of peace and understanding among all peoples of the
region.

103. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation notes the
positive importance of the joint Soviet-American statement
on the Middle East of 1 October last.

97. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Security
Council is today discussing one of the main questions of a
Middle East settlement: the question of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. The Soviet delegation has
listened attentively to the detailed statement by Ambassador Fall, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

104. Speaking at a luncheon on 21 October of this year in
honour of Mr. Moraji Desai, the Prime Minister of the
friendly country of India, the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Leonid
Ilyich Brezhnev, made the following remarks concerning
the search for a settlement in the Middle East:

98. The position of the Soviet Union on the question of
Palestine and its attitude towards the work of the Committee, towards its report and its recommendations, have
been set forth in detail in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly; indeed, they are well known. The Soviet
Union regards the question of Palestine as one of the
principal aspects of the Middle East problem. The experience of recent years and the events now taking place in the
Middle East show that there can be no peace in the region
until the consequences of Israeli aggression have been
eliminated-above all, Israel’s continuing occupation of
Arab territories-and
until the Arab people of Palestine is
secure in the exercise of its lawful national rights.

“In recent months serious efforts have been made to
advance towards a comprehensive settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East. We would hope that the
parties directly involved in the conflict, with the assistance of the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference,
would avail themselves of the new opportunities that are
opening up.”
105. The Soviet Union stands for a Middle East settlement
on a lasting and just basis, as do many other States of the
world. This wish is reflected in the Soviet-Indian declaration signed only yesterday in Moscow by the Prime Minister
of India and the President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet. The declaration states:

99. We consider it necessary to state once again that the
Soviet Union, as in the past, will lend all possible support to
the Palestinian people in its just struggle for its inalienable
rights. The Soviet Union consistently favours a just solution
of the Palestinian problem on the basis of the exercise of
the lawful national rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to self-determination and the creation of its
own State.

“The parties again declare their support for a just
political settlement in the Middle East on the basis of the
withdrawal of Israel’s troops from all the Arab territories
occupied by Israel in 1967, the satisfaction of the just
demands of the Arab people of Palestine, including its
lawful and inalienable right to create its own State, and
the exercise by all the States of the Middle East of the
right to an independent existence and development. To
this end, they firmly favour the earliest reconvening of
the Geneva Peace Conference with the participation of all
interested parties, including representatives of the Palcstine Liberation Organization.”

100. The Soviet Union has supported and wili continue to
support the Palestine Liberation Organization as the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and as
the universally recognized leader of the Palestinians in their
struggle for their inalienable national rights. We note with
satisfaction the relations of close friendship and fruitful
co-operation that are being forged between the Soviet
Union and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

106. The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that our
common efforts in the Security Council and the United
Nations in general will contribute to progress towards a
comprehensive settlement within the framework
of the
Geneva Peace Conference, including the solution of the
Palestinian problem on the basis of the exercise of the
lawful national rights of the Palestinian people.

101. We stand for the establishment of a just and lasting
peace for all States and peoples of the Middle East. This, of
course, applies also to Israel, But an essential prerequisite to
such a peace is an end to the intolerable, unnatural and
13

107, Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretution
from
Chinese): Resolution 3236 (XXIX), adopted by the General
Assembly in 1974, is a resolution of signal importance. It
affirms, for the first time in the history of the United
Nations, the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty without
external interference, recognizes its right to regain its
national rights by all means and appeals to all States to
extend their support to the struggle of the Palestinian
people. Resolution 3376 (XXX)
reaffirmed
resolution
3236 (XXIX).
These two resolutions reflect the just
demand of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and are
the result of their protracted struggle undertaken with the
support of the people of the world, The Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people
was established in pursuance of resolution 3376 (XXX). We
are in favour of the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee which reaffirm or conform to
those two resolutions. Basing itself on this position, the
Chinese delegation voted in favour of resolution 31/20,
adopted at the last session of the General Assembly.

people, about the responsibility of the United Nations and
about the lack of results, despite efforts made by the
Organization and the overwhelming opinion in favour of
the realization of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people.
111. A range of interests surroundsthe F%ktinian Wee
tion and prevents the finding of a solution to the
regrettable situation which two generations Qf Palestinians
have now enduredin all its tragic dimensiofls.
112. Those of us who are considering this item in the
Council for the first time find it difficult to aPPortio~1
blame, becausewe have all been the victims of historical
circumstances. However, we do find it possible to reach
certain conclusions on the basis of the report which we
want to put forward in all sincerity.
113. We believe that Palestinianshave the samerights as
all peoples: rights to self-determination, independence and
national sovereignty. We alsobelieve that those rights have
been denied them. Together with many other members of
the international community, we hope that under the
relevant resolutions of the Organization the exercise of
those rights will be granted to the Palestinian people. TO
that end, we need only mention Generai Assembly resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III), as well as other legal instrup
mcnts which embody thoserights for the Palestinian people
and which guarantee its tight to return to its homes and to
receive compensationfor lossof its property.

108. The Palestinian question is an important, integral
part of the whole Middle East question. The rivalry
between the two super-Powers over this region is the crucial
reason why the question of Palestine and the Middle East
has remained unsettled for $0 long. While each of them is
trying to outdo the other in clamouring for an over-all
settlement of the Middle East question, in essence neither
of them wants to have a genuine settlement. Instead, both
of them are working hard to maintain the state of “no war,
no peace” in the Middle East so as to facilitate their control
over the Middle East, motivated by the needs of their
respective global strategies. That is why each of them, in its
own different ways, is encouraging, supporting and abetting
the Israeli Zionists as well as exerting pressures on the Arab
countries and Palestinian people. In this respect, the
super-Power which styles itself the “natural ally” of the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples is even more cunning
and contemptible in its tactics. However, the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples are heroic peoples who have been
long tested in the raging flames of struggles, and in the end
it is only the Arab and Palestinian peoples themselves, and
not the super-Powers, that will determine the destiny of the
peoples of Palestine and the Middle East,

114. We wish to thank membersof the Committee for the
work they have done and to say that we agree with the way
in which they have approachedthe Palestinian problem. We
hope to seetheir conclusionslead the parties at issue to
find a solution to the suffering and degradation which has
been inflicted on the Palestinianpeople.

109. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly held that Israel must withdraw from all the Arab
territories it has occupied and that the Palestinian peopIe
must regain their national rights. We strongly condemn the
super-Powers’ rivalry in the Middle East. We stand firmly on
the side of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and
support their just struggle againstZionismand hegemonism
and for the recovery of their lost territories and the
restoration of their national rights. All the super-Powers’
schemesto sacrifice the basic interests of the Palestinian
and other Arab peoplesand to write off and emasculatethe
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people are
impermissibleand doomed lo complete failure.
110. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (irztcrpretatior~ Jkvn
Spanish): The reading of the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
Peop&zhas led us to think once againabout the fate of that
12

115. Mr. RIOS (Panama)(interpretrrtion from SpaMsh): I
would first pay tribute to the membersof the Cnmmittee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, established under General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX). The Committee has submitted its second
report and there may be disagreementwith specific parts of
it. But that does not detract from its merits, as we
recognize.
116. Speaking of merits, it is only fair to mention the
indefatigable efforts of the Secretary-General in his incessant search for peace in the Middle East. His constant
travel, his personal contacts, the tenacious work of his
envoys, all speak eloquently of someone who is devoted
and zealous in the work of avoiding a new outburst of
armed struggle in that highly explosive region. The Secrctary-General and his advisersand assistantsunderstand that
the Middle East holds all the elements of a potential
conflagration, and that is why they have spared ncithcr
word nor deed in trying to avoid sucha tragic outburst.
117. 60r those who have followed events in the Middle
East with close attention, the present moment seems
extremely dangerous,full of ominoussigns. The amount of
weaponswhich have been accumulating in the region for
warlike purposes are not exactly signs of peace. On the

contrary, they point to war, with the aggravating factor
that the weapons are becoming increasingly lethal, increasingly destructive, and therefore more likely to involve a
larger number of parties in the conflict. Never before have
we been able to say with more certainty that a situation of
conflict was a danger to international peace and security.

Council had the report of the same Committee before it,
this is the first time that collective efforts have been
undertaken with a view to arriving at an objective and
non-partisan definition of the real nature of the Palestine
problem, which some people have always tried to complicate and bury in hazy historical references,

118. After these remarks, and in keeping with the policy
followed by the delegation of Panama with regard to the
Middle East conflict, we wish to present our position. We
wish to define and to reaffirm the policy of Panama with
regard to all aspects of the conflict in the Middle East.

123. It became necessary in our Organization to formulate
a historical definition of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people in order to make clear to a busy
minority, given to blackmail so as to hide the truth, that
certain stubborn realities will not go away.

119. Security
Council
resolutions
242 (1967)
and
338 (1973) contain the fundamental elements on the basis
of which peace in the region must be established. We
reaffirm our recognition of the rights of the Palestinian
people. We consequently declare that, in order to be
effective, a just and lasting peace in the Middle East must,
according to the terms of resolution 242 (1967), be based
on the following principle:

124. The overwhelming majority of the Members of the
Organization recognizes the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people as they are indicated in the Committee’s
report. However, the definition of those rights within the
United Nations opens up a new dimension in the search for
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, since the
Palestinian problem lies objectively at the very heart of a
settlement of the Middle East crisis. Not to recogniee this
reality would be to display ‘a grave political shortsightedness.

“Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and
respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or
acts of force.”

125. The manoeuvres of the imperialists and their puppets
with a view to preventing the Security Council from
recognizing the rights of the Palestinian people are doomed
to failure. The determination of the Palestine Liberation
Organization in its legitimate struggle against the oppressors
is an invincible weapon, Sooner or later the Palestinian
people will triumph. My delegation reaffirms its militant
support of the struggle of the Palestinian people for
effective recognition of its rights within the objective
framework proposed by the Committee. In other words,
my country entirely approves the pertinent and very wise
recommendations of the Committee. Those recommendations are made with a view to achieving a just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East crisis for the sake of peace
and security in that troubled region where, in the final
analysis, the sordid manoeuvres of international imperialism
ore aimed at the political domination and economic
exploitation of the peoples and the immense resources of
the region.

We also reassert our conviction that that peace entails, as
one of its essential elements, full acceptance of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people as set forth in
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
120. With the support of the world community and the
participation of the parties directly involved, the Geneva
Conference is, in our view, the competent instrument to
open the way to that just and necessary peace. That is why
we must unanimously decide to encourage the Co-Chairmen
of the Conference-the
United States and the Soviet
Union-to put aside every political or hegemonic consideration and to endeavour, in full compliance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, to resort to
all available means of persuasion to make an effective
contribution to bringing about peace in the Middle East,
thus ending this tragic and unduly long chapter in modern
histoty.

126. If, since 1976 when the report was submitted to us,
the Council has been unable to take a decision, it is because
of the diversionary tactics adopted by the enemies of peace
in the Middle East. In my delegation’s view, the report of
the Committee deserves the conscientious and objective
consideration of the Council, and that consideration must
be based on the principle of the equality of the inalienable
rights of the peoples of the world. My country, the People’s
Republic of Benin, would welcome a thorough study of this
question and we hope that authorized voices will be heard
so that the Council may be enabled to take a decision in
complete freedom. Nevertheless, it would seem that, in
order to satisfy certain private arrangements, the Council,
subjected as usual to inadmissible pressures, is holding this
meeting just for appearances and that no positive result is
to be expected from this debate. My delegation. as a
member of the Council, sincerely regrets being involved in
this tragicomedy. The struggling Palestinian people will
know whom to hold responsible.

121. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation from French): My
delegation is happy that the Security Council has at last
met today to consider the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
122. My delegation listened attentively to the statement
of the Chairman of the Committee who was kind enough to
introduce to us the report. My delegation would like to
thank the Chairman of the Committee, Ambassador Fall,
and all the other members of the Committee for the
excellent work done in conformity with the mandate they
received from the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
The Committee’s report is an outstanding piece of work,
thanks to the objectivity of the investigations and debates
reflected in it. As my delegation said in 1976 when the
13

hasbeen carrying out his duties. I do not wishto saymore
becauseIndia, as a memberof the Committeeof whichhe
is the Chairman, is a party to the report which hehas
presented.The views of the Indian delegationwereplaced
before the Security Council /1928th meetingj whenthe
Council considered this matter in June 1976. Wehave
nothing new to add to our substantive support for the
legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine.Their
rights remain inalienableand are protected by international
law, although the question of their exercisehasyet to &
resolved.

127. Mr. HOSSEN (Mauritius): My delegation has listened
attentively to the statement of the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, and we cannot but agree with and fully
support the contents of the report of the Committee. We
congratulate Ambassador Fall of Senegal and his colleagues
for this comprehensive report, which has shed more light on
the plight of the Palestinian people in their selfless
determination to secure their right to national self-determination.
128. The world at large can ill afford, at this critical
juncture in history, to ignore the legitimate rights of the
people of Palestine. We feel tllat the time has now come for
a negotiated settlement, and this in the interest of peace
and security. The views of the Mauritius delegation on this
issue are well known and have been expressed at the United
Nations on various occasions. At this stage, we wish to
reiterate strongly and reaffirm our position regarding the
just and legitimate struggle of the people of Palestine for an
independent homeland. We are happy to note that efforts
aye under way LO secure a comprehensive settlement on a
lasting and just basis, with the participation of all parties
concerned. The Mauritius delegation will endeavour in its
own
humble way to contribute towards securing such a
settlement.

132. In that connexion, my delegation has readwith
interest the text of the Soviet-American statementof
1 October on the joint efforts being madeby the t\vo
Co-Chairmento reconvenethe Geneva Conferenceonthe
Middle East. The two Co-Chairmenhavemadean appealto
all parties for careful consideration of eachother’slegitimate rights and interests.We hope that positiveresponses
to that appeal will facilitate the successof the current
diplomatic initiatives to reconvenethe Conference.Wehave
every confidence that nothing will be prejudged,that all
options will be kept openand that the legitimaterightsand
interests of all parties, including those of the Palestinian
people, will be adequately ensured.Any other courseof
action would not result in a peacesettlementthat wasjust
and enduring.

129. The PRESIDENT: As there are no other speakers, I
should like to make a brief statement as the representative
of INDIA.

133. Resuming my role asPRESIDENT of the Council,[
should like to thank AmbassadorFall onceagainon behalf
of the Council for hisvery comprehensivestatement.

130. I do not share the impression of the representative of
Benin that we are participating in some sort of tragicomedy. On the contrary, it seems to me that we havehad
a very seriousdiscussion,
at leastby thosewho have spoken
on the item beforeus.

134. I may say that, after prior consultationswith
membersof the Council, it has been agreedto adjounlthe
debate on this question for the present.The next meeting
of the Council on this question will be fixed after
consultationsamongmembers.

131. My delegationwishesto expressits deepappreciation
of the tenacity and devotion with which AmbassadorFalI

The meetingraseat 5.45 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

SUS.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)
