S/2002/411

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 11 April 2002 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
As you know, the situation in Angola has changed dramatically in recent
months. The Chiefs of Staff of the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) and the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) signed a Memorandum of
Understanding on 4 April 2002 as an Addendum to the Lusaka Protocol for the
Cessation of Hostilities and the Resolution of Outstanding Military Issues, paving
the way for a general ceasefire. According to the Memorandum, the United Nations
is expected to provide military observers, and technical and material support, as well
as technical expertise to the quartering, demilitarization and reintegration of UNITA
military forces. In addition, it has been asked to provide initial emergency assistance
to the families of demobilized troops and to assist in the quartering, disarming and
repatriation of foreign troops.
The Government of Angola had indicated that the signing of the Memorandum
marked the beginning of the second phase of the peace process dealing with the
remaining political items of the Lusaka Protocol. As you know, my Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim A. Gambari,
travelled to Angola at my request to represent me at the signing ceremony and to
initial the Memorandum as a witness in the company of representatives of the
Troika — Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States of America. I also
asked my Adviser to discuss with the Angolan parties the second phase of the peace
process and to clarify the role of the United Nations in that regard. He is expected to
conclude those discussions on 20 April 2002.
After receiving the report of my Adviser, I intend to submit a comprehensive
report to the Security Council containing recommendations on the future role of the
United Nations in Angola and the resources and structures required to support it. As
requested, my Adviser will provide an oral briefing on his discussions in Luanda to
members of the Council on 23 April 2002.
In the meantime, I should like to request the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) at the current strength for
a period of three months, until 15 July 2002, in order to allow time for further
discussion with the Government of Angola and UNITA, and for the preparation of
an updated and comprehensive report to the Council on the situation in Angola and
the future role of the United Nations in the country.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan
02-33004 (E)

120402

*0233004*
