79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committe.-

C
CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the urgent necessity of strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,38 and of
the adherence by all States to the Convention on the Pro­
hibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, signed in London, Moscow and Wash­
ington, on lO April 1972, 39
Noting with concern reports that chemical weapons have
been used, as well as indications of their emergence in an
increasing number of national arsenals,
Expressing concern at the increasing risk that chemical
weapons may be resorted to again,
Noting international efforts to strengthen relevant inter­
national prohibitions, including efforts to develop appro­
priate fact-finding mechanisms,
Recalling its resolution 39/65 A of 12 December 1984,
Rededicating its efforts to protect mankind from chemi­
cal and biological warfare,
l . Reaffirms the need for strict observance of existing
international obligations regarding prohibitions on chemi­
cal and biological weapons and condemns all actions that
contravene those obligations;
2. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to ensure the most
effective prohibitions possible on chemical and biological
weapons;
3. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to accelerate
its negotiations on a multilateral convention on the com­
plete and effective prohibition of the development, pro­
duction and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their
destruction;
4. Calls upon all States, pending the conclusion of such
a comprehensive ban, to co-operate in efforts to prevent
the use of chemical weapons.
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/93. Israeli nuclear armament
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli
nuclear armament, the latest of which is 39/147 of 17
December I 984,
Recalling resolution 39/54 of 12 December 1984, in
which, inter alia, it called upon all countries of the Middle
East, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, to agree to place all their nuclear
activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safe­
guards,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 487 (198 l)
of 19 June 1981 in which, inter alia, the Council called
upon Israel urgently to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to
commit itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weap­
ons, despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the International Atomic Energy
41 N40/520, annex.

Agency, and to place its nuclear facilities under Agency
safeguards,
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger interna­
tional peace and security as a result of Israel's develop­
ment and acquisition of nuclear weapons and Israel's col­
laboration with South Africa to develop nuclear weapons
and their delivery systems,
I. Takes note of the report of the United Nations Insti­
tute for Disarmament Research on this question;41
2. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's refusal to
renounce any possession of nuclear weapons;
3. Requests once more the Security Council to take
urgent and effective measures to ensure that Israel com­
plies with Security Council resolution 487 (1981) and
places all its nuclear facilities under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Reiterates its request to the Security Council to
investigate Israel's nuclear activities and the collaboration
of other States, parties and institutions in these activities;
5. Calls upon all States and organizations that have not
yet done so to discontinue co-operating with and giving
assistance to Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Reaffirms its condemnation of the continuing
nuclear collaboration between Israel and South Africa;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
Israeli nuclear activities and to report thereon as appropri­
ate to the General Assembly.
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

40/94. General and complete disarmament
A
CONVENTIONAL DISARMAMENT ON A REGIONAL
SCALE

The General Assemblr.
Reaffirming the determination to save succeeding gener­
ations from the scourge of war that is expressed in the Pre­
amble to the Charter of the United Nations,
Again recognizing the urgent need for the harmonizing
of political wills in order to promote initiatives aimed at
reducing expenditure on armaments so that the resources
thus released can be devoted to the social and economic
development of all peoples,
Recalling paragraph 2 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 10 in which
it is stated, inter alia, that the nuclear and conventional
arms build-up threatens to stall the efforts aimed at reach­
ing the goals of development, to become an obstacle on the
road of achieving the new international economic order
and to hinder the solution of other vital problems facing
mankind,
Recallingfurther paragraphs 45 and 46 of the Final Doc­
ument of the Tenth Special Session, 10 in which it declared,
inter alia, that priorities in disarmament negotiations
should be: nuclear weapons; other weapons of mass des­
truction, including chemical weapons; conventional weap­
ons, including any which may be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects; and reduction
of armed forces; and that nothing should preclude States
from conducting negotiations on all priority items concur­
rently,

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

80

Recognizing that unilateral measures to limit or reduce
armaments can make a contribution to the attainment of
disarmament,
Recalling its resolution 37/100 F of 13 December 1982
on regional disarmament, in which it stressed, inter alia,

the importance of the regional measures already adopted,
as well as of efforts of a regional nature undertaken in the
field of nuclear and conventional disarmament,
Recalling also its resolutions 38/73 J of 15 December
1983 and 39/63 F of 12 December 1984 on regional dis­
armament,

I. Urges Governments, where the regional situation so
permits and on the initiative of the States concerned, to
consider and adopt appropriate measures at the regional
level with a view to strengthening peace and security at a
lower level of forces through the limitation and reduction
of armed forces and conventional weapons, under strict
and effective international control, taking into account the
need of States to protect their security, bearing in mind the
inherent right of self-defence enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and without prejudice to the principle
of equal rights and of the self-determination of peoples, in
conformity with the Charter, and taking into account the
need to ensure balance in each phase and to avoid impair­
ing the security of any State;
2. Expresses its most firm support for recent unilateral
measures, adopted by some Governments, which are
intended to limit conventional armaments and reduce
military expenditures and which contribute to the creation
of an atmosphere favourable to the realization of conven­
tional disarmament on a regional scale;
3. Endorses most emphatically the recent regional and
subregional initiatives directed towards the conclusion of
agreements to limit armaments and reduce military
expenditures;
4. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of the militarily
significant States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, for
halting and reversing the arms race, and the priority
assigned to nuclear disarmament in the context of the
advances towards general and complete disarmament;
5. Requests all States to facilitate progress towards
regional disarmament by strictly honouring their commit­
ment to refrain from the threat or use of force and to con­
tribute to the creation of an atmosphere favourable to the
realization of conventional disarmament on a regional
scale;

6. Urges also countries which are suppliers of conven­
tional weapons to co-operate with regional efforts;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide interested
Governments, upon request, with such technical services
and assistance as may be useful in measures of conven­
tional disarmament on a regional scale and also requests
him to submit a report on the situation with regard to this
matter to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Conventional disarma­
ment on a regional scale".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985
42 United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 76.1. 7
43 A/39/400
44 A/40/379:

B
STUDY OF THE QUESTION OF NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE
ZONES IN ALL ITS ASPECTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/99 F of 13 December 1982,

in which it decided that a study should be undertaken to
review and supplement the Comprehensive study of the
question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects42 in
the light of information and experience accumulated since
1975,
Recalling also that it requested the Secretary-General,
with the assistance of an ad hoc group of qualified govern­
mental experts, to carry out the study and to submit it to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session,
Recalling further its resolution 39/ l 5 l B of 17 Decem­
ber 1984, in which it took note of the report of the Secre­
tary-General43 to the effect that the Group of Govern­
mental Experts on Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones had not
been able to conclude the study within the time available
and requested therefore the Secretary-General to continue
the study and to submit the report to the General Assem­
bly at its fortieth session,
Reaffirming its resolutions 3472 A (XXX) of 11 Decem­
ber 1975 and 31/70 of 10 December 1976, in which it
expressed its conviction that the establishment of nuclear­
weapon-free zones could contribute to the security of
members of such zones, to the prevention of proliferation
of nuclear weapons and to the goals of general and com­
plete disarmament,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General,44 to
which is annexed a letter from the Chairman of the Group
of Governmental Experts on Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones,
Appreciating the efforts made by the Group of Govern­
mental Experts,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
and regrets that the Group of Governmental Experts on
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones was unable to complete the
study;
2. Conveys its thanks to the Secretary-General, the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Secretary-General of the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America for the
assistance they have given for the preparation of the study.
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

C
STUDY ON CONVENTIONAL DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 5 l C of 17 December 1984,

in which the Secretary-General was requested to prepare a
report for the General Assembly at its fortieth session con­
taining the views of Member States received regarding the
study on all aspects of the conventional arms race and on
disarmament relating to conventional weapons and armed
forces,45
Further recalling paragraph 81 and other relevant para­
graphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
45 The study was subsequently issued with the title Study on Conventional
Disarmament (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.85.IX.1 ).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fint Committee

of the General Assembly, 10 in which the importance also
of conventional disarmament measures is stressed,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the work of the Organization46 in which it is stated that
"while the fear of nuclear weapons is pervasive because of
their potentially global devastating effect, it is conven­
tional weapons that every day claim countless lives", and
further that "the conventional arms race, moreover,
squanders precious economic resources",
Bearing in mind the immense drain on human, econo­
mic and technological resources caused by the conven­
tional arms race,
Further noting the link between disarmament and devel­
opment and the forthcoming International Conference on
the Relationship between Disarmament and Develop­
ment,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General47
containing the views received from Member States regard­
ing the Study on Conventional Disarmament,
I . Appeals to all Member States to make the widest use
of the Study and its conclusions and recommendations;
2. Invites Member States that have not yet informed
the Secretary-General of their views regarding the Study to
do so no later than 3 1 May l 986;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report
for the General Assembly at its forty-first session contain­
ing further views of Member States received regarding the
Study,
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Conventional disarma­
ment".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

D
PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION,
STOCKPILING AND USE OF RADIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 151 J of 17 December 1984,
1. Takes note of that part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament on the question of radiological
weapons, in particular the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on Radiological Weapons;48
2. Takes note also of the recommendation of the Con­
ference on Disarmament that the Ad Hoc Committee on
Radiological Weapons should be re-established at the
beginning of its 1986 session and that the annex to the
report of the Ad Hoc Committee should be considered as a
basis for further work;
3. Recognizes that the work accomplished by the Ad
Hoc Committee on Radiological Weapons in 1985 made a
further contribution to the solution of the issues entrusted
io it;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to con­
tinue its negotiations on the subject with a view to a
prompt conclusion of its work, taking into account all pro­
posals presented to the Conference to this end, the result of
which should be submitted to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
46 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement
No. I (A/40/1).
47 A/40/486 and Add. I.
48 See Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Fortieth Sesswn, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/40/27 and Corr. I), para. I04.

81

5. Also requests that the Secretary-General transmit to
the Conference on Disarmament all relevant documents
relating to the discussion of all aspects of the issue by the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Prohibition of the
development, production, stockpiling and use of radiolog­
ical weapons".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

E
COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF CONCEPTS OF SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ l 88 H of 20 December 1983,
by which it requested the Secretary-General to carry out,
with the assistance of qualified governmental experts, a
comprehensive study of concepts of security,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General49
transmitting the study undertaken by the Group of Gov­
ernmental Experts to Carry Out a Comprehensive Study of
Concepts of Security,
1. Takes note of the comprehensive study on concepts
of security; so
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Group of Governmental Experts to Carry Out a
Comprehensive Study of Concepts of Security, which
assisted him in the preparation of the study;
3. Commends the study and its conclusions to the
attention of all Member States;
4. Invites all Member States to inform the Secretary­
General, no later than 30 April l 986, of their views
regarding the study;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the reproduction of the study as a
United Nations publication50 and to give it the widest pos­
sible distribution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report con­
taining the views of Member States received regarding the
study.
113th plenary meeting
/2 December 1985

F
STUDY ON THE NAVAL ARMS RACE

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ l 88 G of 20 December 1983,
by which it requested the Secretary-General, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, to can-y out a
comprehensive study on the naval arms race,
Reaffirming its concern about the naval buildup and the
development of naval arms systems,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General51
transmitting the study carried out by the Group of Gov49 A/40/553, annex.
SO Ibid.. annex. The study was subsequently issued wuh the title Concepts
a( Secum.v (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX. I).

5! N40!535.

Session

General Assembly-Fortieth
---------------------=---------------

82
-

ernmental Experts to Carry Out a Comprehensive Study
on the Naval Arms Race, Naval Forces and Naval Arms
Systems,
l . Takes note with satisfaction of the study on the
naval arms race;52
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Group of Governmental Experts to Carry Out a
Comprehensive Study on the Naval Arms Race, Naval
Forces and Naval Arms Systems which assisted him in the
preparation of the study;
3. Commends the study and its conclusions to the
attention of all Member States;
4. Invites all Member States to inform the Secretary­
General, no later than 5 April 1986, of their views con­
cerning the study;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the reproduction of the study as a
United Nations publication 52 and to give it the widest pos­
sible distribution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
Disarmament Commission at its substantive session in
May 1986 a compilation of the views received from Mem­
ber States regarding this issue;
1. Requests the Disarmament Commission to con­
sider, at its forthcoming session in 1986, the issues con­
tained in the study on the naval arms race, both its sub­
stantive content and its conclusions, taking into account
all other relevant present and future proposals, with a view
to facilitating the identification of possible measures in the
field of naval arms reductions and disarmament, pursued
within the framework of progress towards general and
complete disarmament, as well as confidence-building
measures in this field, and to report on its deliberations
and recommendations to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Naval armaments and
disarmament".
113th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

----·- ··------· ---

Noting that the agenda of the Conference on Disarma­
ment for 1985 included the item entitled "Nuclear weap­
ons in all aspects" and that the programme of work of the
Conference for both parts of its session held in 1985 con­
tained the item entitled "Cessation of the nuclear-arms
race and nuclear disarmament",53
Recalling the proposals and statements made in the
Conference on Disarmament on those items, 54
Considering that the cessation of production of fission­
able material for weapons purposes and the progressive
conversion and transfer of stocks to peaceful uses would be
a significant step towards halting and reversing the
nuclear-arms race,
Considering that the prohibition of the production of fis­
sionable material for nuclear weapons and other explosive
devices also would be an important measure in facilitating
the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
explosive devices,
Requests the Conference on Disarmament, at an appro­
priate stage of its work on the item entitled "Nuclear
weapons in all aspects", to pursue its consideration of the
question of adequately verified cessation and prohibition
of the production of fissionable material for nuclear weap­
ons and other nuclear explosive devices and to keep the
General Assembly informed of the progress of that consid­
eration.
113th plenary meeting
/2 December 1985

H
NUCLEAR-WEAPON FREEZE

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/9 l H of 16 December 1978,
34/87 D of 1 1 December 1979, 35/ 156 H of 12 December
1980, 36/97 G of 9 December 1981, 37/99 E of 13 Decem­
ber 1982, 38/ 188 E of 20 December 1983 and 39/15 1 H of
17 December 1984, in which it requested the Committee
on Disarmament, 15 at an appropriate stage of the imple­
mentation of the Programme of Action set forth in section
III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, 10 and of its work on the item
entitled "Nuclear weapons in all aspects", to consider
urgently the question of adequately verified cessation and
prohibition of the production of fissionable material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices and
to keep the Assembly informed of the progress of that con­
sideration,

The General Assembly,
Expressing its deep alarm over the continuation and
intensification of the nuclear-arms race, which seriously
increases the threat of nuclear war,
Taking into account the great responsibility of nuclear­
weapon States for the preservation of universal peace and
the prevention of nuclear war,
Recalling its previous resolutions calling for a nuclear­
weapon freeze both in quantitative and in qualitative
terms,
Recalling also that on several occasions it has expressed
the firm conviction that at present the conditions are most
propitious for such a freeze,
Convinced that a nuclear-weapon freeze would raise the
level of trust among States, ease international tension and
diminish the threat of nuclear war,
Convinced also that compliance with the obligations of
the freeze could be verified by national technical means as
well as through some additional verification measures
based on co-operation, taking into account previous
nuclear-arms limitation negotiations,
Noting the wide support for the Joint Declaration issued
on 22 May 1984 55 and the Delhi Declaration issued on 28
January 1985, 24 by the heads of State or Government of
six States Members of the United Nations, which con­
tained an appeal to the nuclear-weapon States to halt test­
ing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and
their means of deli very.

5 2 Ibid., annex. The study was subsequently issued with the title The Naval
Arms Race (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.JX.3).
5 3 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/40/27 and Corr. I ), paras. 10 and 1 2.

5 4 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/40/27 and Corr. I ), sect. lll.B.
55 A/39/277-S/ 1 6587, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records oj
the Security Council, Thirty-ninth Year, Supplement for April, May and June
1984, document S/1 6587, annex.

G
PROHIBITION OF THE PRODUCTION OF FISSIONABLE
MATERIAL FOR WEAPONS PURPOSES

III. Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Flnt Committee

Deeply regretting that some nuclear Powers have not
responded positively to its relevant appeals or to appeals
and proposals by other States made repeatedly during the
last three years,
I. Reaffirms its appeal to all nuclear-weapon States to
freeze, from a specific date, their nuclear arsenals on a glo­
bal scale and under appropriate verification as a first step
to their reduction with the view to their complete elimina­
tion;
2. Urges once again the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America, which pos­
sess the largest nuclear arsenals, to freeze, in the first place
and simultaneously, their nuclear weapons on a bilateral
basis by way of example to the other nuclear-weapon
States;
3. Strongly believes that all the other nuclear-weapon
States should subsequently and as soon as possible freeze
their nuclear weapons.
1 13th plenary meeting
1 2 December 1 985

I
CURBING THE NAVAL ARMS RACE: LIMITATION AND
REDUCTION OF NAVAL ARMAMENTS AND EXTEN­
SION OF CONFIDENCE-BU ILDING MEASURES TO SEAS
AND OCEANS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 38/ 188 F of 20 December 1983
and 39/151 I of 17 December 1984,
Convinced that all channels of the arms race, in particu­
lar the nuclear-arms race, should be effectively covered by
the efforts to halt and reverse it,
Disturbed by the growing threat to peace, international
security and global stability posed by the continuing esca­
lation of the naval arms race,
Alarmed by the even more frequent use of naval fleets or
other naval formations for demonstrations or use of force
and as an instrument to exert pressure against sovereign
States, especially developing countries, to interfere in their
internal affairs, to commit acts of armed aggression and
intervention and to preserve the remnants of the colonial
system,
A ware that the growing presence of naval fleets and the
intensification of the naval activities of some States in con­
flict areas or far from their own shores increase tensions in
�hose ar�as and could adversely affect the security of the
mternat1onal sea lanes there, the freedom of navigation
and the exploitation of maritime resources,
Firmly convinced that the undertaking of urgent steps to
curb military confrontation at sea would be a significant
contribution to preventing war, especially nuclear war, and
to strengthening peace and international security,
A ware of the numerous initiatives and concrete propo­
sals to undertake effective measures aimed at limiting
naval activities, limiting and reducing naval armaments
and extending confidence-building measures to seas and
oceans,
Convinced that such measures should be worked out and
implemented with due regard to the principle of not harm­
ing the legitimate security interests of any State concerned,
56 Resolution 2832 (XXVI).

57 Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), docu-

ment A/CONF.62/ I 22.

83

Stressing once again the importance of relevant meas­
ures of a regional character, such as the implementation of
the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace56
and the transformation of the Mediterranean into a zone
of peace, security and co-operation,
Reaffirming once again that seas and oceans, being of
vital importance to mankind, should be used exclusively
for peaceful purposes in accordance with the regime estab­
lished by the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, 57
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General58 and
other documents, 59 submitted in pursuance of resolutions
38/ 188 F and 391 1 5 1 I, which contain the replies of Mem­
ber States, including a major naval Power, on the modali­
ties for negotiations, as well as various specific ideas and
new proposals for joint measures on curbing the naval
arms race and naval activities,
Noting with satisfaction that the prevailing view expres­
sed in these replies strongly favours an early commence­
ment of negotiations aimed at curbing the naval arms race
and naval activities, strengthening confidence and security
at sea and reducing naval armaments,
Taking note of the study on the naval arms race52 car­
ried out by the Secretary-General with the assistance of the
Group of Governmental Experts to Carry Out a Compre­
hensive Study on the Naval Arms Race, Naval Forces and
Naval Arms Systems,
Considering that the discussion on the subject that has
taken place at the 1985 substantive session of the Disarm­
ament Commission constitutes a valuable initial step in
the common search for ways and means which could
ensure proper conditions for more detailed and thorough
consideration of the issue of curbing the naval arms race,
with a view to holding appropriate negotiations,
I . Appeals once again to all Member States, in particu­
lar to nuclear-weapon States and other major naval Pow­
ers, to refrain from enlarging their naval presence and
activities in areas of conflict or tension, or far from their
own shores;
2. Reaffirms once again its recognition of the urgent
need to start negotiations with the participation of the
major naval Powers, in particular the nuclear-weapon
States, and other interested States on the limitation of
naval activities, the limitation and reduction of naval
armaments and the extension of confidence-building
measures to seas and oceans, especially to areas with the
busiest international sea lanes or to regions where the
probability of conflict situations is high;
3. Invites Member States, particularly the major naval
Powers, including the nuclear-weapon States, to consider
the possibility of holding direct consultations, bilateral
and/or multilateral, with a view to preparing the opening
at an early date of such negotiations;
4. Also invites Member States, especially those that
have not yet done so, to communicate to the Secretary­
General not later than April 1986 their views concerning
the modalities for holding the multilateral negotiations
referred to above, including the possibilities for holding
them at the Conference on Disarmament at Geneva;
5. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
the consideration of this question as a matter of priority in
an appropriate subsidiary body, taking due account of the
proposals made and the views expressed on the subject­
matter contained in the replies of Member States to the
Secretary-General, in the verbatim records of the Disarm58 A/39/4 1 9 and Corr. I .
5 9 A/CN . 1 0/70 and Add . 1 -5.

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

84

ament Commission, in the working papers and the study
on the naval arms race, as well as of future initiatives, with
a view to submitting its recommendations to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Curbing the naval
arms race: limitation and reduction of naval armaments
and extension of confidence-building measures to seas and
oceans".
I 13th plenary meeting
12 December I 985

J
FURTHER MEASURES IN THE FIELD OF DISARMAMENT
FOR THE PREVENTION OF AN ARMS RACE ON THE
SEA-BED, THE OCEAN FLOOR AND IN THE SUBSOIL
THEREOF

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/1 88 B of 20 December 1 983,
in which it reiterated its hope for the widest possible
adherence to the Treaty on the Prohibition of the
Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of
Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and
in the Subsoil Thereof,60 called again upon all States to
refrain from any action which might lead to the extension
of the arms race to the sea-bed and ocean floor, and also
requested the Conference on Disarmament to proceed
promptly with consideration of further measures in the
field of disarmament for the prevention of an arms race on
the sea-bed, the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof,
Taking note of the part of the report of the Conference
on Disarmament on its consideration of further measures
in the field of disarmament for the prevention of an arms
race on the sea-bed, the ocean floor and in the subsoil
thereof,6 1
Noting that the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea had concluded and that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea57 was opened for signa­
ture on I O December 1 982,
Emphasizing the interest of all States, including specifi­
cally the interest of developing countries, in the progress of
the exploration and use of the sea-bed and the ocean floor
and its resources for peaceful purposes,
Requests the Conference on Disarmament, in consulta­
tion with the States parties to the Treaty on the Prohibi­
tion of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other
Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the
Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, taking into
account existing proposals and any relevant technological
developments, to continue its consideration of further
measures in the field of disarmament for the prevention of
an arms race on the sea-bed, the ocean floor and in the
subsoil thereof.
1 1 3th plenary meeting
12 December I 985
60 Resolutbn 2660 (XXV), annex.
61 Offu:ial Records of the General Asseml>lv. /·,1r11rrh Session. Supplement
No. 27(N40/27 and Corr. I ), sect. Ill l .

K
OBJECTIVE INFORMATION ON MILITARY MATTERS

The General Assembly,
Noting that misperceptions of the military capabilities

and the intentions of potential adversaries, which could be
caused, inter a/ia, by a lack of objective information, could
induce States to undertake armaments programmes lead­
ing to the acceleration of the arms race, in particular the
nuclear-arms race, and to heightened international ten­
sions,
Recalling paragraph l 05 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 10 which
encourages Member States to ensure a better flow of infor­
mation with regard to the various aspects of disarmament
to avoid dissemination of false and tendentious informa­
tion concerning armaments and to concentrate on the dan­
ger of escalation of the arms race and on the need for gen­
eral and complete disarmament under effective
international control,
Recognizing that the adoption of practical, confidence­
building measures on a global, regional or subregional
level would greatly contribute to a reduction in interna­
tional tension,
Aware that objective information on the military capa­
bilities, in particular of nuclear-weapon States and other
militarily significant States, could contribute to the build­
ing of confidence among States and to the conclusion of
concrete disarmament agreements, and thereby help to
halt and reverse the arms race,
Recalling its resolutions 3 7 /99 G of I 3 December I 982
and 38/ 1 88 C of 20 December 1 983,
Aware of the existence, under the auspices of the United
Nations, of an international system for the standardized
reporting of military expenditures, and that annual reports
on military expenditures are now being received from an
increasing number of States,
1 . Expresses its conviction that a better flow of objec­
tive information on military capabilities could help relieve
international tension and contribute to the building of con­
fidence among States on a global, regional or subregional
level and to the conclusion of concrete disarmament agree­
ments;
2. Urges all States, in particular nuclear-weapon States
and other militarily significant States, to consider imple­
menting additional measures based on the principles of
openness and transparency such as, for example, the inter­
national system for the standardized reporting of military
expenditures, with the aim of facilitating the availability of
objective information on, as well as objective assessment
of, military capabilities;
3. Invites all Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General before 30 April 1 986 the measures they
have adopted to contribute to greater openness in military
matters in general and in particular to improve the flow of
objective information on military capabilities;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementa­
tion of the provisions of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Objective information
on military matters".
1 13th plenary meeting
12 December / 985

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

L
COMPLIANCE WITH ARMS LIMITATION AND
DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the abiding concern of all Member States
for preserving respect for rights and obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law,
Convinced that observance of the Charter of the United
Nations, relevant treaties and other sources of interna­
tional law is essential for the strengthening of international
security,
Mindful in particular of the fundamental importance of
full implementation and strict observance of agreements
on arms limitation and disarmament if individual nations
and the international community are to derive enhanced
security from them,
Stressing that any violation of such agreements not only
adversely affects the security of States parties but can also
create security risks for other States relying on the con­
straints and commitments stipulated in those agreements,
Stressing further that any weakening of confidence in
such agreements diminishes their contribution to global or
regional stability and to further disarmament and arms
limitation efforts and undermines the credibility and effec­
tiveness of the international legal system,
Believing that compliance with arms limitation and dis­
armament agreements by States parties is, therefore, a
matter of interest and concern to the international com­
munity, and noting the role that the United Nations could
play in that regard,
1. Urges all States parties to arms limitation and dis­
armament agreements to implement and comply with the
entirety of the provisions subscribed to;
2. Calls upon all Member States to give serious consid­
eration to the implications of non-compliance with those
obligations for international security and stability, as well
as for the prospects for further progress in the field of dis­
armament;
3. Appeals to all Member States to support efforts
aimed at the resolution of non-compliance questions, with
a view towards encouraging strict observance of the provi­
sions subscribed to and maintaining or restoring the integ­
rity of arms limitation or disarmament agreements;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide Member
States with assistance that may be necessary in this regard.
1 13th plenary meeting
12 December 1 985

M
THIRD REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/74 of 15 December 1 983, in
which, inter alia, it noted that in the Final Document of
the Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held at
Geneva from 1 1 August to 7 September 1 980, the Con­
ference had proposed to the depositary Governments that
a third conference to review the operation of the Treaty be
. 6 2 See Review Conference o(the Part1e, to the Treatv on the Non-l'ro/ifera­
tron of Nuclear Weapons. Final Document, Parr I ( N PT!CON F.1112211)

(Geneva. 1 980), para. 3 2

convened in 1985 62 and that there appeared to be a con­
sensus among the parties that the Third Review Con­
ference should be held at Geneva in August/September of
that year,
Recalling that States parties to the Treaty met at Geneva
from 27 August to 2 1 September 1985 to review the opera­
tion of the Treaty with a view to assuring that the purposes
of the preamble and the provisions of the Treaty were
being realized,
Notes with satisfaction that on 2 1 September 1 985, the
Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferat10n of Nuclear Weapons adopted by
consensus a Final Declaration. 8
l l 3th plenary meeting
12 December 1985

N
DISARMAMENT AND THE MAINTENANCE OF
INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations.
Solemnly reaffirming the common recognition of Mem­
ber States of the unique importance of the United Nations
and the Charter of the United Nations through which they
are all committed "to practice tolerance and live together
in peace" and "to unite our strength to maintain interna­
tional peace and security'', as well as "to ensure . . . that
armed force shall not be used, save in the common inter­
est",
Further determined to implement the provisions of the
Charter to ensure the maintenance of international peace
and security, in particular the common commitments of
Member States to "settle international disputes by peace­
ful means" and to "refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integ­
rity or political independence of any State",
Affirming the critical relationship described in the Char­
ter between the maintenance of international peace and
security and the principles governing disarmament and the
reguhtion of armaments,
Reaffirming that the promotion of fundamental human
rights, the equal rights of nations large and small and the
promotion of social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom remain irreducible goals of the United
Nations,
Deeply concerned that the arms race directly threatens
the right of people to better standards of life and economic
and social advancement,
Recognizing once again the validity of, and reaffirming
the commitment of Member States to, the Final Docu­
ment of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assem­
bly, 1°
Noting that disarmament and arms limitation is neces­
sarily a matter for negotiation and carefully worked out
agreements which take account of all the concerns of all
participating Governments,
Reaffirming the statement contained in paragraph 13 of
the Final Document 1 0 that genuine and lasting peace can
be created only through the effective implementation of
the security system provided for in the Charter and the

86

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

speedy and substantial reduction of arms and armed
forces, leading ultimately to general and complete disarm­
ament under effective international control,
Taking into account the existence of negotiations in
multilateral, regional and bilateral forums,
Convinced of the need for all States to work to achieve
general and complete disarmament, including the conclu­
sion of arms limitation and disarmament agreements
wherever feasible,
Further convinced that adequate verification is an essen­
tial ingredient if confidence is to be placed in arms limita­
tion or disarmament measures,
Mindful of the provisions of paragraph 24 of the Final
Document, •0
l . Declares the urgent need for effective measures to
ensure achievement of the principles and priorities for dis­
armament as agreed upon by consensus at the tenth special
session of the General Assembly, to be supported by the
following objectives:
(a) Avoidance of war, in particular nuclear war;
(b) Cessation of existing armed conflicts and military
threats of all kinds;
(c) Cessation of the arms race in all its manifestations:
(i) In nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction, as well as conventional weapons;
(ii) In qualitative as well as quantitative terms;
(iii) On the regional as well as global scale;
(d) Prevention of an arms race in space;
(e) Deep reductions in nuclear arsenals ultimately lead­
ing to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons under
effective, legally binding and verifiable arrangements;
(I) The prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices;
(g) Elimination of chemical weapons and effective,
legally binding and verifiable measures against the devel­
opment, production, stockpiling and use of biological or
chemical weapons;
(h) Reduction in arms of all types by all States to levels
consistent with their right of self-defence as recognized by
Article 5 1 of the Charter of the United Nations;
(z) The exercise of responsibility by exporters of weap­
ons and suppression of the clandestine or illegal traffic in
weapons;
(J) Application of the physical and intellectual
resources of humankind for peaceful purposes;
2. Calls upon all States to conduct their relations and
to refrain from the use or threat of force in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Calls upon all States to undertake measures specifi­
cally designed to build confidence in order to contribute to
the creation of favourable conditions for the adoption of
additional disarmament measures and to further relaxa­
tion of international tension;
4. Calls upon all States faithfully to comply with and
implement all provisions of multilateral, regional and
bilateral disarmament and arms limitation agreements to
which they are a party and to negotiate in good faith for
the conclusion of additional treaties and conventions,
multilateral, regional or bilateral as appropriate, taking
into account the need for strict observance of an accept­
able balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations for
nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon States;
63 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session. Supp/emem
No. 4.f(A/40/42), para. 30.

5. Also calls upon all States, including those with sig­
nificant military arsenals as well as those which have spc cial responsibilities as recognized by consensus in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, to exercise their responsibilities regarding dis­
armament and arms limitation in good faith and according
to the provisions of the Final Document, in order to facili­
tate the achievement of meaningful disarmament and
arms limitation measures.
l l 3th plenary meeting
1 2 December 1 985

0
REVIEW OF THE ROLE OF THE UNITED NATIONS IN
THE RELD OF DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 5 I G of 1 7 December 1 984.
Bearing in mind that the primary purpose of the lJ nited
Nations is to maintain international peace and security,
Reaffirming its conviction that genuine and lasting peace
can be created only through the effective implementation
of the security system provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations and the speedy and substantial reduction
of arms and armed forces, by international agreement and
mutual example, leading ultimately to general and com­
plete disarmament under effective international control,
Reaffirming further that the United Nations, in accord­
ance with its Charter, has a central role and primary
responsibility in the sphere of disarmament,
Regretting that, especially in recent years, no substantive
progress has been made in the field of disarmament,
Recognizing the need for the United Nations. in dis­
charging its central role and primary responsibility in the
sphere of disarmament, to play a more active role in the
field of disarmament in accordance with its primary pur­
pose under the Charter to maintain international peace
and security,
Taking into account the part of the report of the Disarm­
ament Commission relating to this question,63
I. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
its consideration of the role of the United Nations in the
field of disarmament as a matter of priority at its next sub­
stantive session, in 1986, with a view to the elaboration of
concrete recommendations and proposals, as appropriate.
taking into account, inter alia, the views and suggestions of
Member States as well as the aforementioned documents
on the subject;
2. Requests further the Disarmament Commission to
submit its report on the subject, including findings, recom­
mendations and proposals, as appropriate, to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Review of the role of
the United Nations in the field of disarmament: report of
the Disarmament Commission".
l l 3th plenary meeting
l 2 December l 985
