A/RES/71/13

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 December 2016

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 126 (w)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 November 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/71/L.9 and Add.1)]

71/13.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Central
European Initiative

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/111 of 9 December 2011, by which it granted
observer status to the Central European Initiative,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/7 of 19 November 2012 and 69/8 of
11 November 2014, in which it invited the specialized agencies and other
organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to cooperate with the
Initiative in order to continue joint activities for the achievement of common
objectives,
Recalling further the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations that
encourage activities through regional cooperation to promote the goals and
objectives of the United Nations,
Appreciating the active involvement of the Initiative in establishing
cooperation with the United Nations system and relevant international and regional
organizations, aimed at the furthering of political and socioeconomic development
by covering all its relevant dimensions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
resolution 69/8, 1
1.
Notes the continuing efficiency of the Central European Initiative as a
promoter of political dialogue, thus supporting the stability, security and economic
growth of its member States in a project-oriented way;
2.
Values, in particular, the great adaptability of the Initiative to political
changes and its immediate response to urgent issues through providing assistance to
affected countries in the region and connecting relevant stakeholders;
3.
Welcomes, in this context, the extraordinary call for proposals on
migration and security issues launched by the Initiative in 2015, as well as its
network events regarding migration crisis management;
_______________
1

See A/71/160-S/2016/621, sect. II.

16-20634 (E)

*1620634*

A/RES/71/13

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Central European Initiative

4.
Also welcomes, in this context, the cooperation established through
memorandums of understanding with specialized organizations, such as the
Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional Initiative, based in Skopje, the International
Centre for Migration Policy Development, based in Vienna, and the International
Organization for Migration, based in Geneva;
5.
Notes the vigorous efforts of the Central European Initiative to support,
elaborate and realize concrete joint regional projects in strategic areas, often in
cooperation with other important regional and international players, in order to
increase the financial support for projects in the region;
6.
Appreciates, in this context, the efforts undertaken by the Initiative in
intensifying its cooperation with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe through joining forces for the implementation of three pr ojects addressing
relevant issues on gender equality, on the fight against corruption and on
reconciliation in the region;
7.
Acknowledges, also in this context, the fruitful cooperation between the
Initiative and the European Union, as one of the main co -funders of the Initiative’s
projects, and supports the continuous efforts of the Initiative to take concrete steps
to establish additional mutually beneficial partnerships with the European Union;
8.
Also acknowledges the commitment of the Initiative to supporting its
non-European Union member States in their integration and modernization
processes;
9.
Welcomes, in this context, the decision of Belarus to take over the
Initiative’s annual presidency in 2017;
10. Also welcomes the continuing financial support by the Central European
Initiative Trust Fund at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
financed entirely by Italy, funding mainly technical cooperation projects related to
larger operations of the Bank in non-European Union States members of the
Initiative, and covering relevant areas including agriculture, transport, energy,
assistance to small and medium-sized enterprises, municipal infrastructure and
services, banking, insurance, institution-building and capacity-building;
11. Appreciates the significant contribution of the Initiative in providing
grants for small-scale multilateral projects in priority areas through the Central
European Initiative Cooperation Fund, to which all member States con tribute, as
well as the financial support by the Know-how Exchange Programme, financed by
Austria and Italy, providing grants for projects promoting capacity -building and best
practices in non-European Union member States;
12. Notes the significant contribution of the Initiative in the areas of culture
and the media by supporting various events, prizes and other initiatives promoting,
in particular, intercultural dialogue and press freedom;
13. Also notes the engagement of the Initiative in support of mobility for
young officials, students and researchers through specific instruments and
programmes;
14. Acknowledges the substantial role of the Parliamentary and Business
Dimensions of the Initiative in fostering regional cooperation;
15. Appreciates the commitment of the Initiative to intensifying cooperation
with the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system, in particular mutual participation in
2/3

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Central European Initiative

A/RES/71/13

events and meetings of common interest, and to developing practical and resultsoriented joint projects;
16. Values the commitment of the Initiative, which presented its support on
the occasion of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post -2015
development agenda, held in 2015, to contributing to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, 2 in particular through focusing on sustainable
development and interconnectivity on a regional level;
17. Invites the Secretary-General to intensify the exchange with the Initiative
in order to continue the fruitful cooperation and to facilitate coordination between
the secretariats;
18. Encourages the specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system to strengthen cooperation with the
Initiative through common action aimed at achieving the shared goals;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session,
under the item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations”, the sub-item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative”.
48th plenary meeting
21 November 2016

_______________
2

Resolution 70/1.

3/3
