S/PV.9145

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9145th meeting

Tuesday, 4 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Abbey
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-fifth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2022/696)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2631
(2022) (S/2022/714)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-61280 (E)
*2261280*

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): I should also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Nicolas
de Rivière, Permanent Representative of France, for
his service as President of the Council for the month of
September 2022. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
De Rivière and his team for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-fifth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2022/696)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2631 (2022)
(S/2022/714)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/696, which contains the thirty-fifth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013), and document S/2022/714, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2631 (2022).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
2/17

04/10/2022

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: Calls for Iraq’s leaders
to overcome their differences and form a Government
have abounded since elections were held a year ago.
Over the past 12 months, we underlined time and
again the importance of maintaining calm, dialogue,
constitutional compliance, respect for democratic
principles, the unimpeded working of State institutions
and a functioning Government to effectively address
the legitimate demands for better public services,
jobs, security, an end to corruption, and justice and
accountability, to name but a few elements.
But regretfully, discord and power play prevailed
over a sense of common duty. And as a direct result
of protracted political inaction, Iraq experienced some
very critical and dangerous hours. With protests and
counter-protests being staged, tensions were on the
rise for months. Supporters of political parties, many
of whom carry weapons, got increasingly worked up.
And one did not need a crystal ball to see where that
could lead. Meanwhile, the ordinary Iraqi citizen was
being held hostage to an unpredictable and untenable
situation — a dire one that culminated on Monday,
29 August when the country stood on the brink of total
chaos. Political tensions degenerated into armed clashes
in the heart of the capital and elsewhere. The sad result
was dozens of people killed and hundreds wounded.
Those tragic developments are indisputably the
result of the inability of Iraq’s political class to cast
the die. In other words, actors across the spectrum
failed to place the national interest first. They left
the country in a prolonged impasse, further fuelling
already simmering anger. And while one would expect
that recent events would have served as a wake-up call,
the harsh reality is that, to date, intra-Shia strife has not
abated, and neither have Kurdish parties come closer to
agreeing on a presidential candidate.
Therefore, where do we stand now? The situation
remains highly volatile. After more than two months
of paralysis, Parliament resumed its sessions last
Wednesday, 28 September, amid very tight security
measures. Those measures, however, did not prevent
further incidents, including a number of indirect-fire
projectile impacts as well as clashes between protesters
and security forces.
To be clear: there is zero justification for violence.
Yet in this instance again, many were injured — 11
civilians and more than 120 members of the Iraqi security
forces, all sons of the country. And we have not seen
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

the end of it yet. Last night, after three days of rocket
attacks, Basra witnessed intense fighting, while smaller
incidents were reported in other southern governorates.
On Saturday, 1 October, we remembered the
victims of the Tishreen demonstrations. Three years
ago, as Council members will recall, Iraqis took to the
streets to protest a lack of political, economic and social
prospects. It was a mobilization on an unprecedented
scale, and it turned into a tragedy. Several hundred
Iraqis died, and many more were severely injured,
abducted, threatened or intimidated. As a result of
the protests, the previous Government stepped down,
and early elections were held a year ago. In other
words — and I have said it often — last year’s elections
were extremely hard-earned. With that in mind, the
absence of a functioning Government 12 months later
is hard to justify.
Last Saturday, new protests were expected. The
hope was that they would be held peacefully, but, in the
early morning hours, we woke up to another alert from
our sense-and-warn alarm system. The day was not
off to a promising start. Throughout the day, however,
protester numbers remained relatively low, not because
Iraqis are now suddenly content, but because they do
not wish to be instrumentalized in the ongoing power
struggle, as was made abundantly clear by many of
those who took to the streets in 2019.
It must be said that, last Saturday, the Iraqi security
forces demonstrated great restraint in their response,
adhering strictly to given orders. Regretfully, some
disruptive elements were present in the streets, and I
can only reiterate the importance of keeping any protest
from descending into violence. The fact is that the
smallest spark can suffice to trigger a major disaster.
We lent our full support to the national dialogue
under the auspices of Iraq’s Prime Minister, a forum
that has thus far been convened twice. For that initiative
to bear fruit however, it is crucial that all parties — I
repeat, all parties — take their seat. As an aside, it is
worth noting that none of the parties was represented
by women. That said, it is also incumbent upon all to
act responsibly in times of heightened tensions. That
means refraining from making provocative statements
and feeding into counter-productive, not to say harmful,
narratives.
While I am usually disinclined to air our initiatives
publicly, I would like to emphasize our intense
engagement during the past months and weeks — from

S/PV.9145

participating in dialogue and holding countless bilateral
meetings to drafting road maps and conducting shuttle
diplomacy in various forms. Believe me when I say that
we tried, non-stop. That said, we do not have a magic
wand. Ultimately, it all comes down to political will.
Equally important is the understanding that, at the end
of the day, one can only be influential if one accepts the
influence of others. If only there was a willingness to
compromise. One thing is clear: the persistent and overt
lack of trust perpetuates a zero-sum game in which
commitment to concrete solutions is being avoided.
Nevertheless, there are solutions. Of course, every
situation has its own history and idiosyncrasies. But let
me be clear: since the elections were held a year ago,
all sides — and I mean all sides — have made strategic
mistakes and miscalculations. Even more importantly,
they missed many valuable opportunities to resolve
their differences. With the risk of further strife and
bloodshed still very tangible, dwelling on who did what
and when is no longer an option. Therefore, it is time for
all of Iraq’s leaders to engage in dialogue, collectively
define core Iraqi needs and pull the country back from
the edge.
In other words, all leaders should assume
responsibility and return the spotlight to where it must
be focused: on the people of Iraq. Make no mistake:
public disillusionment is running sky-high. Too many
Iraqis have lost faith in the ability of Iraq’s political
class to act in the interest of the country and its people.
A continued failure to address that loss of faith will
only exacerbate Iraq’s problems.
Focus is equally important. We have seen the
announcement of a plethora of initiatives since the
elections in October 2021, but too many tracks and
too many cooks distract, confuse and blur the picture.
As I said, there are solutions, but for solutions to see
the daylight, genuine and timely dialogue is essential,
including a willingness to compromise. Indeed, it
goes without saying that delivering a functioning
Government is merely the first step to overcoming the
current crisis in a sustainable way.
A wide range of critical issues must be addressed.
Chief among them is the adoption of a federal budget,
in the absence of which State spending could come to a
halt by the end of the year. Work towards transformative
change must be kicked off. Let us face it: since 2003, too
many opportunities to conduct meaningful and muchneeded reform have been wasted. Nearly 20 years on,

22-612803/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq’s leaders must acknowledge that systemic change
is vital to the country’s future.
Attempts to push through incremental reform,
including in the fight against corruption, have failed
thus far, having been actively undermined or obstructed.
I have said it many times, including in this Chamber:
corruption is a core feature of Iraq’s current political
economy, built into everyday transactions. It is not just
me saying this. This is widely recognized.
A related feature is Iraq’s reliance on patronage and
clientelism, which has resulted in a ballooning inefficient
public sector that functions more as an instrument of
political favour than as a servant of the people. While
Iraq is by no means a poor country, private and partisan
interests conspire to divert resources away from critical
investment in national development. What I am saying
is that Iraq’s political and governance system ignores
the needs of the Iraqi people or, even worse, actively
works against them.
Pervasive corruption is a major root cause of Iraqi
dysfunctionality, and, frankly, no leader can claim to be
shielded from it. Keeping the system as-is will backfire
sooner rather than later. That said, it is important to
frame it as precisely that — a system — rather than a
collection of individuals or a series of events.
As calls for early national elections have become
more pronounced, allow me to elaborate further on
the topic.
Besides the obvious benefits of political parties
clarifying a number of matters in advance, we also
emphasized the importance of following established
legal procedures and mechanisms. We also made clear
that, at this point in time, we would not be able to
confirm the ability of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq to assist in new elections, as that would
depend on a formal request by the Iraqi Government
addressed to the Security Council and, of course,
subsequent deliberations.
Other questions are also worth raising. For instance,
what are the guarantees that new national elections will
not be held in vain once again? How will Iraqi citizens
be persuaded that it is worth casting their vote? And
what reassurances would the international community
need for them to support new elections?
On the topic of elections, we have also actively
engaged with Kurdistan Region authorities and
political parties on several outstanding issues related
4/17

04/10/2022

to the sixth Kurdistan Region parliamentary elections.
The elections were initially scheduled for 1 October,
that is, three days ago. To date, however, Kurdistan
Region political parties have yet to find common
ground, and ,once again, the yellow and green divide
is the single most disruptive factor impeding progress.
In no uncertain terms, we made clear that, here also,
we do not have a magic wand. Here too it comes down
to political will. Party leaders should understand that
they can only be truly influential if they accept the
influence of others, and therefore a willingness to
compromise is essential. More generally, monopolizing
power breeds instability. That goes for both Iraq as a
whole and for the Kurdistan region. I want to stress
that the political fallout of not holding timely Kurdistan
region parliamentary elections, of failing to manage
public expectations properly and of neglecting basic
democratic principles will have a high cost, and if that
were to happen, it would not be for lack of warning.
That is why we are impatiently waiting for the parties
to fulfil their many promises and act in the service of
the peoples of the Kurdistan region.
When I addressed the Council in May (see
S/PV.9034), I raised the alarm about the fact that
Turkish and Iranian shelling in the north had become a
new normal for Iraq. With last week’s Iranian attacks,
all I can do now is repeat myself. Those reckless
acts — which have devastating consequences, killing
and injuring people — must cease. No neighbour
should treat Iraq as its backyard. No neighbour should
be allowed to routinely violate Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity with impunity, yet it is happening
time and again.
On the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including
the national archives, we are pleased to see that
Iraq’s efforts to reach new witnesses have continued
unhindered. Those witnesses are of great importance
in helping to locate new potential burial sites. The
contribution of the tripartite Member States through
their provision of satellite imagery analysis is equally
important. The handover by Iraq on 4 July of additional
missing Kuwaiti property, including a historical sword,
two historical copies of the Holy Qur’an and items
belonging to the Kuwaiti Ministry of Information
marks another positive step. Now it is hoped that with
persistence, determination and commitment from all,
more results will soon emerge.
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, let me again emphasize the
importance of embarking on a path towards political
stability. And to repeat it once more, there are solutions.
While it is in the power of any Iraqi leader to drag the
country into a protracted and deadly conflict, it is just
as much in their power to place national interests first
and lift the country out of crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her frank
and useful briefing and for her leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
continues to play such an important and respected role
in the country.
I must start by strongly condemning the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps missile and drone attacks in
the Iraqi Kurdistan region on 28 September. Iran fired
at least 48 ballistic missiles, which is a major escalation
of its violations of Iraqi sovereignty. Its flagrant
violations of Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
must stop. Such a brazen attack on a neighbour’s
territory, especially one that results in the deaths of
innocent civilians, is morally reprehensible. We remain
concerned about the prospects for renewed violence and
welcome the efforts of Iraqi security forces personnel
to prevent escalation and protect the right to peaceful
protest. The only legitimate way to achieve reform and
form a Government responsive to the needs of the Iraqi
people is through constructive and inclusive dialogue,
not violence.
As we have heard, today’s briefing comes nearly a
year after Iraq held parliamentary elections. Despite the
fact that the elections were credible, peaceful and well
managed, the elected parliamentarians and their party
leaders have failed to form a Government that serves
the people of Iraq. This extended period of political
manoeuvring has delayed the critical work of the
Government to the detriment of Iraq and its people and
has increased tensions that in some cases have devolved
into violence, as we have heard. We call on Iraq’s
elected leaders to shoulder their responsibilities, make
compromises, avoid violence and form an inclusive
Government that is capable of delivering transparent,
effective governance. Complicated challenges face
the next Government, including passing a budget;

S/PV.9145

developing oil and gas legislation that is acceptable to
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government; improving the provision of electricity;
combating climate change; promoting private-sector
development and job growth; and increasing women’s
participation in the workforce.
This month also marks three years since the
Tishreen protests and the brutal repression of protesters
by Iran-affiliated militias intent on silencing the
legitimate demands of the Iraqi people. We call on the
Iraqi Government to hold accountable those individuals
and groups responsible for the abuse of protesters,
which left hundreds dead and thousands wounded.
We welcome news of progress on the repatriation
of Iraqis from the Al-Hol camp and encourage
continued cooperation between the Government,
UNAMI and other humanitarian actors in providing
Iraqi families and orphans with essential legal
documents and rehabilitating and reintegrating them
into their communities safely, voluntarily and with
dignity, in accordance with their wishes. We call
on the Government of Iraq to continue its efforts to
create conditions that will enable displaced persons to
return to their homes and facilitate durable solutions.
It is also important that the Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government implement the
Sinjar Agreement and address urgent reconstruction
and livelihood needs in the Yazidi homeland, where
some of Iraq’s most vulnerable communities languish
without adequate security, infrastructure, education,
psychosocial support or livelihoods.
We listened with interest to Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi’s address to the General Assembly (see
A/77/PV.11). His description of the environmental
degradation facing Iraq was particularly concerning.
We support UNAMI’s efforts to assist Iraq as it works
to mitigate the environmental crisis and adapt to climate
change, including through sustainable development,
water management and the use of renewable energies.
We encourage Iraq’s neighbours and partners to assist
as appropriate.
In conclusion, my delegation congratulates Iraq
on the occasion of its national day on 3 October,
commending the resilience of the Iraqi people as they
overcome existential challenges and look toward a
more peaceful and prosperous future. We call on all
States to support Iraq and respect its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

22-612805/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, for her briefing.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and fully support the
Special Representative’s efforts. I also welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Iraq
in today’s meeting.
Nearly a year after the holding of peaceful, free
and fair parliamentary elections, the people of Iraq still
do not have an elected Government. The continuing
political impasse has a direct impact on the people of
Iraq, who have already endured immense challenges
in the past two decades, from terrorism to economic
hardship. India urges all the political parties to rise above
their differences and assume greater responsibility for
overcoming the current stalemate. A peaceful dialogue
on a constructive way forward is the need of the hour.
In that regard. we welcome the convening of a national
dialogue among Iraq’s political leaders and parties.
Constructive engagement by all parties in the dialogue
will be a critical first step in avoiding further political
deadlock and violence.
The ongoing political instability also affects
the security situation in Iraq, which continues to be
fragile and volatile. We are deeply concerned about the
continued terrorist attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. Terrorist forces must not be permitted
to exploit the current political vacuum in the country.
The continued possession of arms and weapons in
large quantities outside State control is a matter of grave
concern. It poses a serious challenge to stability in Iraq.
The deadly clashes of 29 and 30 August serve as a timely
reminder and highlight the urgency of addressing the
issue within Iraq’s constitutional framework.
The repeated violations of Iraq’s sovereignty under
the pretext of counter-terrorism operations must end.
We condemn all such acts and call on Iraq’s neighbours
to work with the Iraqi authorities to address all the
security challenges they face. Despite its internal
challenges, Iraq continues to be a positive contributor
to regional stability and friendly relations. We welcome
Iraq’s efforts and constructive role in promoting
regional talks aimed at strengthening security and
stability in the region.
We also welcome the cooperation between the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait towards achieving
an amicable solution to the issue of missing persons
6/17

04/10/2022

and the return of Kuwaiti properties. It is imperative
to maintain the momentum and move towards an early
and mutually satisfactory conclusion to this important
humanitarian issue.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance of the
sense of urgency required for Iraq’s political leaders to
overcome divisions, set aside partisanship and attempt
to put the interests of the people of Iraq at the forefront.
An end to the political deadlock is urgently required to
meet people’s aspirations and hopes and secure their
safe and prosperous future.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Let me start
by commending the tireless efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq in
difficult circumstances. I would like to make four
points today.
First, the United Kingdom offers its deepest
condolences for the deaths and casualties caused by
violence in the International Zone in Baghdad on 29 and
30 August. As the Special Representative said, the
country stood on the brink of chaos. We cannot allow
violence to destabilize the political process. We urge
Iraq’s leaders to work together urgently in the coming
weeks to find a peaceful and inclusive solution to the
political crisis — the political impasse has gone on too
long. Such work will enable Iraq to address and tackle
the considerable challenges facing its people, from
ensuring the country’s long-term security to tackling
climate change, delivering urgent economic reform and
reconstructing the areas of the country liberated from
the control of Da’esh.
Secondly, the United Kingdom condemns in the
strongest terms Iran’s indiscriminate missile attack on
Kurdish towns on 28 September, which led to the loss
of innocent lives and damaged civilian infrastructure.
Those attacks are a violation of Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and are wholly unacceptable. They
demonstrate a repeated pattern of destabilizing activity
in the region by Iran. We stand with the Kurdistan
Regional Government in condemning those attacks and
continue to support the security of Iraq, including the
Kurdistan region.
Thirdly, we must carefully manage the humanitarian
risks. We welcome the efforts by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Food Programme to support food production and
sustainable resource management. We urge regional
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

neighbours to engage with the Government of Iraq on
water shortages. The United Kingdom is also working
with the United Nations Development Programme to
support the Government of Iraq in dealing with the
worst effects of climate change, including by providing
support on the governance of water resources.
Finally, we welcome the Special Representative’s
update on missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property. We note the progress
made on the identification of burial sites, including in
Najaf, and we urge continued progress on that file.
The fundamental point is this: as the Special
Representative has said, Iraq’s political leaders must
step up their efforts to resolve the current impasse and
begin delivering for the Iraqi people. The Security
Council must be united in encouraging progress on that.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank the Special
Representative for her briefing this morning. Ireland
sincerely appreciates her efforts and those of her team
in the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in what has been a very challenging period.
We deeply regret that the situation in Iraq has
deteriorated considerably since the most recent meeting
on this subject, held in May (see S/PV.9034). As others
have said, it is almost one year to the day since wellmanaged and peaceful elections took place across the
country. However, Government formation remains
painfully elusive. This comes at a great cost to the Iraqi
people, for whom critical reforms are long overdue.
We unequivocally condemn the violent clashes that
occurred at the end of August in Baghdad, which led to
at least 46 deaths. We strongly urge all actors to refrain
from resorting to violence to settle political disputes
and to make every effort to de-escalate tensions.
The right to peacefully protest is, of course, a
fundamental pillar of any democracy, but respect for
State institutions and the Constitution must also be
upheld. Dialogue can be the only way to overcome the
current deadlock. We welcome the efforts by Prime
Minister Al-Kadhimi to that end, including through
the convening of a national dialogue. We encourage all
actors to engage in good faith to reach agreement on a
fully empowered Government.
More broadly, the security situation at present in
Iraq is precarious. Ireland has condemned the deadly
artillery attack of 20 July in Dohuk, which tragically
killed 9 civilians and injured more. Shelling last week

S/PV.9145

in the Kurdistan region, claimed by Iran, which has
also reportedly resulted in civilian casualties, is deeply
concerning. Such attacks must cease immediately.
We urge all actors to respect Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity at all times. We recall how Iraq has
shown remarkable commitment to enhancing regional
dialogue and fostering good-neighbourly relations
over the past years. Iraq’s regional and international
partners should match that. Its stability is critical to
that of the region.
Iraqi women performed remarkably in last year’s
elections, winning a record number of seats. We
commend their activism and achievements in spite
of significant obstacles. We also acknowledge the
impactful work of UNAMI in engaging with women
voters and candidates in the run-up to the elections.
However, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General noted this morning, that exemplary
performance last October has regrettably not translated
into women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in the Government formation process, with women
largely excluded from the talks.
Later this month, the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security will consider the
situation in Iraq. That will provide an opportunity
to identify ways to address the barriers to their
participation in political and public life, and we look
forward to that discussion.
We were disappointed by the findings of the
recent report by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and UNAMI on
accountability and unidentified armed elements in Iraq.
While progress on compensation for victims of human
rights abuses and violations is a welcome step, true
accountability lies in ending impunity. We urge the Iraqi
authorities to ensure, albeit in a complex environment,
credible investigations for all alleged violations
and abuses perpetrated against protestors, activists,
journalists and critics. Without that, trust between the
State and the Iraqi people will remain elusive.
Finally, we welcome the commitment of both sides
to further progress on the Iraq-Kuwait issue relating to
missing persons and property.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me join others
in thanking France for its work during the month of
September and wishing you, Mr. President, all the best

22-612807/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

for the month of October — you can rely on Albania’s
support this month.
Returning to the issue under discussion, I would like
to thank the Special Representative for the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for her
briefing and welcome the presence of the representative
of Iraq in today’s meeting.
We condemn in the strongest terms the deadly
attack in Iraq. Albania expresses its deepest sympathy
and condolences to the victims’ families and wishes a
speedy and full recovery to those injured. Furthermore,
we call on Iran to respect Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to refrain from intimidation,
threats and a further escalation of violence.
We reaffirm our strong support for Iraq’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and condemn
all attempts to undermine its stability and political
independence. Furthermore, we are also worried
about the security situation regarding the threat posed
by Da’esh. I reiterate Albania’s principled support
for ensuring accountability for all violations of
international law, delivering justice and taking a firm
stance against impunity.
Iraq has gone through enormous challenges
in recent years. However, the deadlock in the
Government-formation process following the October
2021 parliamentary elections is a growing threat to the
stability of the country and its role in the region. We
urge all parties involved to rise above their differences
and commit to inclusive dialogue.
There is an urgent need for a new Iraqi Government
to tackle the many challenges ahead, as noted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Women and girls are disproportionately affected by
many of those challenges. An inclusive and united
Government, with the meaningful participation of
women, will better respond to the hopes and aspirations
of the Iraqi people.
In the current acute and dire humanitarian situation
that Iraq is facing, we commend the Iraqi authorities
for repatriating more than 2,500 Iraqis while respecting
the principles of accountability and reintegration. In
addition, we welcome the intensified field mission
concerning the repatriation and return of all Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals or their remains. The mission
will increase the possibility of identifying new burial
sites in Iraq. We also commend the recent handover of
8/17

04/10/2022

Kuwaiti property. That is also an essential step forward
in Iraq’s efforts to strengthen its social contract with its
citizens and neighbours. We also welcome the adoption
of the law for emergency support for food and security
and development and hope that its implementation will
lessen the suffering of the Iraqi people.
Considering that Iraq is the fifth-most vulnerable
country in the world to the effects of climate change,
we commend UNAMI’s work on the impact of climate
change in Iraq, and we took note of the concerns on
that issue expressed by the Iraqi Prime Minister during
the general debate of the General Assembly (see A/77/
PV.11).
In conclusion, we believe that UNAMI is a critical
partner to the Iraqi people and has played a vital role in
helping Iraq during this democratic transition.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
echoing your words, Mr. President, commending the
French presidency during the month of September.
I also wish Gabon all the best during the month of
October. Gabon can count on Brazil.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing, and I would like
to welcome the delegation of Iraq to this meeting.
Like the written report submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Council Members a week
ago (S/2022/714), the presentation made by the Special
Representative today reminds us of events in Iraq that
we have been following closely, including through our
Embassy in Baghdad.
As protesters have once again taken to the streets
to express their frustration with domestic politics in
Iraq, Brazil calls upon the Iraqi authorities, the political
leaders and parties and the Iraqi population, in general,
to exercise restraint and not to fuel violence, hatred or
civil unrest.
Brazil is also concerned with the attacks in the
Iraqi Kurdistan region last week. Like other recent
attacks on Iraq from without, they are contrary to
international law and threaten the territorial integrity
of the country and the stability of the entire region. In
that regard, we acknowledge the importance of calls
from within the Council for the protection of civilians
under all circumstances.
Under the terms of resolution 2631 (2022),
we convene to assess the progress made in the
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). As a mission
under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
UNAMI’s mandate hinges upon the consent of the
Iraqi Government. It is therefore only fair that we
turn to Iraqi officials for further input. In our view,
the most important aspect of UNAMI’s mandate is to
support the Iraqi Government on advancing political
dialogue and national reconciliation. Success in the
implementation of that mandate should be measured
through concrete results.
Brazil had hoped that the circumstances in Iraq
would have allowed for the swift formation of a
Government based on the outcome of the October
2021 elections. However, a year has now elapsed and
the current political impasse has taken hold. Drawing
on that experience, we should encourage inclusive and
meaningful dialogue among all Iraqi political parties
rather than calling for expedited solutions today. Only
thus will they be able to bridge their differences and
make the necessary political agreements beforehand.
In that regard, we see value in the organization of the
national dialogue proposed by the Iraqi Prime Minister,
and we hope all political groups in Iraq can participate
in that dialogue. We also note with satisfaction that the
Special Representative attended two sessions of that
national dialogue, on 17 August and 5 September.
Brazil, of course, stands ready to lend its support to
Iraqi efforts to achieve peace and stability in the country.
In our view, that is also the primary goal of UNAMI’s
presence in Iraq. At the same time, we understand that
it is not for us to dictate how Iraqi authorities should go
about setting or pursuing their national priorities.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert for her briefing. I welcome the participation
of the representative of Iraq in this meeting.
The Special Representative shared with the
Security Council an analysis of the situation in Iraq,
which can be summed up as follows. It is not possible to
build democratic institutions and uphold the rule of law
when the very root of the situation in Iraq, almost 20
years ago, was another invasion of a sovereign country,
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations. The
same thing could occur in other States whose territorial
integrity and independence are being infringed upon
while recourse to diplomacy continues to be ignored.

S/PV.9145

Mexico joins others in condemning the attack that
took place in the Iraqi Kurdistan region just a few days
ago. Unfortunately, that was not an isolated incident,
but a confirmation of a dangerous trend, together with
the recent attacks in Dohuk and Erbil. Those attacks
are contrary to international law. They constitute a
violation of Iraqi sovereignty and territorial integrity
and pose a serious risk to the stability of the region.
In addition, in the past three months there have been
more than 180 attacks against Iraqi security forces,
attributed to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
as well as bombings against Government buildings,
diplomatic facilities and vehicles and clashes between
law enforcement and demonstrators.
In the light of that alarming security situation, I
will now focus on the political impasse and the need to
resume institutional strengthening.
This week marks the third anniversary of the
beginning of the popular protests for regime change,
which led to early elections last year. Now, nearly a
year after those elections, unfortunately, the political
factions have been unable to translate the popular
will into a functioning Government. We welcome
the fact that the participants in the national dialogue
convened by the Prime Minister reiterated their
commitment to resolving the political crisis while
respecting the democratic constitutional order. We
hope that that initiative will lead to the formation of an
inclusive Government.
Despite the high number of women elected
as members of Parliament, we note that they have
been largely excluded from the process of forming a
Government. We underline the importance of ensuring
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
young people and minorities in that process.
Furthermore, we urge both the Baghdad
Government and the Erbil Regional Government to
resolve disputes over the budget and the management
of natural resources, as well as the full implementation
of the Sinjar Agreement, through dialogue. That
process must of course take place within the
constitutional framework.
Nevertheless, at the regional level, Iraq has played
a key role in the stability of the region. In that regard,
my delegation also recognizes the ongoing progress
and bilateral cooperation by the Iraqi Government in

22-612809/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

resolving the outstanding issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals.
We also take note of the Special Representative’s
recent visit to the Al-Hol refugee camp in Syria. We
acknowledge the efforts of the Iraqi Government and
the assistance of humanitarian agencies to continue
the repatriation and relocation of approximately
28,000 Iraqis.
With regard to institutional capacity-building, I
would like to highlight the collaboration in electoral
matters that Mexico and Iraq have maintained for
almost two decades. In that context, I am pleased to
announce that, this month, in October, a delegation of
Iraqi electoral judges is planning to participate in a
capacity-building programme provided by the National
Electoral Institute and the Electoral Tribunal of the
Judiciary of our country.
Before concluding, I once again reaffirm the
importance of very soon seeing a prosperous, democratic
and sovereign Iraq as a fundamental building block for
achieving peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you the
utmost success. We also thank France for its successful
presidency of the Council last month.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, for her thorough briefing. We welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Iraq, Ambassador Mohammed Bahr
Aluloom, in today’s meeting.
Today’s meeting takes place amid a critical period
for Iraq. The delay in forming a new Government
over the recent months has led to an escalation of the
situation, an increase in violence and civilian deaths
and injuries. In that context, my country expresses
its concern over those events. We call on the relevant
stakeholders to overcome the obstacles hindering the
formation of a new Iraqi Government and to ensure that
the interests of the Iraqi people prevail over all other
considerations. There should be an urgent return to
constructive dialogue, calm and self-restraint. Those
are essential and indispensable demands. A stable
and credible Iraqi political institution is necessary
to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi people, who seek
10/17

04/10/2022

security, reform and prosperity and must be ensured
access to basic services. We stress that further violence
will not only impact Iraq and its people, but also the
entire region.
The United Arab Emirates also emphasizes
its rejection of foreign interference in the internal
affairs of Iraq, which undermines Iraq’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. We also
condemn violence of any kind, which continues to
destabilize Iraq’s security and stability, in violation
of human principles and values. That also includes
terrorist acts, especially as Da’esh continues its
relentless attacks on Iraqi territories — reaching 184
in number during the reporting period covered by the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/714). We commend
the achievements made by the Iraqi forces in combating
that scourge, and we look forward to continued efforts
until the threat is fully eliminated.
There is also a need to continue efforts to fight
extremism and terrorism and address their causes.
There are concerns that the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation in camps, such as Al-Hol
in Syria, will provide fertile ground for radicalization
and for terrorist groups to exploit the situation to
recruit the next generation of terrorists. In that regard,
we welcome Iraq’s repatriation, with United Nations
assistance, of more than 2,500 citizens from Al-Hol
camp. We emphasize the need to seriously and urgently
work towards reaching a sustainable solution to the
situation in the camp.
The progressive progress made during the past
four months regarding the missing Kuwaitis and thirdcountry nationals, as well as missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, is encouraging, and we
hope that such progress will continue. We commend the
efforts of Kuwait and Iraq in that regard.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates supports
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq in the implementation of its mandate, in
coordination with the Iraqi Government. I would like to
take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Claudio Cordone
on assuming his new position as Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Political
Affairs and Electoral Assistance. I would also like to
commend the Iraqi people for showing resilience in the
face of difficult challenges that they are still subjected
to. I reiterate my country’s steadfast support for security
and stability in Iraq, as well as reconstruction efforts.
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.9145

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for her briefing on the situation in the Republic
of Iraq.

there is a need for the broadest possible coordination
of counter-terrorism efforts. We believe there is a need
for all stakeholders engaged in counter-terrorism in
Iraq to respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and to
coordinate their action with the country’s officials.

We are closely following the developments in
friendly Iraq, where we remain concerned about the
internal political instability, compounded by a difficult
socioeconomic situation. Since late July, in Baghdad
and a number of provinces in the south of the country,
there have been mass protests, accompanied by the
seizure of Government buildings and attacks on the
offices of political parties. Several dozen people were
killed in the violent clashes, and hundreds were injured,
including law enforcement officers.

One cannot but note that a sustained normalization
in Iraq is obstructed by attempts by certain external
players to gain benefit from the internal difficulties.
In this context, we urge the international community
to support Baghdad’s efforts aimed at stabilizing the
country, including ensuring law and order and restoring
the social, financial and humanitarian sectors in
the Republic.

Those events were the result of acute differences
among Iraq’s leading political forces, which have not
been able to complete the formation of Government
bodies following the early parliamentary elections for
the Council of Representatives of Iraq, held in October
2021. We hope that the parties represented in Parliament
will soon agree on the candidacy of the President and
the composition of the new Government, based on
the support of all the main political associations and
ethno-religious groups in the country.
We express our grave concern over the military
escalation in the northern parts of the country, including
in the Kurdish Autonomous Region, which resulted in
the deaths of many civilians and children. We extend
our sincere condolences to the families of the dead.
Once again, we reiterate that ensuring the safety of
civilians needs to remain a priority. We share the view
of the President of Iraq, Mr. Barham Salih, that his
country should not become an arena for score-settling.
At the same time, we take note of the statement by
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps that the
recent attack, for which Iran claimed responsibilty,
constitutes a response to a major threat to the country’s
security from the terrorist groups based in the Kurdish
Autonomous Region.
According to the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/714), in various provinces of the
Republic, there indeed have been reports of attacks by
fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
including with the use of suicide bombers, which
destabilized the already restive security atmosphere
in the region. In this context, we wish once again to
reiterate that in order to effectively ward off this threat,

We believe that it is unacceptable for this country
to morph into an arena for personal score-settling
and regional confrontation. The Russian Federation
supports the efforts of the Iraqi Government geared
towards remedying the situation. We trust that all
Iraqi stakeholders will take a responsible approach,
eschew violence and strive to resolve their differences
exclusively through the legal system, accounting for
the interests of all groups in the country. We value
the resumed dialogue between the federal authorities
of Baghdad and the Kurdish Autonomous Region
on resolving existing differences, first and foremost
in the oil and gas spheres. We believe that a further
resolution will help to advance efforts to settle the
ethno-religious issues that have amassed and support
harnessing the economic potential for the benefit of the
entire Iraqi people.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
stability of Iraq.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to congratulate Gabon on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and thank France
for its excellent work as President of the Council over
the last month.
China thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing
and welcomes the Permanent Representative of Iraq at
today’s meeting. I also wish to congratulate Iraq for
National Iraqi Day, which was celebrated yesterday.
At present, Iraq is in a crucial political phase, facing
such major tasks as forming a new Government. We
sincerely hope that all parties in Iraq will strengthen
unity, properly settle their differences, and, within the

22-6128011/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

constitutional and legal framework, conduct dialogue
and consultations to seek consensus on next steps in
political arrangements, with a view to laying a solid
political foundation for lasting peace, development
and prosperity.
All members of the international community
should fully respect the sovereignty and ownership
of Iraq and support the Iraqi people in independently
choosing a development path that fits their national
conditions. With its strategic location and its ethnic
and religious diversity, Iraq should become a propeller
of regional cooperation, not a playing field for
geopolitical competition.
China commends Iraq for developing goodneighbourly and friendly relations with countries in
the region and for promoting regional integration. We
support Iraq in its joint efforts with Kuwait to achieve
progress in the search for missing Kuwaiti nationals
and property.
China has always stood for full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Iraq, and has always stood for common
security through cooperation. Iraq has made huge
sacrifices in combating the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and recovering the territories originally
occupied by terrorists and extremist organizations.
The international community must continue its firm
support for Iraq in eradicating the remnants of terror
and in consolidating the hard-won counter-terrorism
results. The United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant must turn
over to Iraq as soon as possible the evidence it has
collected and help the country bring terrorists to justice
in accordance with domestic law.
China welcomes Iraq’s ongoing efforts aimed at
repatriating and resettling Iraqi citizens from Al-Hol
camp in Syria. We urge other countries to take up
their responsibilities as Iraq has done and speed up
the identification and repatriation of foreign terrorist
fighters and their families from Iraq.
Over the past three decades or so, Iraq has
experienced ups and downs in its situation, which
has brought enormous suffering to its people.
Under the current circumstances, the international
community should continue its firm support for Iraq in
safeguarding its security and stability and actively help
the country rebuild with a focus on improving people’s
12/17

04/10/2022

livelihoods. The United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and other United Nations agencies
must channel greater resources and attention towards
supporting Iraq’s national development priorities. In
its work related to human rights and humanitarian
assistance, UNAMI must strictly follow its mandate,
closely communicate and coordinate with the Iraqi
Government and improve the screening and verification
of information.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert, for her clear and important briefing and
for all her efforts and those of her team during very
challenging times.
Almost a year has gone by since Iraq conducted
parliamentary elections, yet still no Government has
been formed. Norway joins the Secretary-General and
others in expressing concern over this situation and
the risks it may pose for Iraq’s political stability. The
formation of a Government is vital to addressing the
many challenges Iraq is facing.
It is time for Iraqi political leaders to unite. It is time
to find compromises. Iraq must have a Government that
can work in the best interests of the Iraqi people. And we
encourage all political leaders to ensure the meaningful
participation of women, youth and civil society.
Norway is deeply concerned at the increase in
political tensions and violence. We call for calm and
restraint. All parties must take steps to de-escalate, and
violence must be avoided. As the Security Council has
stated on several occasions, the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq must be respected.
The year 2022 is the final year of the humanitarian
response plan. We commend the Iraqi authorities for
taking over the responsibility of fulfilling humanitarian
needs. Children are especially vulnerable. In the
current efforts to reintegrate displaced families into
their home communities, special care should be made
to protect children and treat them as victims of war.
This includes children formerly associated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Norway will
continue its humanitarian assistance and cooperation
with Iraqi authorities.
Finally, the challenges Iraq is facing are also
exacerbated by climate change and severe environmental
problems. Norway commends the joint efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraqi authorities on climate action, improving regional
cooperation on water management and investing in
a renewable future. For this work to succeed, it must
include working with private partners and civil society.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I in turn would like to thank the Special
Representative for her briefing. I would also like to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Iraq to this
meeting today
France strongly condemns the massive air strikes
claimed by Iran in the autonomous region of Kurdistan
in Iraq, which indiscriminately struck civilians.
They are a serious violation of Iraqi sovereignty and
international law and a threat to peace and security.
France recalls its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq and calls for respect for the
stability and security of the autonomous Kurdistan
Region in Iraq. We call on the concerned actors to cease
all interference in the internal affairs of Iraq.
A year after the parliamentary elections, the
political situation remains deadlocked. We call on the
political actors to fulfil their responsibilities and agree
on the formation of a Government. We also call on them
to reaffirm their commitment to the Iraqi constitutional
framework and to respect the integrity of Iraqi
institutions. We welcome and encourage the initiatives
taken by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi to relaunch the
national dialogue, which is the only possible way out of
the current impasse. It is essential that the dialogue be
inclusive and allow for the participation of women, who
until now have been excluded from the talks, despite
having been elected in large numbers to Parliament, as
has been recalled several times in this meeting.
Every day without a Government established by the
most recent elections increases the risk of Iraq being
destabilized. The government formation is an urgent
step to avoid a further deterioration of the situation.
France also calls on the authorities in Baghdad and
Erbil to return to the path of dialogue. Cooperation
between the federal authorities and the autonomous
Kurdistan Region on matters of common interest, in
particular security and oil resources, is essential.
Despite the challenges facing Iraq, the country
continues its courageous fight against Da’esh. France
reiterates its full support for Iraq in the fight against
terrorism and will continue its commitment in that
respect as part of its contribution to the international
counter-Da’esh coalition, with full respect for Iraq’s

S/PV.9145

sovereignty, for as long as necessary and as requested
by Iraq.
Iraq also continues to play a positive role at the
regional level. We commend the efforts in this respect
by the Prime Minister and support all regional dialogue
initiatives that contribute to stability in the region and
to addressing global challenges. We are working at
the new summit of Heads of State and Government in
Amman, in the so-called “Baghdad format”, which has
laid the foundations for a credible regional dialogue,
something the region urgently needs.
Finally, I would like to commend the cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of missing
Kuwaitis and third-country nationals. The progress
made thanks to the requests for witnesses and satellite
imagery are important. We encourage both States to
continue their dialogue on that issue.
The President (spoke in French): I will now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Gabon
on behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council (A3), namely, Ghana, Kenya and Gabon.
(spoke in English)
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her informative briefing, which we followed closely,
on recent developments in Iraq and the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We also welcome the participation of the representative
of Iraq at this meeting.
We will focus our statement on three main issues
relating to the situation in Iraq: the political, security
and humanitarian aspects.
On the political front, Iraqis are still waiting for the
formation of a Government long after the parliamentary
elections that were held on 10 October 2021. The
persistent lack of unity among political actors and the
lack of inclusion, particularly of women, despite the
remarkable results they obtained in the elections, are
obstacles to the implementation of reforms essential
to the suitable functioning of the country. The rapid
formation of a new Government is more crucial now.
It will be a critical first step towards promoting longterm political stability in Iraq. As evidenced by recent
protests in Iraq, further delays in forming a Government
will only have a destabilizing impact on the country.

22-6128013/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

We see an urgent need for a new Iraqi Government
that will also be able to address the multiple challenges
facing the country. A new Iraqi Government will be
vital for the implementation of reforms essential to
the proper functioning of the country and responding
to the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people for
peace, security, stability and socioeconomic progress
through the provision of basic services and to contain
the adverse effects of climate change, characterized by
extreme weather conditions.
It is in that spirit that the A3 calls on the various
political actors to take concerted steps to defuse
tensions and to engage in a genuine and inclusive
political dialogue based on peaceful, democratic and
constitutional principles and means in the spirit of
political compromise. Reaching a decision on the
selection and election of a president would in that
regard be a positive first step.
We also strongly encourage the inclusion and
involvement of women in the quest for political
initiatives and the efforts towards Government
formation to resolve the impasse.
The A3 commends the continued support of
UNAMI to the post-election activities in Iraq and
calls on the Independent High Electoral Commission
and the Independent High Elections and Referendum
Commission of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq to strengthen
their cooperation and pool their technical expertise.
We take note of the efforts of the Government
of Iraq to foster dialogue and cooperation within the
region. We therefore encourage Iraq’s regional and
international partners to support those efforts while
respecting the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and good-neighbourly relations for the benefit
of the country and the region.
We further welcome the ongoing cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait and encourage more progress
on that important file.
On the security front, the situation in Iraq remains
volatile and worrying, including in the Kurdistan region.
Asymmetrical attacks by Da’esh and unidentified armed
groups targeting Iraqi security forces, drone overflights
and the use of explosive devices and ballistic missiles
are recurrent. That escalation of violence is likely to
hamper hard-won peace and stability efforts on Iraqi
territory. We therefore call for urgent de-escalation
14/17

04/10/2022

and discourage any actions that would impede
government formation.
The A3 condemns military operations by external
actors in the north and reaffirms that Iraq must not be
used as an international arena for States and non-State
actors to settle scores at the expense and detriment
of the security, political stability and socioeconomic
progress of the country and its people.
In the meantime, we are deeply concerned by the
recent attacks of 28 September, which killed many
people and injured civilians, including children.
On the humanitarian front, significant needs
remain. Civilians are paying the heaviest price for the
instability in Iraq. According to UNAMI, of the 87 facts
established during the period under review, there were
201 civilian casualties, including women and children,
mainly affected by small arms fire, improvised
explosive devices, shelling and remnants of war.
Violations of children’s rights are of the utmost
concern to us. There are 63 documented cases of grave
violations against children, including killing, maiming,
abduction, sexual violence and recruitment.
We take note of the observations by the Committee
against Torture on Iraq’s second periodic report
on measures taken to ensure compliance with the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the
recommendations made, including the adoption of
legislation against torture. In the same vein, we note
that the impact of the Iraqi Government’s human
rights efforts, including compensation for victims,
is relatively limited, owing to the persistence of
impunity for the perpetrators of violations. To that
end, we commend UNAMI’s work in promoting the
Iraqi authorities’ prevention and capacity-building
efforts. The A3 welcomes the assistance that the
United Nations, in collaboration with the Government
of Iraq, continues to provide to internally displaced
persons, returnees and refugees, despite the drastic
decline in humanitarian funding. We join the Special
Representative in congratulating the Government
of Iraq on the repatriation of more than 2,500 Iraqis
in accordance with the principles of accountability
and reintegration. We also welcome the continued
commitment of the United Nations to providing them
with humanitarian and protection assistance following
their return.
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, we reiterate the full support of the
A3 for UNAMI’s efforts in the implementation of
resolution 2631 (2022) and for Special Representative
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert in her commitment to
implementing the United Nations mandate under
the resolution.
(spoke in French)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on Gabon’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to thank Ambassador Nicolas de
Rivière, Permanent Representative of France, for his
remarkable efforts during France’s presidency of the
Council in September. I also thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing.
The political process in Iraq has been deadlocked,
and that has delayed the formation of a new Iraqi
Government following the October 2021 parliamentary
elections. All our stakeholders and political blocs are
aware of the situation and have therefore engaged in
a constructive, serious and frank dialogue aimed at
reaching an agreement and finding solutions to the
current political impasse. A parliamentary session was
held last week for the first time in two months, bearing
witness to renewed confidence in the Speaker and
the selection of a first Vice-Speaker and representing
another step in the right direction that will enable
Parliament to carry out its supervisory and legislative
roles and the parliamentary committees to conduct
their daily activities. It is an important step towards a
political breakthrough, in the light of the constitutional
deadlines and the applicable laws that will eventually
lead to the election of a President of the Republic and
the formation of a new Government, which is what is
required to meet the basic needs of the Iraqi people and
guarantee political security and economic stability for
Iraq and the region.
We are marking the third anniversary of the
peaceful Tishreen demonstrations of 2019, led by young
Iraqi men and women asking for reform and combating
corruption. We ask God to have mercy on the martyrs
and offer our condolences to their families, and we wish

S/PV.9145

those who were injured a speedy recovery. We also
commend the efforts of the Iraqi security forces, who
demonstrated the utmost responsibility and restraint
in providing professional, peaceful protection for the
demonstrations — the third such commemoration of the
Tishreen movement — that took place three days ago.
They avoided confrontation except in a few cases when
some demonstrators attempted to attack them violently.
The Government stands ready to make Iraq a
source of stability within the region and internationally
and to help find sustainable peaceful solutions to the
crises and disputes among the countries of the region,
while avoiding their adverse effects on the security and
stability of Iraq. Through its balanced relationships
and diplomacy, the Government of Iraq has supported
several initiatives and meetings among the countries
of the region that were among the successful outcomes
of the Baghdad Conference for Partnership and
Cooperation. Consultations are currently under way
on convening the Conference’s second session. I
would now like to briefly point to the most significant
developments that have taken place in Iraq over the past
four months.
First, with regard to the security situation, Iraq
would like to thank the Security Council for its support
and for strengthening our capacities in the fight against
terrorism. We were grateful for the July field visit by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
made on behalf of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Iraq is committed to continue cooperating with the
Global Coalition against Da’esh. We are also committed
to multilateral cooperation with the United Nations and
its specialized entities. We look forward to welcoming
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, the Under-Secretary-General
of the Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT), in the
near future.
Iraq reaffirms the concerns mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/714), especially
given the fact that tens of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families remain in detention
camps in Syria. We call on the United Nations to
step up its presence on the ground through the OCT.
Iraq emphasizes the importance of Member States’
repatriation of their nationals from Al-Hol and other
camps and of ensuring that the responsible authorities
extradite all Iraqi terrorist fighters to Iraq. We also
underscore that we stand ready to complete the work of
repatriating our nationals from the camps, and we hope

22-6128015/17

S/PV.9145

The situation concerning Iraq

that the international community will support us in their
rehabilitation and reintegration. Iraq once again urges
that its territories not be used to settle scores or achieve
political goals on a pretext of combating terrorism, and
we call on the Security Council and Member States to
seriously consider that issue.
Breaches by Türkiye and Iran have continued
through land and air violations against Iraq based on
unsubstantiated pretexts and claims. After shelling
by Türkiye that targeted Iraqi families in a resort in
Dohuk governorate in July, Iran carried out air attacks
with missiles and drones against cities and villages in
the Kurdistan region all of last week, and in particular
last Wednesday morning, 28 September, resulting in
the deaths of many martyrs and several Iraqi civilians
injured, including women and children. It terrorized
the population and destroyed infrastructure. The
Foreign Ministry summoned the Iranian Ambassador
in Baghdad and handed him a letter expressing the
Iraqi Government’s vehement condemnation of that
heinous crime. We emphasized our rejection of those
acts and their consequences while demanding respect
for the sovereignty of Iraq, and we called on Iran to live
up to its international commitments and abandon the
language of weapons in working to deal with the security
challenges facing the region. We have also warned of
the consequences of such acts for the communal peace
of both countries and for international and regional
security and stability. In that context, we call on the
Security Council to maintain its united position on the
Iraqi dossier and its emphasis on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq by condemning any foreign
aggressions against it, regardless of the perpetrators, as
well as the use of Iraq as an arena for conflicts and for
exporting problems.
Iraq looks forward to receiving further United
Nations support in order to rebuild the liberated
regions that were destroyed by Da’esh terrorist gangs.
We also look forward to receiving further United
Nations assistance in order to respond to urgent basic
humanitarian needs and to promote Iraqi capacities.
We hope to receive support for our governmental
programme for restoring the liberated areas and
rebuilding damaged infrastructure as well.
The Government of Iraq reiterates its commitment
to implementing its 2030 national strategy for higher
education, which includes increasing school attendance
to 100 per cent and improving the quality of general
and higher education, while also enhancing skills in
16/17

04/10/2022

line with the labour market and economic development
requirements. In terms of women’s empowerment,
we have restored the Ministry of Women’s Affairs,
providing it with a ministerial portfolio and a clear
mandate to promote and protect women’s rights and
advance gender equality. The Women’s Empowerment
Directorate is implementing the second Iraqi national
plan in line with resolution 1325 (2000), aimed at
enhancing women’s participation in leadership and
decision-making and thereby strengthening peace and
security. Political stakeholders are also keen to increase
the participation of Iraqi women in political life and in
the current dialogue on forming the new Government,
enabling them to occupy senior and leadership positions
in our national institutions.
The General Directorate for Yazidi Survivors is
collecting evidence and information regarding all
survivors in order to implement the specific reparations
in line with the law. They have also been allocated part
of the food security budget adopted recently by the
Iraqi parliament.
The Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights is
following up on the humanitarian and relief situation
and on the health front, as well as monitoring the
health care provided to displaced families in camps.
It is also monitoring the steps that the Antiquities
and Heritage Authority is taking to rebuild minority
archaeological sites in the regions of Nineveh Plains
and other governorates where those minorities live. The
office continues to monitor and document violations of
human rights while launching awareness campaigns in
line with international conventions aimed at combating
domestic violence. The Iraqi Government and the
relevant national institutions and law-enforcement
agencies are also monitoring and prosecuting violations
and individual acts in line with Iraq’s international
commitments to enhancing and protecting human rights.
Turning to the issues of desertification and climate
change, Iraq is the fifth most vulnerable country to
climate change in the world. We are suffering from
water scarcity and changes in the water courses we
share with neighbouring countries. We have also been
negatively affected by projects that were implemented
without taking account of the impact they would have
on water-sharing with riparian countries. That has led
to increasing desertification and drought in most of the
natural protected reserves listed as part of world heritage
in the Al-Ahwar region. It also led to a reduction in
arable lands and increased internal displacement. Iraq
22-61280

04/10/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

therefore urges all the countries of the region to engage
in a dialogue aimed at resolving our water issues in line
with international laws and conventions.
Iraq is an oil-producing country that has contributed
to global economic recovery since the beginning
of the twentieth century. While it is suffering from
the consequences of climate change, it is also bound
to be affected by all the measures being taken to
reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Despite that, the
Iraqi Government has been implementing important
strategic projects in the fields of clean energy and gas
extraction, as well as other sectors related to the green
economy, and it therefore needs international support
as it continues to pursue those efforts.
Iraq and its sister State of Kuwait are working to
strengthen their relationship, overcome obstacles and
resolve outstanding issues in a way that guarantees the
rights of both parties, which will contribute to finding
a solution to the issues of disappeared persons, our
maritime borders and Kuwaiti property. With regard
to missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, this
year we have been pursuing our efforts through the
Technical Subcommittee of the Tripartite Committee,
which held its 120th meeting on 30 May in Riyadh and
its 121st on 31 July in Baghdad, while the Tripartite
Committee held its fifty-third meeting on 1 June. The
meetings focused on locating important burial sites
in Tall Al-Shaykhiyah, Karbala, Al-Khamisiyah and
a potential fourth site in Samawah, as well as Salman
Pac site and other sites in Kuwait, with the assistance
of archive records and witness accounts. We have also
analysed satellite images and determined their date and

S/PV.9145

location and increased field missions to some of those
sites, in addition to discussing the issue of a missing
Saudi national who claims that he was detained in
Al-Nasiriyah prison and then transferred to another
location before being released in 2017, according to the
information Kuwait received from witness accounts.
With regard to Kuwaiti property, on 4 July, the Iraqi
Foreign Ministry made an official delivery to the State
of Kuwait containing material and property found by
the Iraqi Government, including historical items as well
as 738 boxes of items related to the Kuwaiti Ministry
of Information.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his steadfast support for Iraq and his calls for
respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We also commend the international community for its
support, which will ultimately enable Iraq to achieve
prosperity and stability for the Iraqi people. On behalf
of the Iraqi Government, we also want to express our
appreciation to the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and its Head of Mission for the support they
have provided to Iraq in various areas, especially on
the humanitarian and development fronts, during the
reporting period covered in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/714).
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-6128017/17
