UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTY-THIRD YEAR

2061

st
MEETING: 6 MARCH 1978

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda/2061 /Rev .1)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

...................................... .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d' Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12578) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

~/(1(S?/3
S/PV.2061

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ ...) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2061st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 6 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2061 /Rev.I)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d'Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12578)

17te meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m;

3. In view of the limited number of places at the Council
table. I invite those representatives to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), .Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Bamba (Upper Volta) and Miss Konie (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Upper Volta, who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the African Group for the
month of March. Accordingly, I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
5. Mr. BAMBA (Upper Volta) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, before entering into the debate, I
would join in your congratulations to the representative of
the Soviet Union, who was President of the Security
Council last month. I am sure that all of us fully
appreciated the excellent manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council during the past month.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT: Before we commence the business
for the afternoon, I should like on behalf of the Council to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Troyanovsky of
the Soviet Union, President for the month of February, for
the precise and skilful way in which he conducted the
business of the Council.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d'Affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12578)

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Angola, Benin, Mozambique, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia in which they
request that they should be invited to participate in the
discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. I wish to thank the members of the Council for having
acceded so promptly to the request which I, as Chairman of
the African Group, submitted to them to consider the
situation in Southern Rhodesia in the light of the latest
developments in that British colony. I am particularly
happy that this debate is being held under the presidency of
one of the most illustrious representatives of Her Britannic
Majesty's Government, Ambassador Ivor Richard.
7. Mr. President, I am most happy at this fortunate
coincidence, which I would describe as historic. You are
undoubtedly the man best fitted to guide this debate, not
only because of your qualities as a skilled diplomat, which
we all recognize, but also and above all because the
Government which you represent here bears the historical
responsibility for the drama unfolding in that country of
Africa in which more than 6 million men and women are
denied the most elementary rights inherent in human
dignity. In congratulating you on your accession to the
presidency for this month of March, I should also like to
tell you that I am assured in advance that you will
successfully guide the work of the Council which will
undoubtedly lead to the preservation of international peace
and security in the world in general-the principal role of
this organ-and in Southern Rhodesia in particular.
8. It is precisely because international peace and security
may be gravely jeopardized in southern Africa and specif-

ically in Southern Rhodesia that I have the honour today to
address the Council on behalf of the African Group.

duty it is to bring it to the most logical and normal
conclusion, to be chained tomorrow to the pilJory of
history because they are guilty of the denial of justice, then
it is more than urgently necessary to restore the rights of
the people of Zimbabwe through the intermediary of the
liberation movements which are the expression of that
people's will.

9. The already intolerable situation linked to the colonial
status to which Southern Rhodesia has been and still is
subjected, aggravated by the rebellion of the white racist
and Fascist minority under the leadership of Ian Smith, has
today become explosive. Indeed, the Ian Smith regime
defies all the resolutions adopted by the Council calling on
him to abolish racism and establish majority rule on the
basis of which democratic, free and genuine elections would
be held, leading to the true independence of Southern
Rhodesia. He has refused to grasp the life-line extended to
him by the United Kingdom, the colonial Power, and the
United States, the life-line known as the "Anglo-American
proposals for a settlement of the Rhodesian problem", in
what was after all a rescue operation rendered necessary by
the mounting tide of liberation movements, whose total
victory by force of arms was becoming inevitable. But by
this refusal Ian Smith and his acolytes, in the panic which
has seized them because the vice is becoming tighter every
day, no longer rely on their instinct of self-preservation but
have recourse to an old method, familiar to all those who
recognize only their own rights: divide and rule.

14. The procedure to be followed in order to achieve this
flows directly froin the right of the people of Zimbabwe to
live in freedom and independence, and cannot be the
subject of any misunderstanding: that is, negotiations
between the colonizing Power and all the liberation
movements, leading to neutralization of the forces of
oppression of the military and racist regime so as to
guarantee the establishment of majority rule and, finally,
the process of accession to independence of Zimbabwe on
the basis of free and genuine elections. The Anglo-American
proposals, while containing some gaps and weaknesses of
which we are aware and which we have not failed to
emphasize, nevertheless constitute a framework and a base
for negotiations which wisdom counsels us to consider as
such.
I 5. The future of the people of Zimbabwe cannot and
must not be sold off cheap simply because, in order to have
a clear conscience, it is easier to wash one's hands of the
matter as Pontius Pilate did.

10. Africans love peace and wish to live in peace. The true
people of Southern Rhodesia, forced to take up arms under
the weight of 80 years of colonial oppression, seek genuine
peace and not a parody of peace which would enable the
oppressor of today to legalize his existence tomorrow in the
eyes of the world and to refine his Fascist practices.

16. The Council, which is the guardian of international
peace and security will, I am certain, take the appropriate
decisions to preserve that peace and security which are so
dear to us all; if not, it is to be feared that Africans will
have no choice but to continue and intensify the armed
struggle until final victory.

11. The Southern Rhodesian problem cannot be solved
within the framework of any internal settlement. And
internal to what: to the British colony we know or to the
racist illegal minority regime under Ian Smith? The initial
illegality that taints the very existence of that regime
requires the Council and the international community not
only not to recognize such a settlement but actually to
condemn it. The very idea of a colony is today as
anachronistic as it is illegal.

17. In assuming their responsibilities before the Council
and in acquitting themselves of their duties, the African
States and the African peoples, on whose behalf I have the
signal honour to address the Council today, have no doubt
that the Council will for its part also assume its responsibilities in the interests of all mankind.

12. In fact, this so-<:alled internal settlement thought up
by Ian Smith and the white minority to suit themselves and
in their interest cannot objectively guarantee the exercise of
power by the people of Zimbabwe for the people of
Zimbabwe. It is intended first of all to cause a fratricidal
dvil war for which the people of Zimbabwe would pay the
costs in the resultant disastrous consequences. The internationalization of the conflict would then become inevitable and all southern Africa would be in flames, to the
great joy of the merchants of cannon and ideologies, who
would there find choice ground where they could quench
their thirst for money and domination with the blood of
the African peoples. Peace and security would be definitively jeopardized in Africa and throughout the world.

18. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
19. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): In requesting to take part in the current proceedings of the Security
Council, my delegation is conscious of the historical
significance of the present debate. For it may well be that
the outcome of the Council's deliberations over this
question may prove to be one of the most important
decisions taken by the Council on issues affecting international peace and security.
20. It was almost 12 years ago that the Council determined that the situation in Southern Rhodesia, brought
about by the illegal minority racist regime, constituted a
threat to international peace and security. Since then, the
situation has moved from one stage of deterioration to
another and no one can seriously deny the fact that today,
more than ever before, the Smith regime with its oppressive
and repressive measures, coupled with its diabolical machi-

13. That is why, in full and complete recognition of the
inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe to live in
freedom and independence and to be the master of its
destiny, the Council must accept and affirm that that
destiny is indivisible. If we do not wish those who bear
responsibility for the tragedy suffered by the 6 million
blacks who make up the people of Zimbabwe, and whose
2

nations and intrigues, has confronted the international
community with the most explosive situation. Any wrong
move or any inaction
·
· on the part of the Council may well
not only contribute to an escalation of the threat to the
peace and security of Africa but also clearly threaten in a
very dangerous way international peace and security.

tially retains the instruments of oppression and domination
in the hands of the racist white minority and thus
guarantees that their interests will remain paramount. It is
another manoeuvre in Mr. Smith's struggle against majority
rule.
26. I shall avoid the temptation of discussing the specific
provisions of the so-called internal settlement as reported
by the press. To indulge in such an exercise would be to
circumvent the main problem. The relevant question is
really whether this so-called internal settlement is in any
way a real settlement. Will it bring to an end the illegal
racist minority regime with its instruments of oppression
and domination? Will it ensure for the people of Zimbabwe
a genuine and effective transfer of power from the minority
to the majority? Does it provide for conditions in which a
genuine exercise of self-determination can take place in that
country? Will it stop the rapidly escalating military
confrontation between, on the one hand, Mr. Smith's army
of repression and oppression and, on the other, the freedom
fighters led by the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe? Clearly
the answer to these very pertinent questions is a categorical no.

21 • It is with this background in mind that the African
S~ates, through the current Chairman of the African Group,
tlie representative of the Upper Volta, have requested the
pre~en,t meeting of the Security Council. More specifically,
~fnca s concern relates to the present manoeuvres of the
illegal racist minority regime aimed, on the one hand, at
perpetu_ating the structures of domination and repression in
Rhodesia and, on the other, at precipitating conditions for
an escalation of the war in that unfortunate land with dire
consequences for its people, both black and white.

22. The so-called internal settlement contrived by the
rebel Smith is no settlement. It is certainly no panacea that
would produce a resolution of the conflict. Rather, it is a
p~escri~tion for its escalation and the broadening of its
dimensions and magnitude. In a nutshell it is the latest and
certainly one of the more deadly of' the series of manoeuvres that the international community has now come
to expect from Mr. Smith and his collaborators.

27. Writing in the New York Long Island newspaper,

Newsday, in February this year, the paper's national
correspondent, Mr. Les Payne, made, inter alia, the following observations concerning the so-called settlement:

23. What is therefore surprising is not so much that the
Smith regime should devise all sorts of techniques to
maintain itself in power in Southern Rhodesia-the history
of the conflict in Zimbabwe since the proclamation of the
unilateral declaration of independence on 11 November
1965 should clearly make us consider this as a logical
move-but that there should be some, even in responsible
positions, who may be beginning to entertain certain
illusions in favour of Smith's schemes. It is both amazing
and sad that this should be so because all of us should know
better. After all, Smith has by now clearly distinguished
himself by his determination to try and prolong as far as
possible his regime's survival at all costs and in all
circumstances.

"Majority rule, Ian Smith said a few years ago, would
not come to Rhodesia in a thousand years. In the Prime
Minister's recent concession to one-man, one-vote, a
thousand years seem to be the amount of time he would
like to allow for it to be implemented.
"The negotiated internal settlement blueprints a gradual
introduction of Africans into the Government and the
economy of Rhodesia. The interim government would be
50 per cent European, even though they make up less
than 5 per cent of the population. The plan guarantees
whites actual control for 10 years beyond that. The pace
of change would be in white hands. They would control
the economy, the military, the Civil Service, the educational system. Under this scheme, Africans would gain
only an appearance of control over their voting precincts
and neighbourhoods.

24. This latest move by the minority regime should
therefore be viewed in its proper context, taking into
account the historical evolution of the situation. Viewing it
in that context, therefore, one can only come up with one
singular conclusion. This is that, faced with the mounting
pressures of the armed struggle, as well as increasing
international isolation and opposition, Mr. Smith has
clearly realized that the old manoeuvres and old tactics of
absolute obduracy and arrogance will lead him nowhere;
hence the new manoeuvres and new tactics. But, while the
tactics have changed, the central purpose of the regime to
maintain itself in one form or another has not changed a
bit.

28. Going through the provisions of the agreement for the
so-called internal settlement, as reported in the press, one
could not agree more.with those comments by the Newsday
correspondent.

25. Clearly, therefore, from the Smith regime's point of
view, the central objective of the so-called internal settlement is not to bring about the genuine transfer of power
from the minority to the majority. For the Smith regime
has not been ail of a sudden converted to belief in majority
rule. Rather, the objective of the exercise is to obstruct
such a genuine transfer by instituting a system which, while
appearing to confer power on the black majority, essen-

29. The so-called internal settlement does not provide for
the demolition of Mr. Smith's instruments of domination
and oppression. To all intents and purposes, the rebel
regime's army, police and security forces remain intact. We
are supposed to believe that those security forces, which
have been the backbone of Mr. Smith's rebellion against the
British Crown, the backbone of defiance against the
international community and the pillar of internal aggres-

"The white supremacist delusion dressed up as majority
rule is Smith's answer to the guerilla war pressure that
drove him to the bargaining table."

3

sion against Zimbabweans as well as of external aggression
against independent African States, are to be the future
security forces of an independent Zimbabwe. Furthermore,
those are the same security forces on whose protection and
guidance the people of Zimbabwe, including those who
have sacrificed their sons, daughters and other loved ones,
ce to rely as they oversee an exercise of self-determination
in the Territory. How cynical can people be?
30. To add to the cynicism, a lot of hue and cry is made
of the fact that there are to be elections in Zimbabwe with
universal adult suffrage leading to majority rule. Naturally,
since we have all been fighting for majority rule, it is
tempting for Mr. Smith to attempt to bamboozle world
public opinion by appearing to accept that goal. The
pertinent question is: Under what conditions and in what
circumstances wiU those elections l)C: held? The nationalists
who for years have been fighting the illegal n!gime and what
it stands for may certainly be forgiven if they distrust
.Mr. Smith's good intentions. They may be forgiven if they
refuse overnight to treat the army and security forces of the
oppressor as the guarantor of their freedom and liberty.
Above all, does it really require any special talent or
wisdom to know that there could never be any climate of
confidence in Rhodesia when all those instruments of
repression and oppression form part of the so-called
internal settlement? And, witl1 the maintenance of all such
structures of domination, how can anyone seriously characterize the "deal" as constituting a means for the genuine
transfer of power?

liberation movement and in consistency with the United
Nations position as articulated in many of its resolutions,
we are interested in seeing in Zimbabwe a genuine transfer
of power and thus ensuring an end to the present conflict.
34. It is important, very important, that the international
community should properly understand this latest manoeuvre of the Smith regime. While clearly safeguarding the
real power bases of the minority-particularly its security
forces-, the Smith regime, in order to overcome international opposition and resistance, is desperately hoping that
the international community, and more particularly the
countries of the Western world with which Smith believes
he has a natural affmity, will be prepared to accept the
appearance, rather than the reality, of a transfer of power.
But it is significant to note that some important segments
of opinion in the Western world which Smith was hoping to
deceive are beginning to recognize his manoeuvres for what
they really are. The New York Times of yesterday, in its
editorial, reflected that recognition when it declared:
" ... The deal is little more than a device for keeping
real power in the hands of Rhodesia's small white
minority ...
" •.. The 4 per cent minority would retain effective
control of the army and civil service. 'Majority rule' so
hobbled by minority rights means no real transfer of
power, no matter how many blacks acquire ministerial
trappings."
35. But the people of Zimbabwe who have shed their
blood to end racist and colonial domination in their land
and the African States which have consistently supported
them in this struggle cannot and will not succumb to the
designs of the Smith regime. Moreover, this very Organization, which has stood firm in opposition to the racist
minority regime, cannot remain idle while Smith is cun•
ningly creating conditions for a more serious escalation of
the war that will have serious international repercussions.
No one who is interested in the freedom, peace and
stability of southern Africa should entertain any illusions
about this deal. Put differently, any sanctioning of the
so-called internal settlement can only further inflame the
already explosive situation-and here we must express our
very grave concern at some of the accolades given to the
Smith regime's latest manoeuvre.

31. For more than 10 years now, Zimbabwean patriots
have fought and died for the liberation of their fatherland.
The struggle has been long and arduous; it has been very
bitter. Is it realistic to expect that just when the pressures
of their combined efforts and sacrifices, coupled with
international pressures, have begun to signal the beginning
of the end of minority rule, that they will now allow
Mr. Smith's manoeuvres to rob them of the fruits of their
struggle? It would indeed be an insult to their intelligence
if we believed that the mere cosmetic change of Mr. Smith's
role in the affairs of Rhodesia, while his minority clique
continued effectively to remain in charge, would presage a
genuine resolution of the conflict. Such misconceptions are
at best a tragic exercise in self-deception.
32. It should therefore surprise no one that such internal
deals will not stop the war nor will they prevent those who
are genuinely concerned in the resolution of the conflict
from continuing effectively to support the freedom
fighters. Smith's internal deals, far from putting an end to
the conflict, will lead to its exacerbation and escalation. I
submit that that is not what the Council is interested in
seeing happen in Zimbabwe. I also hope that it is not the
type of situation that Her Majesty's Government, as the
administering Power over the Territory, would like to
encourage.

36. We believe that such positive evaluations are as
unfortunate as they are dangerous. They have only served
to encourage the Smith regime in its belief that it can strike
an internal deal and outmanoeuvre the anti-colonialist and
anti-racist forces both within and outside Zimbabwe.
Persisting in the belief that he can still outsmart everybody,
Smith hopes to buy more time and create more havoc and
devastation. But the liberation war is a reality and the
patriotic forces will continue to fight. Free Africa, for its
part, has a clear obligation to support that fight so long as
the objective of a genuine transfer of power has not been
achieved.

33. As far as my Government's position is concerned, our
attitude is unequivocal. In concert with the other African
States we have, through the thirtieth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
meeting at Tripoli last month, clearly and decisively
rejected any such deals. For, faithful to the struggle of the

37. Jn bringing our concern to the Security Council, we
consider this meeting an opportune occasion to warn friend
and foe alike of the dangers inherent in the present
4

situation in Southern Rhodesia. We are particularly anxious
to ensure th~t the international consensus so assiduously
worked out m support of the struggle in Zimbabwe is not
compromised through the machinations of the Smith
regime.

my Government, together with the Governments of the
other front-line States, has welcomed the Anglo-American
proposals, formally submitted on 1 September 1977
[S/12393], as providing a basis for a negotiated settlement.
We have done so because, despite some of the negative
aspects and shortcomings of the proposals, we believe that
they address themselves to the fundamental principles that
are an essential prerequisite to a negotiated settlement.
More specifically, the Anglo-American proposals provide
for the dismantling of the armed forces of the illegal racist
minority regime, the formation of a new Zimbabwe army
to be based on the patriotic forces, the preparedness of the
British Government to assume seriously its responsibility as
the colonial Power in order to facilitate the decolonization
of the Territory, and the creation of conditions which
would enable the people of Zimbabwe to determine their
future government, including the involvement of the United
Nations in the different processes envisaged.

~8. Any support, in whatever form, for the Smith regime's
internal settlement, any tendency to equivocate can eventually have the most far-reaching repercussions if the
struggle in Zimbabwe continues, as indeed it must. To those
who sometimes like to conceive of Africa's problems in
terms of global strategy and even cold war considerations
we say that they would be well advised to recognize that
the struggle for freedom in Zimbabwe will continue and
~ll be supported by free Africa and by all those who' have
m the past provided and will in the future provide that
struggle with the necessary means for its prosecution.
39. Let me make one point abundantly clear. In calling for
the rejection of the so-called internal settlement, we do so
conscious of the fact that this deal is in reality an invitation
to further violence and further bloodshed. It is an invitation
to prolonged warfare. We are also conscious of the fact that
what the Smith regime is trying to do is to promote what
has rightly been descrihed as a "black-on-black civil war".

43. Less than one month after the publication of those
proposals, the Security Council, on 29 September 1977,
adopted resolution 415 (1977), in which, inter alia, it
requested the Secretary-General to appoint a representative
to enter into discussions with the British Resident Commis•
sioner designate and with all the parties concerning the
military and associated arrangements that are considered
necessary to effect transition to majority rule. Subse•
quently, Lieutenant-General Prem Chand was appointed,
and he, together with Lord Carver, has had discussions with
the parties concerned. Indeed, after the Malta talks between
the British, the Americans and the Patriotic Front, it had
been our expectation that the negotiations would be
pursued in earnest.

40. Our interest is to put an end to the war. Our concern
is to avoid the internationalization of the conflict. But an
end to the present escalating violent confrontation can only
be achieved through the genuine resolution of the conflict.
To pretend that such a solution can be achieved while
ignoring the reality of the war situation in Zimbabwe is, at
best, to adopt an ostrich-like posture. It is understandable
for Smith, whose armed forces are locked in combat with
the forces of the Patriotic Front, to attempt to achieve
through manoeuvres what his armed forces have failed to
accomplish on the battlefield. But it is both ludicrous and
nai"ve to believe that there can be a cease-fire in Zimbabwe
without the consent of the fighting forces under the
leadership of the Patriotic Front. It is even more absurd to
expect that those forces will acquiesce in the effective
perpetuation of the power of the minority in a different
guise, as envisaged under the so-called internal settlement.

44. To our very profound regret and concern, we have
witnessed over the past few weeks and days, in the wake of
the reports of the so-called internal settlement, a kind of
resignation on the part of the authors of the Anglo•
American plan to the manoeuvres of the Smith regime.
Commenting on this alarming development, the Tanzania
Daily News of 28 February, in a lead commentary, stated,

inter alia:
"The British have described the reported 'agreement in
principle' in Salisbury as 'a step in the right direction'.
Now the Americans, who had earlier rejected the Salisbury agreement, sound as if they are having second
thoughts. Smith is being allowed to take the initiative and
both the British and the Americans are beginning to take
a 'wait and see' attitude.

41. If we are, as we must be, seriously interested in finding
a just and lasting solution to the vexing problem of
Rhodesia, then we must uncompromisingly work for a
genuine resolution of the conflict. Such a resolution must
have among its indispensable elements the following: the
ending of the illegal racist minority regime and the
dismantling of its instruments of oppression and repression,
principally its armed forces; the effective transfer of power
from the minority to the majority, and the emergence of
Zimbabwe as an independent State, such effective transfer
also presupposing the creation of a new Zimbabwe army;
the creation of a climate of confidence in the Territory
where the people of Zimbabwe can freely determine their
future government. It follows that the maintenance of
Smith's instruments of oppression, principally his armed
forces, is totally incompatible with the creation of such a
climate of confidence.

"Both the British and the Americans now seem content
with taking the back seat and letting Ian Smith do the
driving. They have all but allowed Smith to wrest the
initiative from them. They have all but abandoned their
own proposals. This is clearly unacceptable to the
Patriotic Front, the front-line States and to Africa."
45. It is the height of irony that Smith should in fact be
allowed to run the show and even be commended by the
very people who, in their own proposals, had clearly
assumed that the rebel leader would surrender power. We
can only observe that, if an impression is created that the
United Kingdom or the United States, or both, are willing

42. We reject the so-called internal settlement because it
negates the aforementioned principles. By the same token,

5

quickly to abandon their own proposals, a legitimate
question will arise as to how serious they were in the first
place in promoting a just settlement.
46. At any rate, for our part, in keeping with Africa's
clearly declared objecti\'e, we shall not fail to promote a
genuinely negotiated settlement. In the meantime, in
concert with other African States, we shall fulftJ our
obligation to the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe by
unequivocally supporting those who are fighting to bring to
an end the oppression and domination of the minority
racist regime. Moreover, we shall continue to mobilize
active and concrete support for the fighting forces under
the leadership of the Patriotic Front, because we sincerely
believe that only the pressure of the armed struggle,
combined with the relentless pressures of the international
community, can confound once and for all the intrigues
and schemes of the Smith illegal racist minority regime. We
are confident that all men and women of goodwill will
support this struggle, as they must with no less commitment support a genuinely negotiated selllement.
47. Naturally, I cannot conclude my statement without
expressing my gratitude to all the members of the Council
for affording me the oppormnity to address this august
body on so crucial an issue. The delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania is happy to see you, Mr. President, a
very distinguished representative of a Commonwealth country with which we maintain friendly relations, presiding
over the Council's deliberations.

itself'. We hope that the Smith regime will not be
encouraged to believe that it can get away with the
so-called internal settlement, because the blatant truth is
that it will not. All that such direct or indirect encourage•
ment can achieve is the escalation of the confrontation.
5 I. Mr. President, in the last few months-and indeed
during the most recent years-our two Govermn~nts, th;
Government of the United Kingdom and the Government
of the United Republic of Tanzania, have worked fairly
closely in an attempt to find a negotiated settlement of the
Zimbabwe question. We hope that this will continue to be
the case, for it would be unfortunate if we found ourselves
moving once again along the path of confrontation rather
tJ1an that of co-operation.
52. I am therefore confident that your sense of integrity,
your capabilities and abilities, coupled with the realities of
the situation, will prove to be invaluable assets in enabling
the Council to reject decisively the path to chaos, further
violence and bloodshed-a path that is clearly indicated in
the current so-called internal settlement. l also believe that
it is within the Council's capabilities to put an end to this
charade and to promote instead conditions that are
conducive to a real solution of the conflict in Southern
Rhodesia.

53. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for the kind words that he
addressed to me and to my country, and I take note of the
unkind words that he addressed to me and to my country.

48. It is perhaps a fitting coincidence that the United
Kingdom should be presiding over the current debate. After
all, Southern Rhodesia is a British colony, and most of the
problems that we arc now faced with in that unhappy land
are not totally unrelated to the United Kingdom's own acts
of omission and commission over the years as administering
Power. My hope-indeed, the fervent hope of my Government-is that the United Kingdom will use its influence
both in the Security Council and outside it to promote a
genuine settlement of tJ1e conflict in Zimbabwe, for to do
otherwise would be most unfortunate and indeed unworthy
of a Power with colonial responsibility for the Territory.

54. The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I
invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to make
her statement.

55. MISS KONIE (Zambia): The Security Council is
meeting at a critical tfme in order to consider the
deteriorating situation in Southern Rhodesia. Since 11
November 1965, the question of Southern Rhodesia has
been a perennial item on the agenda of the Council and on
that of the United Nations in general, but it has defied
solution. As the foregoing implies, this meeting is but one
in a series. The only unusual characteristic of this particular
meeting is that it is taking place under the presidency of the
colonial Power in Southern Rhodesia. In addition to the
involvement of the British for generations in Southern
Rhodesia, you, Mr. President, are personally familiar with
and have for quite some time been intimately involved in
attempts to find a negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe. One
is reminded of the abortive Geneva conference of only two
years ago that was presided over by none other than
yourself.

49. It would be particularly unfortunate because it would
constitute yet another error in the history of the tragedy of
errors committed by the United Kingdom in the Southern
Rhodesian question. This is not the time for us to go into
the history of the acts of omission and commission of the
administering Power with regard to this question. But let
me just remind this Council that it was the then British
Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Wilson, who declared in I 965
that Britain would not use force to quell the rebellion, even
if Smith went ahead and made his unilateral declaration of
independence. Whatever may have been Mr. Wilson's
motives, in effect his statement was certainly taken by
Mr. Smith as a green light to go ahead with his rebellion.
After all, one does not tell a potential thief that, while
stealing is a crime, he could get away without serious
punishment.

56. Zambia has been watching the situation in Rhodesia
very closely. We have reached the conclusion that the
recent so-called internal settlement in the British colony of
Rhodesia is a sell-out and cannot provide a meaningful
solution of the Rhodesian problem for a variety of reasons.
57. The so-called internal settlement in essence perpet•
uates the illegal regime in Rhodesia. We regard it as
retrogressive. It is even worse than the Kissinger proposals
of 1976 which were rejected at Geneva. It clearly en•

50. We do sincerely hope that, in the particular circumstances of developments in Zimbabwe today, we shall not
l:ie witnessing the fulfilment of the adage "History repeats
6

trenches not only Smith but also white minority rule in
Zimbabwe.

granted are violated and denied to the people of Zimbabwe
by the agents of Smith. Innocent men, women and children
are tortured, humiliated and usually murdered in cold
blood. Smith continues to mobilize for a total war against
the gallant freedom fighters. He is committing more men,
more sophisticated weaponry and more money, including
bribes, to the war against the Zimbabwean liberation
movement.

S8. As we see it, the so-called internal settlement is a
challenge to the Anglo-American proposals, which both the
fre«:dom fighters and the front-line States believed to be a
basis for an internationally acceptable negotiated settlement. This be1ief seems to have been vindicated by Security
Council resolution 415 (1977), which authorized the
Sec_retary-General to appoint a Special Representative and
which resulted in the appointment of Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand. In hatching the so-called internal settlement
formula, Smith is clearly seeking to undermine and to
frustrate the Anglo-American initiative.

63. In concocting his so-called internal settlement scheme,
Smith was so nai've as to behave as though the thousands of
freedom fighters now dealing devastating blows to his
regime did not exist. To believe that these brave young men
and women, who have sacrificed their lives for the
liberation of Zimbabwe, could lay down their arms because
of a sham settlement is to indulge in a costly exercise in
self-deception. Indeed, one would have to live in a fool's
paradise not to know that only the genuine liberation of
Zimbabwe will stop the war that is now raging in that
unfortunate land. Realistically speaking, no settlement in
Zimbabwe that excludes the fighting forces of the Patriotic
Front can be sustained.

59. In spite of some obvious flaws in the Anglo-American
proposals, Zambia, along with other front-line States,
continues to regard those proposals as providing a framew~rk that could lead to the genuine independence of
Zimbabwe. We had hoped that the United States and the
United Kingdom would be both willing and able to work
for the success of their own initiative. We had also hoped
that they had undertaken that initiative with the full
determination not to allow Smith to continue to fool them
and the rest of the international community.

64. The concurrence and participation of the fighting
forces in any settlement in Zimbabwe is totally indispensable for the stability and genuine independence of that
country. The attempts of Ian Smith and his clique to
circumvent the fighting cadres are intended only to create a
civil war in Zimbabwe.

60. Recent reports, attributed to the United States and to
the United Kingdom concerning their attitude towards the
so-called internal settlement in Southern Rhodesia, have, to
say the least, been disquieting. In particular, statements
emanating from the British Foreign Office have continued
to give the impression that the British Government is ready
to abandon the Anglo-American proposals in favour of the
scheme devised by Ian Smith. We find this reprehensible
and unacceptable. The British Government should not
attempt to wash its hands of the Southern Rhodesian
problem before it is resolved amicably. The United
Kingdom should not repeat its historical mistakes with
regard to South Africa and Palestine the ominous consequences of which continue today. The only notable positive
voice that we have heard from Washington is that of
Ambassador Andrew Young, the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations. He
has made statements on the so-called internal settlement
negotiations that have shown realism and farsightedness. We
know that those statements have earned him the mischievous criticism of reactionary elements in his country, but
we hope and trust that his Government will stand by the
position he has taken.

65. The facts clearly show that in reality the so-called
internal settlement gives effective power to Smith, who
continues to control the army, the air force, the police and
the judiciary. This means controlling the entire machinery
of state. The intention of Ian Smith is to divide and rule.
Smith's intention in the whole exercise is to cause utter
confusion and conflict among the Africans in Zimbabwe,
the Organization of African Unity and the whole interna•
tional community.
66. Zambia contends that nothing has changed in the
Rhodesian situation. Zambia therefore condemns and
totally rejects the so-called internal agreement just concluded at Salisbury.
67. Zambia will continue to work for genuine majority
rule and independence in Zimbabwe, as indeed in Namibia
and South Africa. We reiterate our support for armed
struggle in Zimbabwe. It is the effectiveness of the armed
struggle waged by the Patriotic Front which prompted the
Anglo-American initiative, as indeed the Geneva conference
in 1976. We believe that continued and intensified armed
struggle is imperative for the success of any negotiated
settlement in Zimbabwe. As a basis for negotiations, the
Anglo-American proposals and the armed struggle, both of
which we shall continue to support, are, in our view, not
contradictory but complementary.

61. We are entitled to expect that the proponents of the
Anglo-American proposals will be the first to defend them.
If they were sincere in advancing the proposals, we do not
expect them to abandon them on the altar of expediency.
Their credibility is at stake. The circumstances that
motivated them in making the proposals for a genuine
settlement in Zimbabwe have not changed. If anything,
they have worsened and become all the more visible.

68. The Patriotic Front deserves the full support of all
well-meaning countries for the mature manner in which its
members have conducted themselves with regard to the
Anglo-American proposals, as demonstrated at the recent
talks in Malta between representatives of the Patriotic
Front, on the one hand, and representatives of the United

62. Southern Rhodesia is today fast drifting towards an
ugly holocaust. Smith has intensified his repression of the
black majority. Every Zimbabwean, particularly in the
so-called protected villages, is a virtual prisoner. The very
basic human rights that the rest of the world takes for
7

States and the United Kingdom, on the other. The Patriotic
Front has negotiated seriously on the basis of those
proposals and remains ready to pursue them. Ian Smith
must not be allowed to veto the Anglo-American proposals
and get away with his own scheme, which is intended only
to allow him to buy time and perpetuate the suffering of
the people of Zimbabwe.
69. Zambia calls upon all Member States to reject the
so-called internal settlement. The United Nations must not
acquiesce in the scheme of Ian Smith, which is fraught with
dangerous consequences not only for Zimbabwe but for the
whole of southern Africa. We must remain true to the
principles and purposes of the United Nations and seek
genuine majority rule and independence in Zimbabwe 'in
accordance with· the numerous relevant United Nations
resolutions, including ~neral Assembly resolution
1514 (XV).
70. It is now fashionable for the racist minority regimes in
southern Africa to talk about so-called internal settlements
with a view to circum\·enting the authority of the United
Nations. South Afric.a· is currently watching developments
in Southern Rhodesia for their relevance to Namibia. We
must reject and combat these manoeuvres calculated to
preserve white power and privilege in southern Africa and

to condemn the black majority to perpetual subjugation,
oppression, repression and exploitation.
71. The Security Council is the United Nations organ
entrusted with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The situation in
Southern Rhodesia remains a serious threat to international
peace and security. The existing economic sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia must not only be maintained but also
widened. to include the full force of Chapter VII of the
Charter. The Council must reject the manoeuvres of Ian
Smith and pronounce null and void any so-called internal
settlement in Southern Rhodesia arrived at under the
auspices of the white racist minority regime. The Council
should, moreover, categorically oblige the States Members
of the United Nations and the rest of the international
community to refuse any recognition to a regime created in
Southern Rhodesia as a result of the so-called internal
settlement negotiations. We must continue to work for the
total ostracism of the white minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia and for the genuine exercise by the people of
Zimbabwe of its inalienable right to self-determination and
national independence.
17ze meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

8
