30

General Assembly -

expressed wishes of the people. This does not preclude consultations as appropriate or necessary under the terms of the
free association agreed upon.
Principle VII I
integration with an independent State should be on the basis
of complete equality between the peoples of the erstwhile NonSelf-Governing Territory and those of the independent country
with which it is integrated. The peoples of both territories
should have equal status and rights of citizenship and equal
guarantees of fundamental rights and freedoms without any
distinction or discrimination; both should have equal rights
and opportunities for representation and effective participation
at all levels in the executive, legislative and judicial organs of
government.
Pri,iciple IX
Integration should have come about in the following circumstances:
(a) The integrating territory should have attained an
advanced stage of self-government with free political institutions,
so that its peoples would have the capacity to make a responsible
choice through informed and democratic processes;
(b) The integration should be the result of the freely expressed wishes of the terrttory's peoples acting with full knowledge of the change in their status, their wishes haying been
expressed through informed and democratic processes, impartially conducted and based on universal adult suffrage. The
United Nations could, when it deems it necessary, supervise
these processes.
Principle X
The transmission of information in respect of Non-SelfGoverning Territodes under Article 73 e of the Charter is
subject to such limitation as security and constitutional
considerations may require. This means that the extent of the
ihformation may be limited in certain circumstances, but the
limitation in Article 73 e cannot relieve a Member State of
the obligations of Chapter XI. The "limitation" can relate only
to the quantum of information of economic, social and educational nature to be transmitted.
Principle X I
The only constitutional considerations to which Article 73 e
of the Charter refers are those arising from constitutional
relations of the territory with the Administering Member. They
refer to a situation in which the constitution of the territory
gives it self-government in economic, social and educational
matters through freely elected institutions. Nevertheless, the
responsibility for transmitting information under Article 73 e
continues, unless these constitutional relations preclude the
Government or parliament of the Administering Member from
receiving statistical and other information of a technical nature
relating to economic, social and educational conditions in the
territory.
Principle XII
Security considerations have not been invoked in the past.
Only in very exceptional circumstances can information on
economic, social and educational conditions have any security
aspect. In other circumstances, therefore, there should be no
necessity to limit the transmission of information on security
grounds.

1542 (XV). Transmission of information under
Article 7 3 e of the Charter

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 742 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, the General Assembly approved a list of
factors to be used as a guide in determining whether
a Territory is or is no longer within the scope of
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations,

Fifteenth Session

Recalling al,so that differences of views arose among
Member States concerning the status of certain territories under the administrations of Portngal and Spain
and described by these two States as "overseas provinces" of the metropolitan State concerned, and that
with a view to resolving those differences the General
Assembly, by resolution 1467 (XIV) of 12 December
1959, appointed the Special Committee of Six on the
Transmission of Information under Article 73 e of the
Charter to study the principles which shonld guidt'
Members in determining whether or not an obligation
exists to transmit the information called for in
Article 73 e,
Recognizing that the desire for independence is the
rightful aspiration of peoples under colonial subjugation
and that the denial of their right to self-determination
constitutes a threat to the well-being of humanity and
to international peace,
Recalling with satisfaction the statement of the representative of Spain at the 10-l8th meeting of the Fourth
Committee that his Government agrees to transmit information to the Secretary-General in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter,
Mindful of its responsibilities under Article 14 oi
the Charter,
Being aware that the Government of Portugal has
not transmitted information on the territories under its
administration which are enumerated in operative paragraph 1 below add has nut expressed any intention of
doing so, and became such information as is otherwise
available in r('gard to the conditions in these territories
gives cattse for concern,
l. Considers that, in the light of the provisions of
Chapter XI of the Charter, General Assembly resolution
742 (VIII) and the principles approved hy the Assembly
in resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 Drcemher 1960, the
territories under the administration of Portugal listed
hereunder are Non-Self-Governing Territories within
the meaning of Chapter XI of the Charter:
(a) The Cape Verde Archipelago;
( b) Guinea, called Portuguese Guinea;
( c) Sao Tome and Principe, and their dependencies;
(d) Sao Joao Batista de Ajuda;
(e) Angola, including the enclave of Cabinda;
(f) Mozambique;
(g) Goa and dependencies, called the State of India;
( h) Macau and dependencies ;
(i) Timar and dependencies;

2. Declares that an obligation exists on the part of
the Government of Portugal to transmit information
under Chapter Xl of the Charter concerning these territories and that it should be discharged without further
delay;
3. Requests the Government of Portugal to transmit
to the Secretary-General information in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter on the conditions prevailing in the territories under its administration enumerated in paragraph 1 above ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps in pursuance of the declaration of the Government of Spain that it is ready to act in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter;
5. Invites the Governments of Portugal and Spain
to participate in the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance

Resolutfons adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commillce

with the terms of paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 1332 (XTII) of 12 lkcemlwr 1958.
9/St/z plenary mcctiny,
15 Dcremher 1960.
1563 (XV).

Petitions relating to the Territory
of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having acce/1trd the advisory op1111011 of 11 July
lqSO of the International Court of Justice oil the question
of South \Vest Africa, 13
Having authori:;cd the Committee Oil South \Vest
Africa, by resolution 749 /\ (\'III) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the
Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee dealing
with petitions relating, inter alia, to the status of S(1uth
\Vest Africa and conditions in the Territorv, tlw situation in the Windhoek :\"ative Location, the removal
of the Native Location in \Valvis Bav, conditions in
the Ovamboland Native Reserve, co;1ditions in the
Hoachanas Native Reserve, general conditions in the
Rehoboth Community, the imprisonment of Mr. Toivo
Ja-Toivo, tlw question nf the return of Hereros in
Bechuanaland to South \Nest Africa and a request fnr
a scholarship from a student in South \Vest Africa, 14
Noting that these petitions raise questions relating to
various aspects of the administration of South West
Africa and of conditions in the Territory, uprm which
the Committee has presented a report,
Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned to
the report and observations of the Committee on South
West Africa regarding qmditions in the Territory submitted to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session, 15
and to the action taken by the Assembly on this report.
951th plenary meeting.
18 December 1960.
1564 (XV).

Political freedom
Africa

in South West

The General Assembly,
Having noted, on the basis of the report of the Committee on South West Africa, 16 that leaders of the South
\Vest Africa Peoples Organisation and other Africans
in the Territory of Sou;h \Vest Africa are being subjected to arbitrary imprisonment and deportation,

l. Expresses its deep concern regarding this disturbing development;
2. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to instruct the competent authorities in the
Mandated Territory of South West Africa to cease the
arbitrary imprisoning and deporting of Africans, including the leaders and members of the South West Africa
Peoples Organisation, and to ensure the free exercise
of political rights and freedom of expression for all
sectors of the population.
954th plenary meeting,
18 Dere111ber 1960.
13 Interirational status of South-West Africa, Advisory O f'i11ion: I.CJ. Reports, 1950, p. 128.
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Se.<sion, Supplement No.12 (A/4464), part I, section IV.
rn Ibid., part II.
16Ibid., Supplement No.12 (A/4464).

31

l 565 (XV). Legal action to ensure the fulfilment
of the obligations m,sumerl by the Union of
South Africa in respect of the T(~rritory
of South West Africa
Fite General Assembly,
Ncralliny its resolution 1361 (XIV) of 17 November
I ()59, in which it drew the attention of Member States
lo ,lie conclusions of the special report of the Committee
011 South \Vest Africa 17 concerning the legal action open
to :\!ember States to submit to the International Court
,if Justice any dispute with the Union of South Africa
relating to the interpretation or application of the
pnll·isions oi the l\landate for the Territory of South
\Vt'st Africa, if such dispute cannot be settled by
11cg-ot iation,
,Votiny with·yrmJC conrcrn that the administration oi
thl' Territory, in recent vears has been conducted in
a ma111H'r cc;ntrary to the· l\1a1;clate, the Charter of the
United Natinns, the Universal Declaration of Human
h'.ights and the resolutions of the General Assemblv,
including resolution 449 A ( \') of 13 Decembt'r 195(),
1,y which :he Assembly accepted the advisory opinion
of 11 July )(J~O oithe lnternational Court of Justict' on
the quc:ition of South \Vest Africa, 13
Notinr; that all negotiations and efforts on the part
<1i the ( ;eneral Assemblv, of its several committees and
organs constitutt'd and ;11thorized for this purpose, and
of .'\krnlwr States acting through such committees and
organs, have failed lo bring about compliance on the
part nf the ( ;overnment of the Union of South Africa
with its obligations under the Mandate, as is evirfenced,
inter a1ia, by the following reports of the said committees
and ()rgans to the Assembly :
(a) Reports of the Ad l Joe Committee on South
\Nest Africa to the General Assembly at its sixth,
,eventh and eighth. sessions, 18
( b) Reports of the Committee on South \Vest Africa
to the General Assemblv at its ninth to fifteenth
sessions, 19
•
( c) Reports of the Good Offices Committee on South
Vv est Africa to the General Assembly at its thirternth
and fourteenth sessions, 20
Noting the aforesaid reports, and in particular the
reports of the Committee on South \Vest Africa concerning the failure of negotiations with the Government
()f the Union of Scuth Africa and the Committee's conclusions that the L: nion has at all times declined to
co-operate in any way with the Committee in the
discharge of its functions,
I. N oil's with appro1.1al the observations of the Committee on South \Vest Africa concerning the administration of the Territory as set out in the Committee's
1 1 Jbid.,

Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A./3625).
Sixth Session, Aimcxes, agenda item 38, documents
:\/1901 and Add.1-3; ibid., Eighth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 36, doc-uments .\/2261 and Add.I and A/2475 and Add.I
and 2.
19 Jbid., .\"intlz Session, Supplement No. 14 (.'\/266() and
Corr.I); ibid., 1Vinth Session, ,-/nnexcs, agenda item 34, document A/2666/Add.1; ibid., Tenth Session, Supplemmt ,11/0. 1::
( A/2913); ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 30, documents A/2913/ Add.I and 2; ibid., Eleventh Sl'ssion, Supplement
No. 12 (A/3151; ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplemc1it No. 12
( A/3626) ; ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supple-men/ No. 12
( A/3906 and Add.I); ibid., Fourteenth Session, Supplement
No. 12 (A/4191); ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 12
(A/4464).
zo Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, docurnent A/3900; ibid., Fourteenth Sessin11, Annexes, agenda item
JS, document A/4224.
18 Ibid.,
