TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 20 MARCH 1969
- I
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1465) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 14 March 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Ceylon,
Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Ivory
Coast, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Syria, Jgo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9090 and Add.l-3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1465

FOURTEEN

NUNDRED

AND SIXTY-FIFTH

eld in New York on Thursday,
President; Mr. K. CSATORDAY

(Hungary).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda IS/Agenda/l465)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 14 March 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Ceylon,
Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Cyprus, EquatoriaI Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Ivory Coast,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Syria, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United
Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9090
and Add.l-3).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

‘MEETING

20 March 1969, at 3 p.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. 13’1Kony
(United Arab Republic) took a seat at the Comcil table.
2. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I should like to
join with our colleagues in expressing our appreciation to
Ambassador Bt%ard for the distingished fashion in which he
carried on our consultations last month. I also wish,
Mr. President, to welcome you. It is with great plc;lsure that
we continue our deliberations under your Presidency.
3. Today’s meeting of the Security Council on Namibia, at
the request of fbrty-six Members of the United Nations, is
truly of historic importance when we consider the train of
events that has brought us here.
4. Since 1947, the question of Namibia, or South West
Africa, has been repeatedly considered by the General
Assembly. Early and unsuccessful efforts were made to
place this Territory, along with other League of Nations
Mandates, within the United Nations Trusteeship System.
The International Court of Justice, in Advisory Opinions,
stated that the Mandate under which South Africa administered the Territory had not lapsed and that South Africa
was under an obligation to account to the United Nations,
which inherited the supervisory functions formerly executed by the League of Nations. Efforts were also made, by
the adoption of resolutions and the establishment of
commissions, to make it possible for the people of Namibia
to exercise their inherent right of self-determination, as
provided in Chapters XI and XII of the Charter. All of these
efforts and appeals by the international community were
rebuffed by the Government of South Africa.

The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 14 March 1969 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Ceylon, Chad, Congo
(Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen,
Sudan, Syria., Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Repubhc, United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/9090 and Add.l-3)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at this morning’s meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of the
United Arab Republic to take a seat at the Council tabIe in
order to participate in the discussion of the item on our
agenda, without the right to vote.

5. In 1966, the General Assembly adopted resolution
2145 (XXI), in which the Assembly decided that by virtue
of the breach of its obligations and its disavowal of the
Mandate, South Africa had forfeited its Mandate in
Namibia.
6. Having decided that that Mandate had been terminated,
the General Assembly also decided that the Territory came
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations. What
is this responsibility? First, we submit, it is to be informed
of, and to keep the world fully aware of, developments
affecting the vital interests of all Namibians; second, to
promote those interests by all peaceful and practicable
means; and third, to seek to assist the Namibians in the
exercise of their right to self-determination. It is a cause of
deep regret that the United Nations has to date been
prevented from exercising its responsibilities in Namibia.
7. Among other provisions, resolution 2145 (XXI) called
on South Africa not to take any further steps which might

tend to alter the international status of the Territory.
Under the guise of “steps to promote self-determination of
the people”, South Africa soon appeared to have embarked
on what amounted to piece-meal anrlexation of the
Territory.

peaceful solution to the problem may be possible. And the
South African GoGernment, for its part, must be prepared
to re-examine its provocative behaviour. If I may para.
phrase President Nixon, the need now is to lower our voices
all round so that we begin to understand each other.

8. In 1967, we learned that South Africa had enacted the
so-called “Terrorism
Act”. This measure was soundly
condemned by the international community and its appli‘cation to Namibia considered to be illegal. In 1968, the
United Nations demanded the release and repatriation of
Namibians held in connexion with this Act. Also in 1968,
an additional step in the direction of annexation was taken
when South Africa adopted the “Self-government
for
Native Nations of South West Africa Act”. According to
statements made by South Africa, the provisions of this Act
were arrived at through consultation with the people of
Namibia and, therefore, represented a valid form of
self-determination.
My Government in the past has been
unable to accept this assertion and is still unable to do so.
We should like to know, for example, who were the people
consulted, about what propositions, and by what means?

14. In this connexion, I am happy to state that the United
States supports the draft resolution which we have before
us. I should like to pay special tribute to the statesmanlike
way in which consultations which led to the present text
were conducted. As a result, we anticipate that the draft
resolution introduced this morning by the representative of
Zambia will command broad support within the Council,
crossing regional and ideological lines.
15. The United States is able to support the text of the
draft resolution before us because it wisely does not
commit the Council to the narrow path of mandatory
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. As we have
repeatedly made clear, we believe that it would be
inappropriate in this situation to consider measures contained in Chapter VII. In our judgement, this is not a
situation which can sensibly and humanely be remedied by
mandatory sanctions. Such measures would be likely to
prove ineffective and hence to weaken rather than strengthen the prestige and authority of the United Nations. For
the same reason they would, far from impioving the lot of
the Namibians, run the risk of making their situation even
worse than it is today. With these considerations in mind,
we wish again to make clear, despite our strong condemnation of South African behaviour in this regard, the limits
beyond which we do not feel that it would be either wise or
feasible for this Council to go in present circumstances.

9. More recently, we understand that still another bill has
been passed by the South African Parliament concerning
Namibia-the so-called “South West African Affairs Bill”.
This Bill appears to be a further effort to consolidate South
Africa’s control over Namibia by giving the South African
Parliament and central government departments wide
powers over the affairs of Namibia. We have urged South
Africa not to enact this legislation.
10. These actions which 1 have briefly outlined show that
South Africa is not only attempting to annex Namibia, but
is also extending its heinous policy of upnrtheid-a policy
which has been condemned by all here present-to
that
Territory.

16. Despite the fact that South Africa has no legal right in
Namibia, my Government believes that South Africa
remains accountable to the United Nations for all of its
actions in the Territory and for the well-being of the people
there so long as it remains in de facto control. We think
that it would help if the South African Government, which
has often protested that its actions in Namibia are
misunderstood, would receive, without any conditions, a
special representative of the Secretary-General to discuss
Namibia, or would make some other gesture which would
have the effect of acknowledging its responsibilities to the
international community,
In other words, the time has
come for South Africa lo make a fresh effort, in cooperation with the United Nations, to resolve the problem,
My Government believes that a just and peaceful solution,
ensuring the rights and interests of all of the parties, is still
possible, and to that end I pledge the support of the United
States for all appropriate steps.

11. The United States voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). We believe that South Africa’s
actions, which I have briefly summarized, demonstrate that
the General Assembly was correct in determining that
South Africa had forfeited the right to administer Namibia
and in concluding that the United Nations should assume
responsibility for the Territory.
12. The United States shares the objective of the members
which have taken the initiative in bringing this matter to
the Council. We, like them, are firmly dedicated to the
achievement of freedom and independence by the people of
Namibia. For its part, the United States is willing to take
every peaceful and practical step under the Charter which
would assist, or would be likely to assist, in the qchievement of this goal.

17. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
[tmnsluted from Russian): Mr. President, before stating the
position of the Soviet Union on the matter being discussed
by the Security Council, may I say that the Soviet
delegation fully associates itself with those who have
already expressed their gratitude to your predecessors, the
former Presidents of the Security Council, Ambassador
Jakobson and Ambassador Birard.

13. Earlier, I stated that this meeting of the Council was
of historic significance. Although the Security Council met
oti two occasions in 1968 to consider South Afrjca’s actions
in illegally arresting and bringing to trial thirty-seven
Namibians, this is the first time that the Council has met to
consider the situation created by South Africa’s refusal to
implement resolution 2145 (XXI) of the General Assembly.
In this new setting, we shall perform the highest service to
the Namibian people if we seek ways and means by which a

18. In saying this, the Soviet delegation is not merely
following the usual protocol ritual and the long-standing
2

22. In the light of these events reflecting the profound
social, economic and national liberation processes of our
time, the colonial policy of the South African racist
authorities towards the vast Territory which they hold
illegally in southern Africa-Namibia and its indigenous
population-is all the more intolerable.

practice of the Security Council; we regard it as a pleasant
duty to reaffirm the sincere esteem and the friendly feelings
we have for Mr. Jakobson and Mr. Bdrard as representatives
of countries with which the Soviet Union tias relations of
friendship and co-operation.
19. France and Finland lie in different parts of Europe
and the languages spoken by their peoples are different and
there are other differences between them and us. But the
USSR, France and Finland have a good deal in common. It
is not simply a geographical connexion, not simply the fact
tlhat they belong to the same geographical region of the
world. Long-standing ties of continually developing cooperation in the most varied fields bind the Soviet Union to
its northern neighbour, Finland, and to France, a country
in the extreme west of Europe,, whose great people has
made an invaluable contribution to the heritage of world
civilization and human progress. In our countries, we are
firmly convinced, there is a general desire and determination to ensure that Europe becomes a continent of peace
and fruitful co-operation between nations on an equal
footing, that it shall be a decisive factor in stability and the
maintenance and strengthening of peace and security
throughout the world. It is towards that goal that the
Soviet Union and the other socialist countries of Europe are
c,onstantly and steadfastly striving. Their efforts and their
sincere desire have been recently confirmed in the appeal of
the socialist countries to all the States of Europe, which
was adopted recently at a conference in the ancient and
beautiful capital of your country, Mr. President, that of the
fraternal Hungarian People’s Republic.

23. For the Soviet Union, a country which from the first
days of its existence has taken a firm stand against all forms
of social and national inequality and discrimination, against
colonial and racist oppression, and has firmly supported
national freedom and national independence, the fate of
Namibia and its people cannot be a matter of indifference.
Our own impatience towards colonialism and racism, and
our complete solidarity with the peoples fighting for their
liberation, determine the Soviet Union’s stand on the
Namibia question.
24. That stand has frequently been explained fully by
Soviet representatives during the debates on the question
on Namibia in the Security Council, at sessions of the
General Assembly and in the Committee of Twenty-Four.1
It is determined by the very nature of the Soviet State and
its Leninist foreign policy, one of the fundamental points
of which is to provide all possible support and assistance to
the liberation movement and to co-operate brotherly with
the oppressed peoples against imperialist oppression and
colonial exploitation.

20. Allow me, then, to welcome you, Mr-President, and
to say that I am sure that your rich and varied experience,
your deep knowledge of international relations and your
tact and ability, for which you are well known in United
Nations circles, of maintaining friendly and businesslike
contacts with all your colleagues in the United.Nations are
a guarantee that you will successfully carry out the highly
important and responsible task of President of the Security
Council. The Soviet delegation is particularly glad to greet
you on this auspicious occasion when your country is
celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the proclamation of
the Hungarian Soviet Republic. The heroic deeds of the .
Hungarian proletariat and peasantry in 1919 are written in
letters of gold in the history of the international working
class movement. After the Second World War the Hungarian
people embarked upon the broad path of socialist development. Rejoicing together with you at the successes achieved
by the Hungarian people in building socialism, the Soviet
delegation once again wishes you, and the fraternal
Hungarian people as a whole, prosperity and happiness.
21. During the last two decades the national liberation
struggle of the peoples has attained vast proportions and
has been crowned with remarkable success. In Africa, Asia
and in other continents former colonial territories which
had no rights have been replaced by dozens of young
sovereign States. This important historical fact of the
post-war period is clear evidence of the invincible drive of
The peoples towards freedom, national independence and
the complete eradication of the shameful centuries-old
systemof colonialismand imperialism.

25. The Soviet Union has always firmly and consistently
advocated the decisive condemnation of the racist colonial
r&me of South Africa and of those imperialist States
which, in defiance of the decisions of the United Nations
organs, are either openly or indirectly supporting that
r&ime.
26. The events subsequent to ,the decision taken at the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly to terminate
South Africa’s Mandate for the administration of South
West Africa (resolution 2145 (XXI)), and the recent events
in that country, which is now called Namibia, fully confirm
the correctness of the position of principle taken by the
USSR on that question.
27. The brilliant speeches by the representatives of
Zambia and Algeria at this morning’s meeting, full of
incontrovertible facts concerning further.crimes committed
by, the Pretoria authorities against the people of Namibia,
rang out as a fully justified indictment of the inhuman
racist regime of South Africa and its supporters. The clear
statement of the representative of Senegal contained a stern
and angry condemnation of the policy of racism and
apartheid carried out by the criminal South African
Government,
28. That was the voice of free Africa, a voice which the
South African racist leaders cannot but reckon with and
which must be listened to attentively by those who,
notwithstanding the numerous resolutions of the United
Nations, are continuing to maintain relations and contacts
with the South African racists and helping them to carry
I Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

3

out their policy of violent racism and apartheid, which is
abhorred by the peoples and condemned by the United
Nations.

36. In the course of this discussion, there has been an
attempt to define the South African regime as the “foster
child of the developed countries”. In fact the racist South
African rdgime is the last born child of the colonial system
of imperialism. We know that the natural resources of
southern Africa have for a long time attracted the close
attention of the imperialist monopolies, while the im.
portant strategic position of that area is an attraction for
the military authorities of many Western countries. There
in southern Africa, under the protection and with the direct
help of those countries, there has been created a special
kind of military-political
triangle, known among the
Africans as the “unholy alliance”, comprising the Republic
of South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Portugal, which is
a member of NATO. The territories and colonies of this
“troika” are a stronghold of colonialism and racism on the
African continent. This stronghold is used as an instrument
for protecting the interests of the imperialist monopolies
which are exploiting the African population and despoiling
it of its wealth. The members of this triangular military
racist bloc carry out co-ordinated punitive operations
against the peoples of the Portuguese colonies and Southern
Rhodesia and Namibia, endeavouring to frighten the young
independent countries of Africa with the threat of war and
armed reprisaEs. The leading role in this bloc belongs to the
racists of South Africa.

29. The militarist, fascist and racist regime of Pretoria,
ignoring the clear-cut decisions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, and disregarding world public
opinion, is carrying out in Namibia an unbridled policy of
colonialist arbitrariness, apartheid and racial discrimination
towards the indigenous population of that country.
30. The events of recent months bear witness to the fact
that the South African racist regime is becoming increasingly aggressive. The Government of South Africa is forcing
through the notorious “Odendaal plan”, the purpose of
which is to deprive the Namibian people of its unity and
territorial integrity by means of the compulsory transfer of
the indigenous African inhabitants to specially created
reserves called “bantustans”. FolIowing the creation of the
“bantustans”
of Ovamboland and Katutura in uninhabited
areas that are hardly suitable for human habitation, the
South African troops forcibly expelled from the Caprivi
strip about 1,000 Namibians who subsequently, fleeing
from persecution and terror on the part of the authorities,
were compelled to leave their homeland and settle in
neighbouring African countries.

37. In a TASS communiqu& issued in connexion with the
talks held in October and November of last year between
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mr. Wilson, and
Smith, the head of the Souihern Rhodesian racist regime, it
was stressed that there were grounds for the fears of the
Governments of many African States, and also of the
leaders of the national liberation movements of the peoples
of southern Africa, concerning that bloc of racist States
which is a constant threat to the independent African
States and bars the way to the national liberation movement in Africa.

31. There has been an intensification in Namibia of
arrests, evictions, trials and sentencing of Africans, whose
sole fault consists in the fact that they will not be
reconciled to the position of colonial slaves in the second
half of the twentieth century and are resisting the colonialists. According to press reports, South African police
and army reinforcements are carrying out punitive operations in the territory of Namibia.
32. All these acts of violence against Africans by the
racists are for one single purpose: to break the will of the
people of Namibia to light for its freedom and independence, and to pave the way for the strengthening of the
unlawful annexation of that Territory by the racist r&ime
of South Africa.

38. But the “unholy alliance” does not operate by itself.
It enjoys increasing economic and military support from
the leading States members of NATO and their monopolies.
The material basis for the military policies of the South
African racists is to be found in the thousands of millions
of dollars invested by British, American, West German and
other imperialist monopolies, which contribute to the
South African economy for the sake of obtaining extremely
high profits through the inhuman exploitation of African
labour, including that of the population of Namibia.

33. It is in that light that we must consider the new
“South West Africa Affairs Bill” which the Pretoria
authorities intend to bring into force on 1 April of this
year. Under this racist colonial law, Namibia will, in fact, be
turned into the fifth province of South Africa,
34. These are just some of the facts which eloquently
testify to the deteriorating situation in Namibia as a result
of the further escalation of the colonial-racist policy
pursued in that country by the South African racist r&ime.

39. For exampIe, we know that the investments of British
monopolies in the economy of South Africa constitute
more than $3,000 million and are increasing. The volume of
trade between the United Kingdom and South Africa is
continually growing, particularly with respect to British
purchases of South African goods.

35. In analysing the causes of the annexationist policy of
the r6gim-e towards Namibia and its flagrant disregard of the
General Assembly resolutions and also of the Security
Council resolutions 245 and 246 (1968), the Soviet Union
considers, as before, that all this is a direct consequence of
the stand taken on that question by some Western countries
and their monopolies. They, and above all the monopolies
of the United States and the United Kingdom, are providing
every assistance and support to the militarist racist-Facist
r&me in the south of the African continent.

40, The United States monopolies continue to have wide
economic and trade relations with South Africa. According
to official figures, more than 200 United States firms are
operating in South Africa. The flow of their investments
into the South African economy is continually increasing.
41. Quite recently, with the knowledge and agreement of
the authorities, a direct airline was opened between the
4

United States and South Africa. This act was in direct
contravention of General Assembly resolution 1761 (XVII)
which calls upon Member States to refuse landing and
passage facilities on their territories to all aircraft belonging
to the Government of South Africa.

licences for the production of a Belgian rifle by their West
European friends and patrons. And under licences obtained
from United States monopolies, fighter aircraft are being
produced in South Africa.
47. In accordance with United Nations resolutions, South
Africa has forfeited any right to administer the Territory of
Namibia. Yet, in violation of those resolutions, the South
African colonialists continue to commit lawless acts in
Namibia. They squander the natural wealth of that country,
handing over vast tracts of land in Namibia as concessions
to foreign monopolies. In December last year the American
petroleum company “Standard Oil”, the headquarters of
which, as we know, is at San Francisco, was granted a
concession in Namibia of an area of 35,000 square miles. At
the beginning of this year the British firms “British
Petroleum” and “Shell”, and also the American firm of
“Gulf Oil”, obtained concessions in Namibia from the
South African authorities for a term of seventeen years,
which would seem to indicate that the oil monopolies
obviously expect that Namibia will not be liberated for at
least seventeen years.

42. These are facts, and they cannot be glossed over.
43. The countries and peoples of Africa, and all peaceloving States, cannot but be watchful of the growing
co-operation between South Africa and Western Germany.
This co-operation, ihe extent and the forms of which are
continually being extended, is becoming a serious threat to
the cause of the national liberation of the peoples of
southern Africa, including the people of Namibia, from the
yoke of colonialism. With the assistance of a West German
monopoly, dozens of industrial enterprises have been built
in South Africa or converted to modern technology. West
German investments in South Africa already amount to
hundreds of millions of dollars. The rate of inflow of West
German capital into the South African economy is higher
than the rate of inflow of capital from other imperialist
coun,tries. We know too that the Federal Republic of
Germany regularly grants long-term loans to the Government of South Africa, mainly for the development of its
military-industrial complex. In February of this year, South
Africa received from West Germany a loan of 100 million
West German marks. That was the tenth loan granted to
South Africa by West Germany. The volume of trade
between those countries is expanding. According to incomplete data, the volume of trade last year exceeded the
1967 level and amounted to over $500 million.

48. Assistance is also afforded to the South African racists
by the Israeli aggressors. We know that as a result of Israel’s
aggression against the Arab States navigation through the
Suez Canal has been stopped for over a year, so that ships
sailing from Europe to Asia or the Far East and back are
obliged to use South African ports. Up to 8,000 vessels a
year call at these ports. And the South African racists
prosper at the expense of the misery of the Arab peoples
and of costlier transport for the peoples of Europe. The
profits made by South Africa during that period on ships
calling at its ports and on servicing them have led to a sharp
improvement in South Africa’s balance of payments.
According to figures given by The New York Times of 24
January this year, South Africa’s balance of payments,
which showed a deficit of $360 million in 1966-1967, had
attained a surplus of about $141 million in the 1967-1968
financial’ year. Such is the direct assistance tendered by
Israel.

44. In expanding its economic links with South Africa,
West Germany is actively accelerating the development of
its military co-operation with the South African racist
r$ime. With the active co-operation and assistance of
Bonn, the army of Pretoria is being equipped with modern
weapons. These actions of the Government and monopolies
of the Federal Republic of Germany are a direct violation
of Security Council resolutions 181 and 182 (1963) and
191 (1964) which called for the establishment of an
embargo on the sale and shipment to South Africa of arms,
ammunition of all types, military vehicles, and equipment
and materials for the manufacture and maintenance, of arms
and ammunition in South Africa. Particularly sinister is the
co-operation of Bonn and Pretoria in the development of
missiles, the most dangerous type of weapon of our time,

49. All these facts concerning the economic, trade and
military and political relations of South Africa with the
Western countries clearly and unquestionably confirm that
it is those links and that co-operation which are the main
cause of the cynical disregard by the Government ol South
Africa, 2 country which is a Member of the United Nations,
of the decisions of this Organization concerning the
question of Namibia and of the continuing unbridled terror
which that racist r6gime uses against the Namibians.

45. In December last year, at the St. Lucia missile range
(to the north of Durban), the first guided missile of the
“ground-to-ground”
type was tested. This test was the
culmination of five years’ work at the missile research
institute near Pretoria, which was carried out with the
assistance of West German specialists and paved the way for
the mass production of missiles for the armed forces of
South Africa. This constitutes a direct threat to Ihe African
countries.

50. Consequently, the r@me of Pretoria, by its refusal to
implement the resolutions on the question of Namibia
adopted by the Assembly and the Security Council, has
thrown out a direct challenge to the United Nations. But to
say only that is not enough. The truth is that we have to
add the fact that the Western countries, having taken on the
ignoble task of acting as the main trading partners and
ldlitary suppliers of the South African racists, and continuing to maintain relations of 211 kinds with South Africa,
are addressing a no less blatant challenge to the authority of
the United Nations, undermining its prestige and authority,
and bringing disillusionment to the African peoples.

) 46. The United Nations resolutions on Namibia are being
infringed not only by West Germany but also by some
other West European countries-members
of NATO. They
are selling to South Africa warships, armoured cars and
aircraft. The South African racists have been granted
5

the Mandate of the South African raciststo administerthe

51. During the debates on the question of Namibia, more
particularly
at the last two sessions of the General
Assembly, the USSR delegation, on the instructions of the
Government
of the Soviet Union, set out in detail a
programme of measures which, with the help and participation of the United Nations, would in our view accelerate
the achievement of the final goal: the liberation of Namibia
and the provision for the people of that country of the
conditions which would enable them to decide their own
fate according to their own wishes. That programme is well
known to the Members of the United Nations and of the
Security Council,

territory of Namibia wasterminated, and it callsupou the
Soutl! African Government to withdraw its administration
from the unlawfully occupied country. As another positive
factor to be noted is the fact that in the draft resolution the
actions of the leaders of Pretoria designedto destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia through
the establishment of bantustans are considered to be
contrary to the provisions of the United Nations Charter. It
states that the South African Government hasno right to
enact a further colonial law on the Territory of Namibiain
pursuance of its purpose of perpetuating its colonial
occupation of that country, And lastly, the draft resolution
condemnsthe refusal of South Africa to comply with many
resolutiohs of the General Assembly and the Security
Council on the Territory of Namibia.

52. We are still of the opinion that, until the Western
countries put an end to their relations with the racist
regime of South Africa and cease to provide assistance to it,
it will be impossible to solve the problem of Namibia in the
interests of its indigenous population, and the hopes of
Africans that the colonialist regime of South Africa might
comply with the demands of the United Nations and the
international community will, as before, remain an empty
hope.

59. Neverthelessit must be pointed out that on the whole
the draft resolution submitted to the Security Council is a
weak one. It does not provide for measuresconcerning
those States Members of the United Nations that are
continuing as before to maintain broad political, economic
and military relations with the South African racists.Yet
such measureswould undoubtedly be useful and would
help to make the decisions on the question of Namibia
effective. But in view of the fact that the African and some
other delegationswho took an active part in drafting this
text have considered it acceptable to them, the Soviet
delegationdoes not intend to object to its adoption by the
Security Council as a minimum which the Council must
fulfil immediately to help the peopleof Namibia.

53. It was along these lines, as we know, that the
Secretary-General of the United Njtions was thinking when
he stated quite recently that he could see no grounds at
present for any hope that talks with the Government of
South Africa on the question of Namibia could have any
positive results.
54. In the view of the USSR delegation, one of the
effective measures which the Security Council ought to
include in its resolution should be a pressing appeal to the
Governments of those countries whose nationals and firms
are engaged in industrial, financial and trade activities in
South Africa and on the territory
of Namibia to take
legislative, administrative and any other necessary measures
to stop either private or State investment in the South
African economy until such time as South Africa has
implemented the United Nations resolutions on Namibia,

60. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrow Russian): I should
like to thank the distinguishedrepresentativeof the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics for his generous,warm and
friendly words about me. 1 wish to thank him particularly
for his congratulations on the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishmentof the Hungarian Soviet Republic. We are
proud of the achievement of 21 March 1919, when for the
first time in our history the heroic Hungarianworkers took
the state power into their own handsthrough a revolution
and themselvesdetermined their own fate, It is particularly
appropriate to rememberthis whenwe are dealingwith the
problem of a people fighting for its freedom and independence.

55. The Security Council resolution would have gained
much if its sponsors had included a demand to all the States
to put an end to trade, economic and other relations with
the South African r&lme. Such a measure is also essential
in order to put pressure on the South African Govcrnmcnt
and make it comply with the demands of the United
Nations.

61, Mr, JAKOBSON (Finland): Before dealing with the
question on our agenda, I should like to take this
opportunity to thank all those membersof the Council who
have made such generouscommentsabout my activities as
President of the Council in January-comments which
reflect the friendly relations that happily exist betweenmy
country and theirs.

56. There can be no doubt that a resolute condemnation
of the South African colonialist regime and of those who
give it assistance and support, and afso the immediate
cessation of all help, support and relations with South
Africa and its racist regime would be an effective way for
the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole to
put pressure on the South African authorities.

62. Finland welcomes the initiative of the forty-six
African and Asian States which haverequestedthis meeting
of the Security Council to examine, in the words of their
letter, “the deteriorating situation in Namibia”. The situntion has indeed gone from bad to worse. No progress
whatsoeverhasbeen madein United Nationsefforts to help
the people of Namibia to achieve self-determinationand
independence. The resolutions passedby the General
Assembly in the past two and a half years since the
termination of the Mandate have had no practical effect.

57. I should now like to say a few words about the draft
resolution on the question of Namibia,
58. The Soviet delegation has studied the draft. First of all
WC should note that it has some useful fgatures. It confirms
one of the most important General Assembly resolutions on
the question [resolution 2145 (XXI)], according to which
6

The General Assembly, in fact, seems to have exhausted the
means at its disposal. The Government of South Africa has
refused to co-operate with the United Nations. It has on the
contrary intensified its control over the Territory, It has
gone ahead with its plans to split it up into separate
administrative units and it now proposes to enact the
so-called “South West Africa Affairs Bill”, thus acting
contrary to its own professed recognition of the international status of Namibia. The present trend of events is
detrimental not only to the interests of the population of
the Territory but also, in the words of the draft resolution
introduced this morning by the representative of Zambia,
to the interests of the international community as a whole.
It is right, therefore, that the Security Council should now
take up the search for practical and effective means by
which the United Nations could discharge its responsibilities for Namibia and its people.

67. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
should like first to join with all the members of the Council
in paying respect to you, Sir, as our President. We assure
you of our full assistance and loyal support,
68. At the same time, we express our respectful gratitude
to Ambassador Berard and Ambassador Jakobson. We are
fortunate indeed when our Council is under the leadership
of such experienced and distinguished Ambassadors.
69. May I also add my welcome to all the new members of
the Council, especially to those whom I have not heard
speak in the Council before. It is clear that they set a very
high standard indeed.
70. I have spoken on the subject of South West Africa in
this Council and in the General Assembly many times since
the Judgment of the International Court was delivered
nearly three years ago. At every opportunity I .have urged
that we owe it to the people most concerned, and also to
the Organization in which we place our faith and hopes, to
act deliberately after the fullest consultation, to act, if at all
possible, in agreement, and, most important of all, to act
within our clear capacity.

63. Our starting point must, of course, be recognition of
the fact that the United Nations General Assembly has
terminated the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and
assumed direct responsibility for the Territory until its
independence. Adoption by the Security Council of a
resolution expressing such recognition will mean more than
a mere restatement of what the General Assembly has
already decreed. It will mean that for the first time the
authority and the power of the Security Council will be
fully engaged in the task of translating that decision into
reality. In this, I believe, lies the real significance of the
action the Council is about to take.

71. We must not deceive ourselves on what can be done.
We have an obligation not to mislead, by raising false hopes,
those who rely on us. We also have an overriding obligation
not to weaken the reputation and authority of the United
Nations by passing resolutions which we know very well
will be ineffective.

64. The crucial question of how and by what means this
can be achieved remains unanswered. It will be recalled that
the agreement reached in the General Assembly-the very
wide measure of agreement-on the decision to terminate
the Mandate did not extend to the means by which it could
be carried out. Subsequent efforts to agree on such means
were unsuccessful, and later resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly, though supported by large majorities,
failed to receive the backing of the leading Powers,
permanent members of the Security Council. Consequently,
they made no impression on the Government of South
Africa.

72. More than two years ago I said in the Asskmbly that if
we pass resolutions which we know are inopetative, we
debase the currency of the United Nations. It is said that
the road to hell is paved with good intentions. I would add
that the road to hopeless frustration is paved with useless
resolutions.
73. What is more, if we adopt such resolutions about
South West Africa, resolutions which are ineffective and
inoperative, we are neither serving the people concerned
nor having any salutary effect on the South African
Government. We are doing exactly the opposite: we are
giving positive encouragement to the South African Government to pursue the evil policies we all condemn; the people
of Namibia lose hope in our authority; the Government of
South Africa takes confidence from our frustration.

65. As the representative of Pakistan said this morning, we
can only move in unison if we are to move at all. Any
future proposals submitted for the consideration of the
Security Council, to be effective, should be based on the
wide measure of agreement which we believe the present
draft resolution commands among members. Only thus can
we hope to make the influence of the United Nations felt in
shaping the future of Namibia. Proposals likely to divide
the Council would only dissipate its authority. We must be
mindful of the fact that the responsibilities of the Security
Council under the Charter are of a different order from
those of other United Nations organs.

74,. It is for these reasons that I have been urging and
hoping for more than two years that we should be able to
find means of going forward together in agreement, for
when we are divided we give comfort to those whose
policies and actions we detest.
75. It was for these reasons that we thought that the
course adopted by the General Assembly in 1966 was
mistaken. It was for these reasons that I have constantly
urged that we should search for a more practical and
positive course. I make no excuse for making the same plea
again today. I do so because I would not wish to see this
Council adopt a course which will lead nowhere, which will
deceive the people who rely on us, and which will give
nothing but satisfaction to those who practice racial
domination and racial injustice.

66. The termination of South Africa’s Mandate over
Namibia was an irrevocable step. This will now be confirmed on the authority of the Security Council. We must
now look ahead and engage in an active and concerted
effort to find a just and peaceful solution of this problem.
Failure to do so would mean defeat, not only for the
people of Namibia, but for the United Nations itself.
7

76. Let me go back for a minute or two to restate the
position of my Government. Almost two years ago,
speaking in the General Assembly, I said:
“First of all, let me state again plainly’ that our motive,
our aim, our determination must be to set the people of
South West Africa free, free to advance to the destiny of
their own choice in full self-determination. Secondly, we
share and strongly support the views of this Assembly on
the policies of apartheid. We deplore and condemnand
oppose the domination of one people or one race over
another. We cannot accept the South African Government’s defence of its racial policies; and, even more
strongly still; we reject the application of thosepoliciesto
a country which is an international responsibility.Weare
convinced that a political and economicand socialsystem
built on the domination of one race by anotherby force
cannot survive,“2

timing in particular. Wehad, and still have, a duty mt to
advanceuntil the ground has.beenthoroughly explored,
until all the legaland other aspectsof the wholeprob~lcm
havebeen examinedand assessed.
Moreover, my Govera.
merit pledgeditself, if such a coursewere accepted,to
play a full andconstructivepart in pursuingit.
‘My Governmentmadeits position absolutely clear otr
the principles and purposeswhich commandedoverwhelmingsupport, and we pointed the way to concerted
action which could have enabled us all to go forward
together.“4
79. I make no excusesfor repeating those words, for
nothing that has since happened has diminished our
convictions.On the contrary, everything that hashappened
has reinforced our misgivings.Meanwhile we, have not
hesitated to condemn the actions of the South Afr.ican
Government.

77.: And ! went on:
L‘. . . the South African Government repeatedly and
openly contested that the Mandate remainedin force and
that the United Nationshad succeededto the supervisory
functions formerly exercised by the Council of the
Leagueof Nations.
“It is those fundamental provisions for international
accountability which are at the heart of the mandate
system but which the South African Governmenthasso
far persistently refusedto accept.
“By word and by action the South African Government
demonstratedthat it wasnot ready to acceptthe essential
obligations incumbent upon it under the Mandate. By
repudiating those obligations, so clearly-affirmed by the
international Court and by this Assembly,it forfeited its
title to the Mandate. It no longer had the right to carry
the sacredtrust conferred upon it,
“It is well that we should restate these principles,and
these conclusions and these convictions, We have no
reasonwhatever to retreat or retract from them. They are
the basison which all future action must bejustified.“s

“We were gravely disturbedby the Pretoria trial under
the provisionsof the Terrorism Act of 1967. Wesenl an
observer to that trial, and we stated in the Security
Councilour strongobjectionsto an act which, in the view
of my Government,wasoffensiveto the principleswhich
shouldunderliethe framingof criminal legislation., . WC
made it clear that what my Government particularly
abhorredand condemnedwas that that vast retrospective
criminallegislationcarried the supremepenalty of death.
“In the matter of the trial itself it wasa matter of
relief to us, and to all of us,that, despitethat deplorable
legislation,and despitethe heavy sentencespassed,the
South African Government did not resort to calritirl
punishmentin that instance.Someof the sentenceshave
been reduced on appeal, and it is well that no further
trials of the same sort have occurred. I am !suru
world-wide protests, including those made here at the
United Nations,contributed to thoseresults.
j.$l%t

“Another action of the South African Government
which hasrightly exercisedthosewho have taken part iu
this debatewasthe HomelandsAct. . . . My Government
certainly cannotacceptthat the provisionsof the new law
serveto promote to the utmost the material and moral
well-beingand the social progressof the inhabitants,as
the South African Governmentwasrequired to do by the
mandate.I need not recount in detail the objectionable
provisionsof this legislation.The so-calledhomelandsare
mostly in remote areaswith poor communications.They
can scarcely provide substantive economic benefits for
their inhabitants. Indeed, they seemto be intended to
serveas reservoirsof labour for industry and agriculture
undertakenby the white few, while the areasthemselves
remainlargely undeveloped.The so-callednative nations
for which the law provides would have no voice or
interest in the central Government,The new law divides
the land in sucha way asto give to the white population
the best land, the most land per head of population, and
practically all the mineral depositsof the Territory. ‘The

78. I alsosaidat that time:
“I saidthat we had an obligation not only to the people
of South West Africa but to the people of the United
Nations itself. Wehad, and we still have, an obligationnot
to raise falsehopesby hasty or ineffective methods,not
to deceive ourselvesor anyone elseby shutting our eyes
to practical barriers, not to imagine that thosebarriers
can be overcome by words alone, not to believebthatan
inoperative and ineffective resolution could be a substitute for deliberateand practical action.
“I urged . . , that we should consult together about
methods and means,to see,what was possibleand what
was not, to consider tactics and strategy, to consider
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Special Session,
1504th

80. WhenI spokein the Assemblylast DecemberI said:

meeting,para.141.

3 Ibid., paras.143-146.

4 Ibid.,

8

paras.
150-1.52.

law is essentially an extension of the evil practices of
apartheid and the system of bantustans in South Africa
itself.“5

They were advocated by the distinguished Irishman,
Mr. SeanMacBride.Moreover,hewasspeakingon behalf of
a group of organizationswhich mustsurelycommandwide
respect.They includedthe Commission
of the Churcheson
International Affairs, the International Commissionof
Jurists, the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions and the International Defence and Aid Fund.
Mr. MacBride, on their behalf, proposeda detailed study,
perhapsconductedby a specialresearchand planningteam,
of the situation and the needsof the Territory. The
distinguishedAmbassador,Alva Myrdal, supported this
proposal when she spoke last December on behalf of
Swedenin the GeneralAssembly.Thisis what shesaid:

81. And I should add that the South West Africa Affairs
Bill similarly has the effect of diminishing and so prejudicing the separate identity of the Territory.
82. Now I turn to the practical steps which we could take,
limited steps, but steps within our capacity, steps in the
right direction.
83. It is of some interest to look at the list of subscribers
to the United Nations South African Education and
Training Programme which includes in itS operation those
who come from Namibia. This is indeed the only practical
and effective scheme which we in the United Nations have
been able so far to devise to help the people of Namibia. It
is certainly regrettable that in spite of all the brave words,
no more than a score of countries have made any financial
contribution at all to this Programme. We heard this
afternoon from the representative of the Soviet Union
many words, but no more. In vain we looked for the name
of the Soviet Union in the list of subscribers in this scheme
to help the people concerned. But, as we know, the Soviet
Union is always the first to criticize and the last to
contribute. From the Russian Ambassador we get rumbles,
but no roubles. My country, on the other hand, has been in
honourable competition with Sweden and Denmark as the
main contributor to this scheme of positive aid, and I am
glad to be able to say that I have been authorized to pledge
a further British contribution of L50,000, subject to
Parliamentary approval, for the financial year 1969-1970.
With this pledge we are now ahead of everyone else, our
total contribution being now some $390,000.

“In this context I would wish to refer to the recommendations made by the International Seminar on
Apartheid at Kitwe a year ago.Its recommendationNo. 8
was concernedwith South West Africa, suggestingthe
establishmenton a full-time basisof a ‘nucleus of a
researchand planningteam of speciallyqualified people,
principally South Africans’. I do not want to enter here
into any substantialdiscussion
of the rather comprehensive researchprogrammeindicated in that recommendation. It is the approachrather than the work plan which,
to my mind, needsto be re-examinedtoday.“6
88. Why have all these proposalsbeen neglected?Why
cannot they be revived and reexamined? Would it not be
best evennow to avoid a draft resolutionwhich will surely
be stillborn?
89. I do not say that there is a great dealwhich can be
done now. I dearly wish that much more could be
proposed.But what I do ask is that we should consult
about every practical idea, every possibleproposal,every
plan within our capacity. If insteadwe resort to the easy
alternativeof attemptingto escapefrom reality by passing
empty resolutionswe will not be goingforward at al1but
backward.

84. This is the programme which can give help in
education and training to the people we want to assist. This
is not mere talk, but practical help. While the contributions
to the Educational and Training Programme are a useful
barometer of sincerity, the scheme itself is no more than
one move in the right direction.

90. Let me sumup what I amanxiousto say.
91. We all wish to seethe peopleof Namibiaset free, to
advanceto true self-determinationandindependence.

8.5. More important, I remind the Council of the practical
proposals put forward by the delegations of Canada, Italy
and the United States in 1967 at the resumed twenty-first
session of the General Assembly. We pledged our support
for those proposals, but the arguments for positive though
limited advance were not heeded.

92. Werespectthe intensefeelingsof the majority and of
Africans in particular on this world issueof racial domination andracialinjustice.
93. But we are convincedthat no goodandonly harmcan
come from passinga resolutionwhich isineffective. Nor do
we seethat the draft resolutionnow presentedto us can
prove effective. The only other comment on the draft
resolution I make now is that it is well that an original
intention to include languagefrom Chapter VII of the
Charter hasbeen abandoned.I have alreadymadeit clear
that my Government is not and will not be preparedto
agreeto commitmentsunder ChapterVII of the Charterin
this regard.

86. Other proposals for practical actions have been made
which have not been followed up. The proposals made by
Canada, Italy and the United States included a plan for a
comprehensive survey of the situation in the Territory, of
its human and material resources, of its various requirements, of the conditions which would enable the Territory
to achieve self-determination, But such practical proposals
have been put aside in favour of strong words which lead
nowhere.
87. Moreover, the proposals made at the Kitwe Conference on Apartheid in 1967 have not been followed up.
5 Ibid., Twenty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 1742nd meeting,

paras.32-34.

9

94. Yet again,therefore, we urgethat we shouldabandon
the courseof empty wordsand turn to the possibilitiesof
practical advance.Weknow that it will be hard andthat it
6 Ibid., 1734th meeting,
para.1%.

may be slow, but in our view any advance is better than
none.

in the report of the Council for Namibia, no doubt

9.5. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind references he addressed to the
President.

101. Consequently, if we want the people of Namibia to
be free and independent the immediate withdrawal of
South Africa from the Territory becomes the most fundamental demand.

96. I call on the representative of the United
Republic, Chairman of the Council for Namibia.

constitute a serious threat to world peace.

Arab
102. For its part, the Council for Namibia has stated its
views on the present situation, time and again, in the
following terms: “It is only if all necessary measures are
taken for the removal of South Africa’s presence from the
Territory that the Council can be expected to discharge its
primary function effectively.”

97. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr. President,
I am indeed grateful to you and to the members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in the
present debate, in my capacity as the President of the
Council for Namibia, I wish to comment briefly on the
present situation in Namibia, a matter which, since the
creation of the Council, has all along been a source of
frustration and deep concern to it. The situation as it exists
today in Namibia is, by now, well known to the Security
Council, for the Council for Namibia has constantly kept
the Security Council informed of the developments in the
Territory.

103. The Security Council does not need any proof that
the South African Government has no intention to withdraw from the Territory. That Government is consolidating
its illegal control over the Territory by various means. Its
policies, methods and actions point to one fact: that it is
determined to annex the Territory of Namibia to its own.
Its decision to create separate homelands is designed to
destroy the territorial integrity of Namibia, and to facilitate
its illegal annexation. In this regard 1 wish to draw the
attention of the members to the Council’s letter cont‘ained
in document S/9032 which enumerates the illegal acts
taken by South Africa and which are aimed at destroying
the territorial integrity of Namibia, Among them were the
forcible removal of African people from their native
locations, the establishment of Ovamboland as one of the
homelands for the Africans and the displacement from the
Caprivi strip of about 2,000 Namibians who subsequently
took refuge in Zambia.

98. The Council deemed it its duty to keep the Security
Council informed of the difficulties and problems which it
has encountered in the discharge of its functions entrusted
to it by the General Assembly. The most recent account of
the situation has been given to the Security Council by the
Council in its letter of 28 February. The letter stated,
among other things that:
“

. * . it should be pointed out that there has been no
advance towards the exercise of the right of selfdetermination and the attainment of independence by the
people of Namibia and that the Council for Namibia has
been denied the exercise of its responsibilities . , .”
[S/9032/ I

104. The United Nations has promised the people of
Namibia sovereignty in freedom, and independence in
liberty. It has not, so far, been able to move an inch
towards the fulfilment of its promises. Instead of moving in
the direction of peace, the problem of Namibia is fast
drifling towards racial war, violence and bloodshed. Instead
of exercising their right of self-determination and enjoying
freedom in their own homes, the people qf Namibia have
been denied their homes and dispossessed of their properties. This injustice is inflicted on them because they are not
white. A white, because he is white, if he enters Namibia, a
country which he has never known, owned or possessed,
can have all the rights; while an African, because he is an
African, is denied his citizenship rights, even though he is
the real owner of the land.

99. The Council, as members of the Security Council are
aware, had been charged with the administration of the
Territory of Narnibia on behalf of the United Nations until
the attainment of independence. The Council so far, in
spite of all its efforts, has not been able to discharge its
responsibility due to the persistent policy of defiance and
obstruction pursued by the South African authorities. Such
policy presents a situation fraught with danger to international peace and security.
100. As the United Nations has terminated the Mandate of
South Africa over the Territory and declared that South
Africa has no right to administer the Territory, the presence
of South Africa in Namibia is therefore illegal. This illegal
presence constitutes a foreign occupation of Namibia, in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. It is an act
of aggression which the United Nations has the responsibility to suppress by all the means provided to it by the
Charter. Furthermore, the presence of S&h Africa in the
Territory
and its continued exercise of the powers of
administration
over the Territory is an encroachment on
the jurisdiction
of the United Nations and constitutes
defiance of its authority. Such occupation of the Territory
by the South African authorities is furthermore an impediment in the way of the freedom of the people. The
increasing conflicts resulting from such actions, as reflected

105. The situation in Namibia, as the Council sees it,
constitutes a nagrant aggravation of the alieady serious
threat to international peace and security, The United
Nations must exercise its responsibility resoEutely and
without delay to avert this threat.
106. In conclusion, allow me to recall the statement of the
Prime Minister of South Africa, a statement which breathes
defiance and challenge to the United Nations:
“As far as the question of what we are going to do
about this decision”-namely,
the General Assembly
resolutions-“and
what the Government’s advice to
you . . * is, I say: go on with your work. We will continue
10

to administer South West Africa as we have done, and we
will carry out what has been planned,”

assumed direct responsibility for the Territory until independence, that the Security Council has considered this
question as a whole. For that reason the Council has not so
far given recognition to resolution 2145 (XXI), apart from
mentioning it in the second prea bular paragraph of
resolution 246 (196g), which was a?;opted on I4 March
1968.

107. The Council for Namibia has spared no effort, and
has indeed exhausted all the means that lie within its
power, to discharge the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the General Assembly.
108. There is a prevailing sense of disappointment and
frustration, not only on the part of the people of Africa,
but also in many other countries and in the international
community.

116. A declaration by the Council:recognizing the action
taken by the General Assembly is, in our opinion, an
essential preliminary to our consideration of such steps or
measures as the Council may adopt, in exercise of its
powers and in conformity with the provisions of the
Charter, to give the Namibian pejople the opportunity to
become master Of their own natiqnal destiny. The occupation of Namibia by South Africa,is illegal precisely because
a decision of the General Assembly has terminated its
former Mandate.

109. The Security Council, which is the organ primarily
responsible for the maintenance of peace, and which is
empowered by the Charter with the necessary means to
enforce peace, is now called upon to put an end to this
serious and deteriorating situation.
110. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, I congratulate you on taking over
the presidency of the Security Council and assuining the
responsibilities of that high office, and I assure you of my
delegation’s firm intention to co-operate fully with you in
the performance of your duties, as it has with your
predecessors.

117. In the conviction that every step in the right
direction, however small it may be or seem to be, definitely
helps to bring the hour of Namibia’s independence nearer,
my delegation has joined those of Colombia, Nepal,
Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia in submitting to the Council
the draft resolution contained in document s/9100, so ably
and eloquently introduced this morning by Ambassador
Mwaangaon behalf of the sponsors.

1 Il. I associate myself with the tribute you paid at the
opening of today’s meeting to Ambassador Jakobson of
Finland and Ambassador Berard of France, who presided
over the Council in January and February respectively.
Your eloquent and felicitous words make it unnecessary for
me to say more.

118. There is therefore no need for me to refer to the
provisions of the draft resolution. The representativesof
Zambia, Nepal, Pakistan and Senegalhavemadea detailed
and convincing analysis of the text and of its positive
features. I should be failing in a fundamental duty,
however, if 1 did not affirm that the draft resolution
undoubtedly representsa great deallessthan what many
Members of the United Nations, and particularly the
African States, expect from the Security Council. While
admitting this, I must point out that one of the important
reasonsfor submitting the draft resolutionin its present
form was our awarenessof the situation prevailing in the
United Nations and a realistic appraisalof what action was
at present possible.Confronted aswe werewith the need to
choosebetween more vigorousformulae,which would serve
only. to draw attention to a profound division among
membersof the Council on a matter asimportant asthat of
Namibia, and formulae such as those submitted, which
might secure much wider support and thus represent the
universal conscience,we honestly believe that the latter
alternative is the better, at leastfor the present.We think
that the other alternative, a resolutionwhich would not be
supported by the votes of important membersof this body,
would merely gratify South Africa and that is not our
intention. We want to serve‘the peopleof Namibia in their
just and legitimate desire for full independence and
unrestricted sovereignty.

112. At the request of a large number of States Members
of the United Nations, the Security Council is today
considering the question of Namibia. After more than two
decades of debate on this question in the Organization,
there is little or nothing to say that has not been said before
in one form or another about the reprehensible and
notorious conduct of the Government of South Africa and
the stubborn arrogance with which it ignores and flouts the
many resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
113. A great deal can be said, however, concerning the
suffering people of Namibia, the direct and defenceless
victims of the expansionist and oppressive designs of South
Africa. The national unity and territorial integrity of the
Namibian people are being threatened by the acts of an
illegal administration forcibly imposed upon it.
114. The more obstinate South Africa becomes in its
hostile behaviour, the more obstinate we must be in our
practical efforts to fulfil our individual and collective
responsibilities and in using the legal instruments available
to us to try to ensure that the people of Namibia can
effectively and safely exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination and to full independence and sovereignty.

119. What I have just said,togetherwith my statements at
the meetings in February and March 1968 (1392nd
meeting, par-u.lOI-1071, establishesthe position of my
delegation.

115. This is the first time since the General Assembly, on
27 October 1966, adopted resolution 2145 (XXI), which
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia-formerly
called the Territory of South West Africa-and
since it

120. It only remainsfor me to expressthe hope that the
draft resolution which my delegationhas sponsored with
other membersof the Council will receivewide support.
11

substanceof the problemclear. It now wishes,however, to
statebriefly onceagainthat it considersthe policy followed
by the Government of South Africa up to now in relation
to the territory of Namibiato be utterly unrealistic and to
be in contravention of the spirit and letter of the United
Nations Charter and the very terms of the Mandate. At the
presenttime it is impossiblenot to realize that the facts of
international life demandthat the international community
shouldaccept the right of peoplesto self-determinationand
independence.

121. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Paraguay for the generous remarks he so kindly addressed
to me.
122. Mr, DE PINIES (Spain) (translated from Spanish):
My delegationwishesto associateitself with the congratulations expressedto you, Mr. President,by previous speakers
and to assureyou that my delegation will unfailingly
co-operate with you in the performanceof your duties as
President of the Council. My delegation also wishes to
compliment AmbassadorJakobsonand AmbassadorBBrard,
of Finland and France respectively, on the mannerin which
they guided the debatesof the Councilduring January and
the private consultationsin February.

127. My delegation wishesto reiterate its view that, in
dealingwith this item andmany others,the United Nations
is confronted with a challengeto the authority and validity
of its decisions.My delegationconsidersthat it is essential
for the maintenanceof a just international order and for
the survival of the United Nationsthat the resolutionsof its
principal organsshouldbe appliedif lossof prestigeis to be
avoided. The excusethat we need comply only with those
of which we approveis not acceptable.Such an approach is
contrary to the democraticprincipleswhich must prevail in
the Organization.

123. This is the first occasjonon which my delegationhas
spoken on the questionof Namibiain the Security Council.
The position of the Spanishdelegationhas, however, been
reflected in the discussionsof the General Assembly and
the Fourth Committee. As my delegationhad the opportunity of stating its views in those debates,it doesnot now
intend to give a further account of the history of this
subject in the United Nations. We hold that there was a
decisive moment in that processand that it occurred with
the adoption on 27 October 1966 of resolution
2145 (XXI), which terminated the Mandate for South West
Africa and thus ended twenty years of fruitless efforts to
induce the Government of South Africa to accept the facts
of the new international community. My delegation voted
in favour of that resolution and is therefore prepared to
co-operate in giving effect to any measureswhich may be
necessaryfor its full implementation.

128. In the case under discussion,my delegation is
inclined to think that it is possiblethat the Government of
the Republic of South Africa may come to understandand
accept the marchof time and to co-operatewith the United
Nations in achievinga peaceful solution to this problem.
Should such co-operation not be forthcoming, the prospects for a peacefulsolutionwill undoubtedly becomeeven
slighter and the Organization will ultimately be forced to
consider the possibility of other measuresin order to
defend justice in the international order and to protect its
own existence.

124. In the samespirit, my delegationsupported resolution 2248 (S-V), in the belief that it embodiedthe essential
minimum principlesfor a solution to the problem of South
West Africa. In my delegation’sopinion, the setting up of
the United Nations Council for Namibia was a desirable
first step oncethe Mandate of the Republic of South Africa
had been terminated, becauseof the possibility that there
might be an administrative vacuum until the Territory
gainedits independence.

129. For those reasonsof principle, my delegation is in
favour of the six-Powerdraft resolutionso ably introduced
this morning by the distinguishedAmbassadorof Zambia.
My delegation supports the principles expressed in the
operative part and considersthat the balanced manner in
which they are presentedis clear proof of the open-minded
and constructive attitude of the sponsors,They have chosen
the via media between excessand insufficiency. This is the
position of the possible,of the only advancethat can be
madeat this time, and my delegationsupportsit.

125. Two years have elapsedsince that resolution was
adopted and in that time the proposed administrative
machinery has begun to operate and the United Nations
Council for Namibia hastaken the necessarystepsto try to
carry out the Assembly’sinstructions. This is not the place
for a detailed analysis of the reports submitted to the
General Assembly by the United Nations Council for
Namibia, but we cannot but note that the conclusionsin
the reports submitted up to now leave no room for hope,
All of them, and particularly the most recent one
/A/7338], 7 reflect the Council’s sense of frustration,
impatience and anxiety on account of the attitude adopted
by the Government of South Africa. My delegation takes
this opportunity to pay a tribute to the work of the
membersof the Council, who have done their utmost to
perform the important missionentrusted to them by the
General Assembly.

130. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Spain for hiscongratulations.
131, Mr. TURBAY AYALA (Colombia)(translated from
Spanish): Allow me, Mr. President, tc, expressmy admiration for the manner in which you have presided over the
meetings of the Security Council with your accustomed
goodjudgement,courtesy and intelligence.
132. I wish to congratulatealsothe distinguishedAmbae
sadorsof France and Finland, who in the two previous
months have demonstratedtheir outstanding devotion to
duty and their experiencein international affairs.
133. My delegation has the honour to be one of the
countries sponsoringthe draft resolution before the Security Council. Wealsohavethe privilegeand responsibility of
being membersof the United Nations Council for Namibia

126. My delegation, by its support of the resoI&ons of
the General Assembly, has already madeits position on the
7 Ibid.,

Annexes,

agenda
item64.
17

and have accordingly been able to follow the progress of
this matter in detail.

141. NO useful purpose would be served if, knowing these
facts, we were to be associated indirectly with programmes
which, while necessary, fail to prevent such extreme
injustices as those now inflicted on the people of Namibia.
We are advocates of indirect measures, but we also advocate
that, at a time when persecution, hostility and retaliation
are being inflicted, as they now are on the population of
Namibia, the voice of the United Nations should be raised
to prevent the continuance of such policies, which we must
neither tolerate nor pass over in silence.

134. We deplore the fact that the Government of South
Africa has paid little or-to be accurate-no attention to the
attitude of the Assembly and the Council for Namibia or to
the resolutions of the Security Council itself.
135. Since the revocation of the Mandate by the General
Assembly, the situation has not improved: it has, in fact,
worsened. I should say that the Government of South
Africa has made the people of Namibia suffer on account of
its own reaction to the action of the United Nations. To
every resolution of the General Assembly, every statement
by the Council for Namibia, every resolution of the
Security Council, the response of the Government of South
Africa is to enact retaliatory measures against the people of
Namibia and to intensify its policy of racial discrimination
and colonialism.

142. I realize, of course, that all the nations represented
here in the Security Council are fully identified with the
anti-colonialist policy which was given practical form by
the United Nations in 1960 in resolution I.514 (XV) and
that they all recognize and applaud the process of decoloniz&ion which has taken’ place throughout the world. It may
be that the greatest success of the United Nations has been
in the decolonization process and I believe that we do well
to encourage it. Accordingly, we firmly and sincerely assert
that in the case of Namibia the satisfaction of this
unchanging aspiration of a people which is enduring every
kind of cruelty and persecution should not be deferred
indefinitely.

136. Naturally, this situation creates new and special
responsibilities for the United Nations, because the fact
that it has adopted a policy of aiding the independence
movements of all peoples which have the right to selfdetermination means that it is compelled not to remain
indifferent when, as in this specific case, its support
produces a reaction from the colonialist Power. The issue is
no longer a problem between Namibia and South Africa,
but a confrontation between the Government of South
Africa and the authority of the United Nations.

143. For these reasons we are sponsors of a draft
resolution which is clearly not a threat but an affirmation
concerning the specific case before us. It is good that all
should know that the Security Council, with all the
authority it possesses, acknowledges that the General
Assembly’s revocation of the former South African Mandate is ratified by the Council itself. It is good that all
should know that this distinguished international body
considers that the continued presence of South African
forces in Namibia is a disruptive factor and a challenge to
international peace and peaceful coexistence in the world
community.

137. We are, of course, in favour of a policy of persuasion,
of diplomatic solutions and of reliance on the resources of
intelligence until they, too, fail. Hence the draft resolution
which we have the honour to co-sponsor is not a verbal
expression of strength. It is strong, not because of the
wording of its provisions, but because of the justice
embodied in its words and because of the wide support it
has inside and outside the United Nations.

144. All these affirmations are important, as is the
reiterated call upon the Government of South Africa to
withdraw its forces and administration from the territory of
Namibia; but if none of this comes to pass, if the voice of
reason is answered by further reprisals and further colonialist and discriminatory acts, then the Security Council, as
the draft resolution states, will meet immediately to
determine what the most effective reply to such a further
challenge might be and thus avoid the indefinite prolongation of a reign of terror in a territory which deserves a
better fate.

138. There are two ways in which ‘a resolution can be
strong: in its tone, or language, and in the support it has
within the United Nations and in world opinion. The draft
resolution now under consideration is certainly not strong
in its language, but it is one which, because of the support
it commands, its identification with the problems and its
potential for solving them, is undoubtedly a step forward in
the assistance that we must give to the people of Namibia.
139. I am aware, of course, that many of those who are
more directly involved with the problem, who suffer with it
in their own continent and watch it developing, must feel
that our reaction is not strong enough to provide them with
timely and decisive aid. In our moderation, however, they
may see our desire for co-operation and our determination
to be of service to their cause.

145. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the representative of Colombia for his generous remarks to
the President of the Security Council. The next speaker on
my list is Mr. Liu Chieh.
146. , Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I think the Chair is
aware .that I am addressing the Council as the representative
of China.

140. I entirely agree with the United Kingdom representative’s opinion that such cases as this call for practical
advance rather than empty words, Nevertheless, we cannot
overlook the fact that the sufferings of the people of
Namibia are not caused by empty words, but by the real
f&S of colonialism, racial discrimination and a stubborn
determination to destroy their nationality.

147. The question of Namibia is not a new one. Under a
different name, Namibia has engaged the attention of the
United Nations since the beginning. On this issue, the
position of my delegation has been consistently clear. AS
far back as 1947, as representative of my Government in
13

152. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakerson my
list, but with the permissionof the Council I shall address
the Council in my capacity as representative of
HUNGARY.

the Fourth Committee 1 stated, in regard to the status of
South West Africa-and
I now quote from the summary
record: “The powers received from the League of Nations
under the mandates System were administrative powers,
not powers of sovereignty. The Administering State was a
trustee, not an owner”.8

153. At the initiative of forty-six Member States, the
Security Council is again called upon to discuss the
continuing deterioration of the situation in Namibia. The
worsening of the situation must be viewed against the
background of the policy of the Republic of South Africa
in that country. That policy is one of a denial of
self-determination, of human rights, of national independence. As we all know, more than two years have passed
since the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of
South Africa over the Territory of South WestAfrica, asit
was called at that time. Since then, the General Assembly
and the Security Council have severaltimesbeencompelled
to face the deteriorating situationin Namibiaresulting from
the refusal of South Africa to comply with the resolutions
of those bodies.

148. The views I thus expressed on behalf of my Covernment were repeatedly reaffirmed in successive sessions of
the General Assembly. It was on the basis of those views
that my delegation unreservedly supported General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, which
declared that
‘L. . . South Africa has failed to fulfil its obligations in
respect of the administration of the Mandated Territory”,
and decided that
“ . * . the Mandate conferred’upon His Britannic Majesty
to be exercised on his behalf l$y the ‘Government of the
Union of South Africa,is therefore terminated”.

154. The white-minority Governmentof South Africa up
to this very day occupiesand illegally administersNamibia.
What is more, the Pretoria Governmenthaseven accelerated
the forced implementation of its inhuman plans aimed at
dividing that country into severalregions-“homelands”, as
they call them-contrary to the interest and the will of the
people of Namibia. The most elementary rights of selfdetermination of this African people are thus suppressed.
Those who resist the colonial rule of the Pretoria Government are treated as criminals by the oppressivecolonial
rdgime. These measures have been condemned by all
civiIized mankind, and that condemnation has been reflected in Security Council resolution 246 (1968), of last
year.

149. With the virtually unanimous adoption of that
resolution by the General Assembly, and with the adoption
of Security Council resolution 246 (1968) reaffirming the
inalienable right of the people and the Territory of South
West Africa to freedom and independence in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the administration
of Namibia came under the direct responsibility of the
United Nations. It is, therefore, incumbent upon the United
Nations to discharge the responsibilities thus assumed in
such a manner as to enable the people of the Territory to
exercise the right of self-determination
and to achieve
independence as soon as possible.

155. The latest plans envisagedby the colonial authorities
have shown most convincingly-if there is still need to
convince anyone in this matter-that the creation of
so-calledbantustans is a logical follow.up on the road of the
inhuman, oppressive policy of Pretoria. Their attempts to
arguethat thesemeasuresare designedsomehowto help the
people of Namibia are too transparentto be refuted. The
Namibian people has never expresseda wish to be helped
by the racists of Pretoria. If thereis anyoneto be favoured
by these policies, it is the racist minority in South Africa
which attempts to transform Namibiainto a land of more
exploitation and suffering.

150. More than two years have elapsed since the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). It is regrettable that the Government of South Africa has not shown
any inclination to co-operate with the United Nations in
regard to this Territory. The immediate issue now before
the Council is to find the most effective and practical
means of implementing resolution 2145 (XXI). The draft
resolution now before us is the nearest thing to a consensus
of this Council. As a first step, it rightly
“Indtes
all States to exert their influence in order to
obtain compliance by the Government of South Africa
with the provisions of the present resolution” [S/SlOO,

156. In this respect one cannot passover in silence the
role played by certain Westernmonopolieswhich collect
huge profits from the toil andsweatof cheaplabour in that
part of the world.

para. 7J.

151a Past experience to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Council should neverthelessleave no stoneunturned for the
achievement .,of a peacefu1 settlement of this difficult
problem. We are convinced that the influence of the
Western Powers on the Government of South Africa, if
fully asserted,could go a long way towards sucha solution.
We earnestly hope that the Government of South Africa
will find it within its power and in its own interest to make
it unnecessaryfor the Council to take any further stepsof a
more stringent kind.

157. It is a most regrettable state of affairs that the
peoplesof Namibia, Southern Rhodesiaand the Portuguese
colonies, not to mention the Republic of South Africa,
have to wage their fight for self-determination, for their
most elementary human rights,not only againsttheir direct
oppressors,but alsoagainstthe might of powerful monopolies which have allied themselveswith their masters, The
substantial financial and military assistanceprovided to
South Africa, for instance, againstthe clearly expressed
wish of the United Nationsasreflectedin resolutionsof the

8 See Official Records of the GeneraI Assembly, Second Session,
Fourth Committee, 31st meeting,page6.
14

General Assembly, by some major Powers shows convincingly the tragic line-up of forces,

certainly nothing to brag about. This is, in fact, a case of
what Shakespeare would have called “Much ado about
nothing”.

1.58. But to present a true picture of these forces we must
add that the people of Namibia does not have to fight alone
against such overwhelming forces. The peoples of many
continents and many countries support them in their just
cause. The socialist countries have always been jn the
forefront of those which have offered meaningful support
to the peoples fighting for their national independence. The
Hungarian People’s Republic is duty bound to offer its
support to the people of Namibia. Although South Africans, in their statements never tire of asserting that they
and they alone know the true conditions prevailing in that
country, we all know the truth. The Pretoria Government,
probably to underline its exclusive knowledge of these
matters, has repeatedly prevented our Organization from
obtaining first-hand reports from Namibia. In spite of those
attempts we all know not only that the Namibian people
are threatened by the inhuman upurtheid policies, but that
their progressive elimination as a separate national entity is
also sought.

162. It would bc better if we concerted our efforts in the
Security Council and concentrated not on how to absolve
ourselves by such sums, but on how to free the people of
Namibia from the oppression and terror of the racist
exploiters of South Africa.
163. As regards Soviet assistance for the education of
Africans, I can assure the British representative that he has
no cause to worry. In the Soviet Union-and my friend the
representative of Zambia who was Ambassador in Moscow
can confirm this-there are 1,000 Africans studying. Among
them there are Namibians; so I can assure the United
Kingdom representative that we spend on the education of
Namibians in the Soviet Union an amount which is
probably greater than the sum he mentioned.
164. Lord CAMDON (United Kingdom): 1 do not wish
to delay the Council at this stage to answer what I think
would be generally regarded as the irrelevancies of the
representative of the Soviet Union. I would perhaps point
out that the only reference I made to the Soviet Union was
in regard to the failure of that country to contribute to the
United Nations scheme for education and training for
Namibians. He saw fit now to invite additional attention to
the fact that no contribution has been made by his country,
whereas my country, I am glad to say, heads the list of
contributors. 1 would assure him that an ounce of financial
assistance is worth more than a ton of talk, and I only wish
that the assistance which he gave under this scheme of
education and training to the people of Namibia was more
tangible.

159. My delegation is thoroughiy convinced that such a
development clearly must be avoided. For this reason we
have believed for a long time that the Security Council
must take effective measures against South Africa should it
continue its defiance of the United Nations and world
conscience. It is in this spirit that we have examined the
draft resolution put forward by six members of the
Council. From the consultation which preceded our present
meetink and from the discussion in the Council we know
that thl: sponsors of the draft resolution wished the Council
to adopt a much more effective text than the one now
before us. We must express our regret that the position of
those Powers whose econom’ic and military interests we
have had the opportunity to refer to in this intervention has
not made it possible for a text to be adopted which would
meet the requirements of the situation. The present text is
unsatisfactory on many counts, as has been amply demonstrated by a number of speakers during this discussion.
Nevertheless it represents modest progress. In view of this
my delegation has decided to give its support to the draft
resolution in document S/9100, which, let us not forget,
envisages, in the event of further non-compliance by South
Africa with the will of the Council, that really effective
measures will have to be taken.

165. The PRESIDENT: If no other representative wishes
to speak, the Council may proceed to vote on the six-Power
draft resolution sponsored by the delegations of Colombia,
Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal and Zambia, which is
before the Council in document S/9100.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, Hungary,
Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United States of America, Zambia.

160. Speaking as PRESIDENT: I would add that there arc
no more speakers on the list, and if no other representative
wishes to take the floor now, I shall ask the Cotmcil to vote
on the six-Power draft resolution.

Against: None.
Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The draft sesolution was adopted by I3 votes fo none
with 2 absentions.

161. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I do not intend to start an
argument with the United Kingdom representative about
his comments on my statement. I will confine myself to
some information. In my statement I spoke of $3,000
million of British investments and $950 million of trade. If
I heard correctly, he mentioned the sum of $950,000. It we
compare these three figures, we can see what a paltry sum
that contribution is by comparison with the profits which
the United Kingdom derives from South Africa, including
Namibia. This sum will not redeem one’s sins and iS

166. The PRESIDENT: Since there are no further speakers, the Council has now concluded its examination of the
current phase of the item on our agenda, an item of which
the Council will remain seized.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
9 Seeresolution 264 (1969).
15
