CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1746)

Adoption

of the agenda

,. . . . . . . . , . .. . . . . . ., .. . . . .. . . .

,. . . . ,. , .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . .. . .. . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the Unite+
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.1746

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoZutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDAND
Held in New

York on Friday,

FORTY-SIXTHMEETING
12 October

1973, at 4.30 p.m.

At the invitatio!? of the President, Mr. 0. Arikpo (Nigeria)
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

President: Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

3. The PRESIDENT: The first name inscribed on the list
of speakers is that of the representative of Nigeria. I invite
him lo take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 746)

4. Mr. ARIKPO (Nigeria): Mr. President, I want to thank
you and the members of the Security Council for granting
the request of Nigeria to participate in this ominous debate
on the Arab-Israeli conflict. In more ways than one, your
presidency of the Security Council at this critical hour is
propitious. You are not only an experienced and highly
‘respected diplomat but also the representative of a Government whose courage and commitment to international
justice and peace are already having a great impact in the
world. I have no doubt that in presiding over the
deliberations of this Council you will be guided by those
high qualities of courage and fair-mindedness which characterize your people and your Government.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 110 10).
77~ meeting was called to order at 5.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The flgenda was adopted.

5. When, on behalf of the Organization of African U&y, I
participated, in the clelibcrations on this issue last June
[I 718th meeting], 1 made a passionate pica that every
effort should bc made by this Council to ensure implementation of resolution 242 (1967) of 22 Novcmbcr 1967,
which was unanimously adopted by the Council and
accepted by the adversaries themselves without any reservations. The leaders of Africa warned then that time was
running out for a peaceful settlement of the Middle East
conflict. That Security Council debate ended in a rejection
of the plea by Africa that morality and law s!lould lake
precedence over armed might in this age of mindless
v:o!ence.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security CounciI (S/l 1010)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

6. Only a few days ago the Mead of State of Nigeria, His
Excellency General Yakubu Gowon, gave the prophetic
warning that “reasonable men who desire nothing but pcacc
and progress” when constantly denied their basic and
legitimate rights, and when “bereft of all hope of change by
an impervious and inflexible ruling class” invariably turn to
the “frightful
alternatives . , , of force and conflict”1 He
concluded his adclrcss to the Assembly on that occasion
with the following statement on behalf of OAU:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. fl: Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. M. Z.
ismail (Syrian Arab Republic) took places at the Council
table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the further
decisians taken at our meeting yesterday I propose also,
with the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of Nigeria and Saudi Arabia to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. I shall ask them to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be called
upon to take a place at the Council table when it is their
turn to address the Council.

“We regard it as an intolerable provocation that part of
Egypt, a member State, should continue to remain under
--

1

serve the cause qf international peace if they escalate the
present conflict by increasing arms supplies to the warring
parties. It is for this reason that Nigeria urges the Security
Council to exercise courage and to order the parties to stop
fighting now and to take immediate and active steps to
return to the positions they held prior to 5 June 19157atld
to comply with all the other provisions of resolution
242 (1967). The Security Council cannot ask for anything
less without seriously undermining its prestige and authority.

armed occupation in spite of the unanimous expressions
of international opinion against the acquisition of territory by force of arms.“’
7. Withjn hours of that statement, hostilities erupted in
the Middle East, where Israel continues to occupy by force
of arms stretches of land belonging to its Arab neighbours.
The vital question at issue now is not who fired the first shot
in the current war but who, in the light of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), is the more justified in resorting to
the use of force to recover Icrritorics,
for the present
conflict is a continuation of the war which started in June
1967 when Israel launched a preemptive attack on Egypt.

12. Let me end by repeating the closing statement of my
Head of State in the General Assembly, on 5 October 1973:

8. We all know Israel’s preoccupation with the question of
recognized and secure borders. In his first statement after
the resumption of the current hostilities/l
743rd nzeetirzg/,
the Foreign Minister of Israel in effect claimed that the
events of the last few days provide additional justificalion
for Israel’s continuing defiance of and contempt for the
resolutions of the General Assembly, and in particular for
resolution 242 (1967).

“Members of OAU desire peace in the Middle Eastpeace based on equity; peace that does not insist on
acquisition of other people’s territory as a pre-condition;
peace that acknowledges the right of all nations in the
area to exist in security, peace that places a premium on
respect for cultural diversity; peace that upholds the
dignity of man and draws sustenance from the principles
enunciated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Charter 01” the United Nations. For all the
inhabitants or the area have every right to expect that
they should no longer be distracted from the urgent task
of economicreconstruction and socialdevelopment.They
have every right to live in peace and to continue to
contribute, asthey have done in the past and in history,
to the mainstreamof humancivilization.“3

9. May I say, in all sincerity, that Nigeria believes that the
reverse is the case. Nigeria, in common with other States
Members of the United Nations, recognizes and indeed
supports the right of Israel to live in peace within
recognized and secure boundaries. But there should be no
mistake about the fact that for as long as Israel continues to
hold by force of arms one sqtlare inch of Arab land, for so
long will the State of Israel know no permanent peace. That
is not a happy prospect for any country which wants to
provide for its peoples a full and abundant life. Let there be
no mistake about this: whatever the final outcome of the
battles which are now raging in the Middle East, there will
bc no peace until Arab lands are restored to them either on
the basis of resolution 242 (1967) or by force of arms. It is
for tllis reason that Nigeria would appeal to the superPowers, particularly the United States, to view the conflict
in the Middle East not in terms of the next quarter of a
century but more realistically in the light of the geopolitics
of the twenty-first
century, when the short-term advantages
of lsrael arc bound to be neutralizecl.

13. It is the hope of my Government that both partieswill
heed this warning and that the Security Council will doits
duty by the international community by ordering a
cease-fireand pursuing the implementation of resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.
14. Mr. MlJNGAl (Kenya): Sir, I take this opportunity to
congratulateyou on your accessionto the high office of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Your experience in diplomacy and the work of
the United Nations assuresthe Council of fruitful resultsin
its deliberations at this time. May I assureyou of my
delegation’ssupport for you asyou guide our work in the
!i EcuIt issuesbefore the Council.

10. WC in Nigeria are grieved about the inevitable loss of
life in this conflict, especially those of Ihc servants of the
United Nations, who in the course of their duty of
promoting international understanding, made the supreme
sacrifice of losing their lives. Nigeria joins the international
community in expressing its condolence to their Governments and their families. Let us hope that their sacrifice, as
wcl1 as that of those who in similar circumstances passed
away before them, will be a sharp reminder to the Security
Council of the need to pursue more vigorously its role of
maintaining international peace and security.

16. I shall now turn to the subjccl before the Council.
Speaking to this Council on 13 June I973, during the
discussionin the comprehensivereview of the situation in
the Middle East, the representativeof Kenya statedthat:

11. The Security Council, and in particular its permanent
members, must bear in mind that, in carrying out its
responsibility for the maintenance of international pcacc
and security, the Council is acting on behalf or all Members
of the United Nations and not on behalf of any special
interest group. I want to say that the super-Powers will not

“The situation that now exists in the area -of ‘no pear
and no war’- can hardly bc expected to last for very
much longer bcforc a generalconflagration erupts which
would seriouslythreaten international peaceand security
not only in the Middle East but in [other areasof the]
world.” /I 724tl~mectihg, para.

15. l also take this opportunity to congratulate the
representative of Yugoslavia for the able and dcdicatctl
mannerin which he guided the work of this Council in the
month of September.

2 IhIi.l., para. 38.

3 Ihid.,

2

,xir;,.

39.

17. It is with profound regret that we note that a shooting
war is once again being waged in the Middle East. My
delegation views with concern and immense grief the heavy
toll of lives lost since 6 October 1973, and in particular,
lives of innocent people and civilians. Kenya has already
had occasion to address the Council on the loss of the
United Nations and diplomatic personnel in Damascus,
Syria, and will say no more on this.

This should also include guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and political independence of every State in the area
and all the other points stipulated in resolution 242 (1967).
22. My delegation will participate with other members of
the Council in every possible constructive effort to bring
about a normalization of relations in the Middle East, based
on the elements that 1 have just outlined. The Council
should not be seen to abdicate its primary responsibility in
such a grave matter as the one before us. My delegation
appeals to the parties to do their utmost to help the
Security Council to this effect. Likewise, the super-Powers
should exercise their utmost responsibilities to influence an
end that gives credit to the role of the Security Council.

18. I appeal to all the parties to this war to respect
humanitarian law during the conflict. Civilians and other
impermissible targets should, within the most stringent
possible constraints, be spared from deliberate and wanton
attacks. This is even more compelling considering that some
of the disputants are parties to the Geneva Conventions of
1949.

23. Kenya believes in peace in the Middle East because all
Africa has to develop and the continent cannot develop
unless we have conditions of peace. Africa is not one of the
big Powers. We have no super-weapons for destruction and,
therefore, I feel that our voice jn this Council should be
listened to, because we would like nothing else but peace,
permanent peace, in the area.

19. This war has resulted from the hitherto frustrating
non-implementation
of resolution 242 (1967), which
Kenya still believes remains a valid basis for negotiations
among the parties. The sole question in the non-implementation of that resolution is the continued occupation of
Arab territories by Israel as a result of the June 1967 war,
Occupation of territories resulting from conquest in war is,
of course, contrary to the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, It is a fact that those whose lands are
occupied cannot permanently accept that. No doubt, the
British Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary was right
when he observed that: “It would not be physically
possible for the Arabs to go on gazing indefinitely across
cease-fjre lines at their own lands without the eruption of
war.”

24. The PRESIDENT: Speaking now as the representative
of AUSTRALIA,
I wish to place on record immediately
that the renewed outbreak of hostilities in the Middle East,
which has brought us together in urgent meeting around
this table, has caused deep distress and concern to the
Australian Government and people.
25. We in Australia wish for nothing more ardently than
that the parties to this grievous dispute-now once again
translated into mortal combat already exacting a fearful toll
in human life and suffering-could compose the differences
that divide that deeply troubled region and reach, even if
only by gradual steps, a just and enduring peace settlement.
Everyone everywhere will agree that it is calamitous, for the
world as well as for themselves, that all these talented
peoples in the Middle East arc using up their energies and
their human and material resources in mutual vilification
and mutual destruction, instead of applying these talents
and resources, jn harmony and co-operation, to the
betterment of life throughout the region as a whole.

20. I: wish to draw the attention of the Council to the fact
that the Organization of African Unity has consistently
expressed itself against the occupation of a State member
of that organization by any other State, wherever it may
be. OAU has stated that it has been seized of the problem
of the situation in the Middle East over a number of years,
and a study of the resolutions and declarations adopted at
the meetings of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of OAU since its inception shows a pattern of
growing concern, disappointment, disenchantment and
sense of danger. This is because OAU cannot turn a blind
eye to the fact that the territory of one of its founding
member States has been the object of military occupation
since June 1967, contrary to the purposes and principles
not only of the Charter of the United Nations but also of
OAU itself.

26. The fact that we are gathered here is an acknowledgement of the grave responsibility that the Charter of
the United Nations places cm this Council as the body
charged with the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is no less than our duty to grasp this
responsibility and to consider urgently what action we can
and should take in this highly explosive and dangerous
situation.

21. My delegation considers that the Council should seek
to declare and enforce the following elements in the present
crisis. First, an immediate cease-fire should come into
effect. Such a cease-fire would obviate further unnecessary
loss of life and destruction of property, which can only
intensify the feelings of enmity against the people and
States that have to live together in the same region.
Secondly, agrecmcnt by whoever occupies the other’s land
to withdraw from such occupation to the pre-5 June 1967
lines. Thirdly, enter into immediate negotiations with a
view to solving the other outstanding problems of the
conflict, including the implementation of the principles
enunciated in Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
giving due attention to the rights of the Palestinian peoples.

27. We are of course faced immediately with the difficulty
of sifting and assessing accurately the numerous reports
that reach us regarding what must be an extremely fluid
situation on the ground in the Middle East-and this
notwithstanding
the valuable reports submitted by the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization. This does
not make it any easier for us to agree on what we should
immediately do. It is an incontestable fact, however, that
heavy fighting is in progress and even increasing in scale,
and that the fragile cease-fire that applied until 6 October
has been shattered. Our first task must therefore be to try,
3

as an initial step, to unite in calling upon the warring parties
to stop fighting.

responsible voice of a great Power, and 1 venture as
President to commend it to members of the Council ind all
parties most closely concerned.

28. This is the least that the weight of world opinion will
expect us to do-and, K say again, as a first step. If the
parties could be brought to accept our call, we would have
provided, for the people of the Middle Eastern region as
well as ourselves, a breathing space in which the arduous
task of extending any areas of agreement that can be found
to exist in the direction of a just and lasting peace on the
. basis of resolution 242 (1967) could be undertaken with
renewed urgency.

32. My own Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, underlined on
7 October the need for a just and durable settlement. I-lc
pledged that the Australian Government would continue to
support all efforts to bring about such a settlement, and
emphasized that, in the Government’s belief, resolution
242 (1967) provides a sound and equitable basis For a
settlement.
33. My delegation can only hope that, because time is
emphatically not our ally, nor the ally of any of the peoples
in the Middle East, the Council will grasp the responsibility
that the Members of the United Nations and ultimately tile
peoples
that we represent have conferred upon us aad
continue its efforts to end this tragic and dangerous war
and to carry forward urgently the task of working towards
a lasting peace in a region that has had far too little peace,
not only in living memory but as a historical fact. We rnusl
bear in mind that while we are talking here people on hot]1
sides are suffering and dying; our ultimate responsibility
must therefore be to the people of the Middle East, as we]]
as to our own conscience. Let us accept it.

29. It seems essential to my delegation that we do find
this breathing space. The debates in this Council over the
past few days have illustrated the very high intensity of
emotion that exists at present, particularly between the
parties concerned; and this, of course, does not make our
task any easier. As our distinguished Secretary-General said
in the moving and eloquent statement that he addressed to
me as President yesterday, [1745th meeting/, it is difficult
for countries in conflict to turn from war to peace. It is all
the more important that members of this Council, individually and collectively, should continue to consider and
discuss this volatile situation in a mood and an atmosphere
as calm and objective as possible. We are simply wasting our
time if we join in recriminations that only seek to ascribe
blame to one side or the other. We can all understand the
frustrations that have increased during the past six years
over the failure to build on the foundation provided by
resolution 242 (1967)-frustrations
which have inevitably
helped to bring about the present renewal of hostilities.
While we must regret lost opportunities of the past, we
must look forward and not backward, as the representative
of the United Kingdom said at the 1743rd meeting, on
Monday.

34. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
{translations from Russian): The Soviet delegation has at
previous meetings of the Security Council quite fully set
forth the position of the Soviet Union on the subject under
discussion in the Council. Now, at this meeting, on behalf
of the Soviet delegation I should like to acquaint the
Council with a statement published today in the Soviet
press by TASS in connexion with the continuance of savage
air raids on non-military targets by the Israeli air force. I
shall read out the full text of the statement:

30. I have already referred to the Secretary-General’s
statement of yesterday, in which he expressed his deep
concern at the increasing threat to international peace and
security that this situation may create, and appealed to the
conflicting Governments to consider alternative courses,
before it is too late, so that fighting and bloodshed may
cease, and also expressed the hope that members of the
Security Council, as well as other Member States, will
redouble their efforts to seek an end to the fighting and an
immediate and determined resumption of the quest for a
just and lasting settlement.

“On 12 October, Israeli missile boats fired upon the
Syrian port of Tartus, and a Soviet merchant vessel, the
&a Meclznikov, which had arrived at that port
011
5 October with equipment for a hydroelectric facility
under construction on the Euphrates River, was sunk. 011
9 October, Israeli aircraft dropped bombs on the Soviet
cultural centre, which is situated in a section of Damascus
where there are no military targets but only embassies of
foreign States. There were casualties among the Soviet
and Syrian citizens who were in that building.
“The piratical air raids to which the Israeli air force
subjected Damascus, Horns and Latakia caused considerable material damage and destroyed
residential
quarters: there were many casualties among the civilian
population, including women and children. In Egypt, Port
Said and the suburbs of Cairo were subjected to bombing
raids.

31. This morning the United States Secretary of State,
Mr. Kissinger, injected another appeal for action to be
taken in an atmosphere of calm, reason and understanding.
In the course of a press conference today, devoted mainly
to the situation in the Middle East, Mr. Kissinger spoke of
placing more stress on attempting to crystallize a consensus
than in going through a battle of resolutions and counterresolutions. In saying that the United States was not seeking
opportunities for public confrontations which might harden
dividing lines and make it more difficult to move towards a
settlement, he defined his Government’s objective as that of
bringing about an end of hostilities in such a manner that it
would be in contact with all of the parties as well as with
the permanent members of the Security Council after
hostilities are ended. This sounds to my delegation like a

“All this testifies to the fact that the Israeli militarists
are turning their deadly weapons against peaceful citizens
and civilian targets, and even carrying out attacks against
ships and strictly peaceful institutions of States that arc
not taking part in the war.
“The air raids on Syrian and Egyptian towns continue.
The ruling circles in Israel are broadening their aggression
4

against the Arab States, particularly against Egypt and
Syria, grossly flouting the decisions of the United Nations
Security Council and General Assembly concerning the
Middle East.

38. I shallnot make any commentsaboutthe fact that the
experience of previous meetingshasshowntime and again
that there are discrepanciesbetween eye witnessreports
and especially between reports which reachus after more
consideredexamination of the facts, and the statements
which WChear around this table. For instanceqregarding
the
Soviet vessel in question, according to a report from
Damascus,“a Soviet freighter was seriouslydamaged”,and
not sunk. But I do not have the full facts, and therefore I
shall refrain from commenting on this unfortunate procedure of placing before the Security Council charges
before they have beenfully investigated.

“The Arab States, which are exercising their right to
self-defence and waging a just struggle for the liberation
Of their ancestral lands that have been occupied by Israel,
are displaying tremendous fortitude and restraint. They
are carrying on combat operations solely against the
armed forces of the enemy and clisplaying feelings of
humaneness towards the inhabitants of Israeli towns, thus
respecting the rules of international law.

39. However, there are reports that in the courseof that
naval battle during the night of 11 and 12 October, there
were civilian lossesand other civilian shipssufferedaswell.

“The conscience of peace-loving mankind cannot rcconciIe itself to the new crimes of the Israeli aggressors, by
whose will entirely innocent people are again dying in the
Middle East. If the ruling circles in Israel assume that
their attacks on peaceful towns and civilian targets in
Syria and Egypt will remain unpunished, they arc
profoundly
deluded. Aggression cannot remain unpunished, and the aggressor must bear severe responsibility for his actions.

40. The spokesmanof the IsraelDcfenseForcesmadethe
following statementtoday regardingthis matter:
“We regret the sinkingof civilian shipsin the areaof the
part of Latakia. Since their attack againstIsraelsix days
ago, Egypt and Syria proclaimeda wide areaopposite
their shores as a war zone, the entry into which by
foreign shipsis prohibited. The port of Latakiaservesasa
military base for Syrian men of war which fight against
Israel.”

“The Soviet Union vigorously condemns the savage
bombings and shellings of civilian targets and peaceful
populations by the Israeli armed forces. The Soviet Union
cannot regard with indifference the criminal acts of the
Israeli militarists, as a result of which there have also been
casualties among Soviet citizens in Syria and Egypt, and it
demands an immediate end to the bombing of the
peaceful towns of Syria and Egypt and strict observance
by Israel of the rules of international law, including those
relating to freedom of navigation. The continuation of
Israel’s criminal actions will lead to grave consequences
for Israel itself.

41. I should like to add and stressthat the Israelidefence
forces, and in particular the pilots of the Israeliair forces,
have strict ordersprohibiting any actionagainstany civilian
targets.
42. The PRESIDENT: 1 now call on the reprcscntativeof
Syria, who wishesto speakin exerciseof hisright of reply.
43. Mr, ISMAlL (Syrian Arab Republic) (inrcrfnvtatiorz
fLon7 f;l-w&z): Just five minutesagoI receiveda telcphonc
communication from Damascus.The Israelis,not satisfied
with dropping napalm bombs, have alsodroppeddelayed
action bombs on parts of the city of Damascus,in the
suburbs, where the poorer classes
live, pcoplcwho arc not
familiar with these bombs and ~110, consequently,fall
victim to them. One of those bombsexploded in the
courtyard of a hospital. Among the victimsin that hospital
were three war casualties,including an Israeliwhom we
were looking after.

“The Soviet Union bclicvcs that the basis for establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle East lies in
putting an end to Israeli aggression and the acts of
violence carried out by Israel and in liberating the Arab
territories occupied by Israel.”
35.
The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representativeof
Israel in the exerciseof hisright of reply.

36. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I bclicvc that enoughhasbeen 44. That is not the bombing of civilian targets-according
said in the courseof the last few meetingsregardingcivilian to the representative of Israel, that is not the bombingof
casualtics in the renewedhostilities in the arca. The annals the civilian population. Well then, what is it? Arc those
of history how no war which has not brought grief and delayed action bombs sweets,arc they chocolatebars’?We
suffering and death to civilians. This is most regrettable. do not riced Israeli chocolatebars.Let themkeepthem and
However, I think that every f’air-mindedpersonwill realizc Ict them caf them themselves.Using napalm bombs,
tIlat responsibility for suchsuffering, grief and death must delayed action bombs, is not a display of courage or
be placed with those who initiate the war -in the caseof
bravura- it is cowardice.
tile present outbreak of hostilities, Egypt and Syria, which
lallnchcd an attack on 6 October.
45. I should like to remind all the representatives
here,and
I should alsolike to remind the reprcsentativcof Israel,of
what 1 said in my statement, to which hc hasnot replied
37. The representative of the Soviet Union referred to
tInfortunate civilian lossesin the Syrian port of Tartus.1-i~ and would not dare rcplv becausehe knowsthat 1 was
speaking the truth. The correspondentof the A,wzcc
did not mention, however, that thoselossesoccurredin the
COUITX of a naval battle which took placebetweenIsraeli I’ruim Prcsscwho was an eye witnessof the sceneof the
bombing of Damascustold us thal on 9 Octoberthe Israeli
alld Syrian war vessels.
5

then you do not want occupation. That is a condition sine
[,~a n~,z for peace. A cease-fire in order that that peace may
become a reality means that there is an intention, a
determination, really to achieve peace. And with the
comlnents ] made just now,
then there must be a
determination to end the occupation. Without that, there
can be no cease-fire.

Phantom strafed the streets. The representative of Israel, in
exercising his right of reply, said that I had not mentioned
the place bombed by the Phantom. 1 repeated to him that it
was the streets. If he does not understand French, I say to
him “street”; if he does not understand English, 1 say to
him “stmda”; if he doesn’t understand Italian, I say to him
in Turkish “s&z/t”.
I do not understand Hebrew and I
cannot tell him how the word “rue” is translated into
Hebrew. The bombing in the streets, among the groups of
civilians who had gathered in the streets, was carried out
twice by that magnificent American Phantom--I say, twice,
and it fired into the. crowd. This is humanitarian?

53. 1 come to the last two points. One is about responsibility-who
is responsible for what has happened, is
happening and will happen in the future? I say it is those
who thought they could rely on force and who teach that
everything can be achieved by force, and who have decided
to live beyond the pale of the law.

do they
46. “War targets”, “strategic targets”--what
mean? Is a sugar refinery a war target? Is a school a war
target? Is a hospital a war target? Technical errors? We
can understand one or two cases but not hundreds of casts.
This is a planned policy that is being followed.

54. When we came to the Council last June we paticlltly
pleaded for peace-a just peace. All its members, with the
exception of one, have condemned the continued occupation of the territories conquered 011 5 June 1967. That was
in a draft resolution /S/10974/, and with the permission of
the delegation of China 1 say that it received 14 supporting
voices, although it receivctl only 13 supporting votes.

47. Now they contend that the port of Latakia is a
military port. Yes; there are two Latakias, one which is a
military base and another, bigger, port that is a commercial
port, and it is the latter that was attacked and not the
former. Ships carrying civilian merchandise were attacked.
One of them was a Greek ship, another was Japanese and
the third was Russian; and all those ships were carrying
goods for civlian use. Arrogant and boastful, lsrael wished
to sink them.

55. The responsibility for all that is happening now, for
every life lost, is on those who were so convinced that they
had the power to occupy and to punish without any
reaction. The responsibility lies in the manner by which we
were told jokes from Gohah Nasr-Eldin in answer to my
pleading with the Council “What do 1 tell my pcoplc’? ”

48. The clcctricity plants in Syria-are they war targets?
And what the Israelis are doing now, or trying to do now, is
to shatter our morale. From this table, solemnly, on behalf
of my Government I wish to proclaim that the detcrmination of the Syrian Government and army has never,
ever, been as great as now to continue the battle until the
invaders are all, every one of them, evicted. Not one inch,
not a single inch, of our land will they occupy.

56. 1 now turn to the bombing, wounding and killing of
civilians. I am not going to speak about that, not one single
word. I just want to know the rules of the game, and to
know that the rules arc going to be followed by both
parties.
57. The PRESIDENT: 1 call upon
the rcprcscntativc
Israel in exercise of his right of reply.

49. As usual, General Dayan, our present-day Hitler, has
proclaimed that Damascus will fall in 24 hours. Well, let us
see whether Damascus does fall in 24 hours. Damascus will
fall in 24 hours if there is not a single Syrian left alive. Then,
and only then, will Damascus fall. Let them all know that,
and let everyone remember it.

01

58. Mr. TEKOAH (lsracl): I want to say just one word to
answer the statement made by the Deputy Foreign Ministct
of Syria.
59. A naval battle in the seas on the approaches to a port
became “an attack against the port”. This is what happened; this is the way that foreign agcncics have reported,
on behalf of official spokcsn~cn of the Syrian Government:
there was a naval night battle in the vicinity of the port ml
apparently some of the ships in the port wcrc hit. The
position of my Covcrnmcnt 11as been cxpresscd in the
CominuniquC which 1 read out.

50. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
of Egypt in exercise of his right of reply.
51. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): Mr. President, I have
listened very carefully and attentively to your wise words
and to the words which have been spoken in this Council.
We arc not really fond of exercising our rights of reply, and
I am going to be very brief.

GO. The Dcpufy Foreign Minister of Syria rcferrcrl againto
air action in the Damascus area, and once again the Sccurit)
Council is witnessing an attempt to put forward charges
which arc completely i~iifoundcd arid rcfu ted by reports
coming out of Damascus, because according to m official
Syrian Government coinmuniqu~, from which 1 Wld:
“Israel today lauiichcd a major assault u11Syrian airports in
the area of Damascus”--not an attack on the city or on any
civilian targets.

52. I just want to say that “peace” is a very nice word. It
is attractive. We all like it: but we must be clear as to the
kind of peace we are talking about. There is also the peace
0f the dead, and in that kind of pcacc we are not interested.
If we are under occupation, then we must react to that
occupation. If there is acceptance, that is the peace of the
dead. If there is refusal, that is resistance. If the resistance is
silent, it is still going to break out one day, loudly, and that
loud resistance is what is being referred to as “the outbreak
0f hostilities”. Therefore, if you do not want hostilities

61. He referred to the kind of bombs that wcrc used. I ~111
not a military man, but I wonder whctllcr Frog tnissilcs,
6

ground-to-ground missiles each with a SOO-kilo warhead,
directed against civilian villages, as the Syrian army has
been doing since 6 October, is less damaging, less powerful,
has a lesser effect than the type of weapons to which he
referred. We presented to the Security Council a list of
Israeli tdwns and villages that found themselves under
continuous bombardment with these missiles. I do not
know whether a kindergarten on which such a missile fell is
of lesser concern to this Security Council than a cultural
centre that was, by accident also affected. And I do not
know whether Jewish blood of innocent Jewish victims in
these villages and towns is to be considered as lighter than
the blood which unfortunately is being shed in Syria, in
Egypt, of Syrian, Egyptian nationals, of foreign citizens, as
a result of the aggression unleashed by these two countries
against Israel on 6 October.

about which we have been hearing so much. And there is
confirmation of this blood-lust in statement after statement
of President Nasser and President Sadat. There is no need to
burden the Council with additional quotations. They are all
in the records of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly.
6.5. But not only words expressed this alleged desire on
the part of Egypt for peace in the area. Actions as well.
Who launched the invasion of l948? I think that even the
representative of the Soviet Union said very clearly where
responsibility lay for the aggression of that year. We heard
it from him in an unequivocal statement only yesterday.
Egypt’s desire for peace in the Middle East was expressed
by the signing of an armistice agreement, to be followed by
launching terror warfare against the Jewish State. Once the
regular armies stopped fighting a new method of aggression
was developed. The so-called feduyeen squads were established by the Egyptian army in Gaza and Sinai, to be
followed by similar paramilitary squads in Syria, trained,
controlled, directed by the Egyptian and Syrian Governmcnts. And we still remember these squads penetrating into
the heart of Israel in order to throw grenades into
classrooms, slaughtering little children. That was all right.
That was in the name of what? Liberation of territories I
think we heard in the last few days. It was all right to
ambush buses and murder all passengers. That was in the
name of Egypt’s sovereignty. It was perfectly all right to
blow up houses with their inhabitants asleep in them. That
too was being done on behalf of lofty ideals. This is the
way Egypt expressed its aspiration for peace in the Middle
East in the 1950s and in the 1960s. We still remember
President Nasser proclaiming in May 1967, “Now we are
strong enough in order to deal Israel a death-blow”. We still
rctnembcr the broadcasts over Radio Cairo, calling on the
Egyptian army and other Arab armies to “kill, kill, kill,
butcher the Jews”, That, of course, is a desire for peace.

62. There is however one difference, and that is that only
yesterday WC heard the Deputy Foreign Minister of Syria
admit that the artillery, the missile crews of his country’s
armed forces, did attack, did fire against Israeli villages.
But, he added, those villages were in the Golan Heights, as
if it made a difference where innocent civilians are killed.
But
I added that all the names of all the towns and villages
UpOtl
which the Syrian armed forces rained fire and death
were inside Galilee, and no rhetoric at this table is going to
move them to any other part of the country, or to any
other side of the armistice line of 1949 or of the cease-fire
lines of 1967.
63. Now, these are the facts, and it makes very little sense
for those who have provoked and brought about these
hostilities, for those who have taken upon themselves the
grave responsibility of engulfing the Middle East in renewed
bloodshed, to come here day after day and pretend that
there can be war with limited liabilities that does not affect
civilians in war zones. To those who have repeatedly turned
these last few meetings into spectacles which have debased
the Security Council, which have brought criticism upon it
and upon the United Nations from responsible international
media of information, I would only say in the words of the
Talmud: “The punishment of those who tell lies is that one
stops believing them even when they tell the truth.”

66. What happened in 1967, after Egypt retnoved the
United Nations Emergency Force from Caza and Sinai,
after Egypt took the first war step by declaring a military
naval blockade in the Straits of Tiran, after Egypt moved
hundreds of thousands of troops to Israel’s borders and
poised them for attack against the Jewish State in order to
implement Prcsidcnt Nasser’s promise to destroy Israel and
to throw its people into the sea? What happened when
Israel succeeded in repelling that aggression and in pushing
back the armies of Egypt that opened fire on our towns and
villages, that were ready to cut the country in two, that did
not conceal at any time the desire to burn and ruin and
butcher? What happened when the Security Council
decided on a cease-fire bctwecn the combatants and the
reaction was, “We are not going to change our politics, we
are going to pursue our objectives”, and the Khartoum
decision was adopted by the Heads of Arab States in
September 1967: “No peace, no negatiations, no agreement
with Israel? ”

64. The Foreign Minister of Egypt spoke again-and we
have heard this so many times in this chamber-of Egypt’s
&sire
for peace, of his own pleas for peace. These are
nice-sounding words, but what are the facts? The facts are
that since 1948 Egypt has carried on a war of aggression
against Israel with the openly proclaimed objective of
destroying
the Jewish State. And confirmation to that
effect is to be found in United Nations documents, when
the Egyptian Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States informed the United Nations in 1948 by telegram
that they were launching an invasion in order to massacre
Jews in a way that would be reminiscent of Mongolian
massacres. This can be confirmccl in the statements made in
the General Assembly and the Security Council’by consecutive Egyptian Foreign Ministers and Egyptian represcntatives who had no qualms about saying, even most
recently, that Israel is an artificial State and that it was a
crime to give the Jewish people, too, the chance to live like
other nations in freedom, in independence. It was a crime
to recognize the Jewish people’s right to self-determination

67. That is the way in which the Government of Egypt
expressed its desire to live at peace with Israel. And when
the Security Council called for a peace agreement between
the parties, for the establishment, for the first time in the
history of the Middle East and in Israel-Arab relations, of
State boundaries, of secure and recognized frontiers, what
7

was the reaction of the Government of Egypt? The
so-called war of attrition-but
that was a peaceful war, with
hundreds of casualties, perhaps thousands, on th.e Egyptian
side. That too was an expression of Egypt’s hopes and
aspirations for a peaceful Middle East.

the streets of Damascus. I note this and I consider it
acknowledgement of the fact. That is my first point.
74. Secondly, I also said in another statement that the
Israelis used napalm bombs. I-Ie did not deny it, therefore
he acknowledges it. I should like that to be taken note of.
He claimed that Syrian forces are using delayed action
bombs against civilian targets in Israel. In fact this claim,
which is false, was denied on the very day it was made by
the official spokesman of the Syrian Government. I repeat
and I state here that it is false and that our targets were
exclusively military, including military colonies which were
called “nahals “, and military airports which were perhaps
near some villages, but what we attacked were military
airports.

68. It takes a great deal of audacity to come before the
Security Council and to speak of Egypt’s desire for
peace-“for
years”, the Foreign Minister of Egypt said-in
the light of these facts. It is audacity, it is an abuse of
common sense and logic to come here and say that Egypt
wanted peace, when Egypt refused to meet with Israel as
suggested by the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Ambassador Jarring, in 1968. It is a blasphemy for
the Foreign Minister of Egypt to come here and claim that
his country, his Government has always desired peace and
worked for peace, only a few wkeks after repeated
statements by his own President that the goals are the
same: first of all push the Israelis back to the old military
lines of 1967 and then continue the struggle until the
elimination of Israel. Those statements too are on record
and are to be found in the verbatim records of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly. It is blasphemy to
come before the Security Council and speak of the desire
for peace after launching the latest aggression, on
6 October, simply because all over the world there was an
atmosphere of ditente and in all parts of the globe States
were proving that, even after protracted conflicts, understanding and peace could be attained through dialogue and
through negotiation.

75. In another statement here in the Council I threw down
another challenge to the representative of Israel which he
has not taken up because he cannot. I ask him the following
question: Why has his country not replied positively up to
now to the appeal of the International Red Cross requesting
the cessation of the bombing of civilian targets and
civilians? Why? I demand a reply to that. But I know the
answer: it is clear that Israel wants to continue bombing
civilian targets. We take note of that. The Security Council
should also take note of it. World public opinion should
take note of it. The International Red Cross should take
note of it, too. All the allies of Israel, assisting it in its
military actions, should take note of it as well.
76. Why hitherto have the Israelis refused to commit
themselves solemnly to respecting the Geneva Conventions? Quite often they have said in the Special Political
Committee that these Conventions are not applicable in the
Arab-occupied territories. Why? Are they not parts of the
civilized world, and isn’t Israel refusing to implement
international conventions intended to alleviate the sufferings of civilians in times of war? Is it not perhaps because
they intend to continue to bomb civilian targets and our
civilians? I demand a reply.

69. This is what happened on 6 October, an escape on the
part of the Government of Egypt from the need to face the
possiblity of entering into a serious, responsible process
that would lead towards peaceful agreement with Israel.
70. In the light of it all, it is clear that what we are
discussing is an attack and a blow at the prospects of peace
in the area, a blow dealt by the Governments of Egypt and
Syria. If there is anything about which they should be the
last to speak in these circumstances, it is about an alleged
desire to see peace established. If in fact they do wish to
attain genuine peace with Israel, the option remains open.

77. This is another mockery before the Security COUK~
when the representativeof Israelclaims that the Arabs want
to eliminate the State of Israel, to eliminate the Jewish
people. That might have been likely 25 years ago when
there were someArab hotheads who went around saying
things like that. But today there is no one in the world who
believes any such thing. At the present time this small
country, this smallpeople is playing power politics. It isthe
Carthageof the present day.

71. Yesterday we heard the Foreign Minister of Egypt
speaking of Israel’s desire to close options. There was no
way out, there was no alternative, he informed the Security
Council-whose
responsibility is international peace-but to
strike at Israel, but to renew hostilities, but to resort to
force; there was no other way. Yes, for 25 years Israel has
been striving to close options-the
options of war, the
options of coercion, the options of imposing-diktatsleaving one option open: the option of peace, the option of
negotiation. It still remains open, once we restore the
cease-fire in the Middle East.

78. It is the Arabs who have always been and still are the
victims of aggressionand the Arabs who need protection
from the aggressiveness
of Israel. At the present time it is
we who are struggling for our existence as a nation. ASa
nation we, too, have a right to dignity.

72. The PRESIDENT: I now call of the representative of
the Syrian Arab RepubIic in exercise of his right of reply.

79. I said in my statement a few days ago that Israeli
arrogancehad reached such limits that it had begun to
expressitself by infringements of the sovereignty of the
alliesof Israel, including the great Powers, and that the day
would come when the leadersof those States would finally
realize their responsibilities and do everything in their

73. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): As I foresaw in the statement which I made
just now, the representative of Israel has been unable to
deny the fact that civilian people were machine-gunned in
8

Power to put an end to this limitless and unwonted
arrogance.

“In the course of these attacks, Syrian aircraft intensively strafed the homes of the villagers, causing the death
of at least 10 civilians, including women and children.
Many were wounded and much material damage was
caused.

80. In another statement I mentioned some resolutions of
the Security Council which expressly condemned Israel for
its premeditated acts of aggression against Lebanon and
Jordan. When I challenged the representative of Israel to
reply he remained silent. He couldn’t answer me because
these were resolutions of the Security Council, adopted by
an overwhelming majority.

“No military objective is located in these areas.
“On 10 October Syrian forces launched some 20
ground-to-ground Frog missiles against civilian centres in
the north of Israel. These deadly missiles have a range of
70 kilometres and contain 500 kilogrammes of explosives.

81. Naturally the Israelis were not very appreciative of
these resolutions. Everybody heard Mr. Eban say: “What is
the Security Council? It is an institution which proves its
moral, political and juridical bankruptcy.” Well, why are
YOU here? If the Security Council is a politically, juridically
and morally bankrupt institution, why are you here?

“As a result of this attack, considerable damage was
caused in the Israeli localities of Gvat, Migdal-Haentek, in
the region of Kfar Baruch and Nahalal. In Migdal-Haemek
and Gvat in particular, civilians were wounded and a
kindergarten, a school and many homes were destroyed.

82. The representative of Israel also mentioned the facts
of 1948 when, as he claims, the Arabs attempted to crush
the Israeli people. But when the Israelis in Palestine began
their massacre of Arabs from the beginning of 1948, the
State of Israel as such did not exist. The birth of that State,
which was marked on 15 May 1948, was preceded by
several horrible massacres of Palestinians. Who among us
does not remember Deir Yassin where the valiant members
of the Stern and Irgun Zwei Leumi killed and disembowelled women? Who does not remember that?

“Other Israeli villages in Upper Galilee-Gadot, Kfar
Scold, Shamir and Snir-were the targets of Syrian
artillery which caused serious damage.
“On the basis of its inherent right of self-defence and in
accordance with its obligations under international law,
Israel took the necessary steps to put an end to the
aggression and to these ,criminaI attacks by the Syrian air
force and artillery.
“The Israeli air force therefore attacked military and
strategic targets in Syria, in particular the headquarters of
the air force in Damascus and other purely military
targets.

83. We talk of civil rights here, of “enlightened
nations”!
This is supposed to be an enlightened nation!
Look at what it did! No Arab State wants to destroy Israel
and wipe out its people, the Jewish people. That is
absolutely false. Our struggle aims solely-~ emphasize
“solely”-at
liberating our territory and restoring our
national dignity. And we want at the same time-1 stress
this-to
see to it that the Arab people of Palestine as well
recovers its legitimate national rights.

“The Government of Israel categorically denies the
groundless accusations of the Syrian authorities.“4
87. The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representative of
Egypt in exercise of the right of reply.

84. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
in exercise of the right of reply.

88. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretcztiun from
Frmch): I take the floor much against my will, and I shall
be very brief.

85. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall refer only to one point
mentioned by the Deputy Foreign Minister of Syria, that is,
the appeals made by the International Committee of the
Red Cross-appeals because, as is customary with Syrian
and other Arab representatives at this table, once again we
are faced by distortion and falsehood. The International
Committee of the Red Cross made appeals to all combatants-successive appeals.
86.

89. The representative of Israel speaks of terror and
terrorism while Israel .has been and remains the chosen
ground of State terrorism. You have all been witnesses here
to the acts of terrorism committed by Israel. The condcmnations that the Security Council has issued against isracl
are numerous. I have yet to see one condemnation against
an Arab State.

This is Israel’s response:
90. The rcprescntative of Israel should have avoided going
into the field of terrorism, for Israel prides itself, through
its Prime Minister, on what she called “glorious exploits”
when innocent victims are assassinated in their homes and
on the streets, and this not only in Arab countries but also
in foreign countries far removed from the area of conflict,
such as the recent assassination of a Moroccan national in
Oslo, Norway.

“On 6 October 1973, in flagrant violation of the 1967
cease-fire of the Security Council of the United Nations,
the Syrian authorities launched war operations on a wide
scale along the entire cease-fire line.
“From the outset of these hostilities, Syrian armed
forces attacked civilian objectives, in particular, the Druse
villages located on the Golan Heights: Buk’ata, Masada
and Majdal Shams.

4 Quoted in I;rcncll by the spcakcr.
9

91. The lsraeli leaders prided themselves and still pride
themselves on their long reach and on the claim that they
can strike and punish anywhere they wish. Boundless
arrogance and cynicism. Well, that hand must be and will be
cut off. The time has come for Israel to realize that
gangrene is not confined to the hand but can spread to the
whole body.

92. The representative of Israel speaks of a dosire ?,,,*
peace. My only answer is that peace cannot be eStabhbt%~
unless Israel withdraws
from the ocoupicd Arab k,rg
pj’*,*:
any
’ i *
and without
going into
tories-simply
consideration.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

10
u1*0

ia bited

Nations,

New

York

Price:

IUS,

l.W(or

equivalent

In other

-^

currencies)
82001--M&Y

1979-2,)

~
