IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Spedal Political Commillrt

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -·--·-------- - - - -

F
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, 4
Deeply shocked by the most recent atrocities committed
by Israel, the occupying Power, against educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
1. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Condemns Israeli policies and practices against Palestinian students and faculties in schools, universities and
other educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially the policy of opening fire on defenceless students, causing many casualties;
3. Condemns the systematic Israeli campaign of repression against and closing of universities in the occupied Palestinian territories, restricting and impeding academic
activities of Palestinian universities by subjecting the selection of courses, textbooks and educational programmes,
the admission of students and the appointment of faculty
members to the control and supervision of the military occupation authorities, in clear contravention of the Geneva
Convention;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply
with the provisions of that Convention, rescind all actions
and measures against all educational institutions, ensure the
freedom of these institutions and refrain forthwith from hindering the effective operation of the universities and other
educational institutions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution before the end of
1983.

100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982
G

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 471 (1980) of 5
June 1980, in which the Council condemned the assassination attempts against the Mayors of Nablus, Ramallah and
Al Bireh and called for the immediate apprehension and
prosecution of the perpetrators of those crimes,
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 36/147 G of
16 December 198 l ,
Recalling once again the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, 4 in particular article 27, which states, inter
alia:
"Protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances,
to respect for their persons. . . . They shall at all times
be humanely treated, and shall be protected especially
against all acts of violence or threats thereof . . . '',
Reaffirming the applicability of that Convention to the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem,

1. Expresses deep concern that Israel, the occupying
Power, has failed for two years to apprehend and prosecute
the_perpetrators of the assassination attempts;
2. Demands once more that Israel, the occupying Power,
inform the Secretary-General of the results of the investigations relevant to the assassination attempts;

95

3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
/0 Decemha /982

37/89.

International co-operation in the peaceful uses
of outer space

The General Assemhlv.
Recalling its resolution 16/15 of 18 November 1981 ,
Bearing in mind the fact that twenty-five years have passed
since the beginning of international co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space in the United Nations,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States
the benefits derived therefrom, and of the importance of
international co-operation in this field, for which the United
Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in developing the rule of law for the advancement and preservation of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Taking note with sati!.faction of the progress achieved in
the further development of peaceful space exploration and
application as well as in various national and co-operative
space projects, which contribute to international co-operation in this field,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its twentyfifth session,7
I. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States that have not yet become parties to the
international treaties governing the use of outer space 8 to
give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treaties;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the successful conclusion of the Second United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 9
4. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twentyfirst session:
(a) Continued its efforts to fommlate draft principles
relating to the legal implications of remote sensing of the
earth from space;
(b) Considered the possibility of supplementing the
norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear
power sources in outer space through its working group;
(c J Continued its discussion of matters relating to the
definition and/or delimitation of outer space and outer space
activities, b.:aring in mind, inter alia, questions relating to
the geostationary orbit;
7
Official Records of the Gn,eml A.rn'mhlr. Thirty-sel'enth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/37/20)
• Treaty on Principles Governing the Al'livities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space. including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched
into Outer Space (resolution 2345 (XXII). annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (resolution 2777
(XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (resolution 1215 tXXIX). annex); Agreement Governing the
Activities of State, on the Moon .rnd Other Celestial Bo<11e~ (resolution
34/68, annex)
9
Sec Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Use., of 011/a \'pace, Vienna, 9-21 Au11us1 /982
(A/CONF IOl/10 and Corr. I ,md 2)

96

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

5. Decides that the Legal Sub-Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twenty-second session should:
(a) Continue on a priority basis its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth
from space, with the aim of formulating draft principles
relating to remote sensing;
(b) Continue its consideration of:
(i) The possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear power
sources in outer space through its working group;
(ii) Matters relating to the definition and/or delimitation
of outer space and outer space activities, bearing in
mind, inter alia, questions relating to the geostationary orbit, and devote adequate time for a deeper
consideration of this question;
6. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its nineteenth session continued:
(a) Its consideration of questions relating to remote
sensing of the earth by satellites;
(b) Its consideration of the United Nations Programme
on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space activities within the United Nations system;
(c) Its examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
(d) Its consideration of technical aspects of and safety
measures relating to the use of nuclear power sources in
outer space;
(e) Its consideration of questions relating to space transportation systems and their implications for future activities
in space;
(/) Preparations for the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in its capacity as Advisory Committee to the Preparatory
Committee;
7. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee at its twentieth session should:
(a) Consider the following items on a priority basis:
(i) Consideration of the United Nations Programme on
Space Applications and the co-ordination of outer
space activities within the United Nations system;
(ii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the earth
by satellites;
(iii) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems
and their implications for future activities in space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
8. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications for 1983, as proposed to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by the Expert on Space Applications, 10 and the recommendations by the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space relating_ to the Programme; 11
9. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, with the benefit of possible advice of both its
Sub-Committees in their next sessions, to consider the implementation of the recommendations of the Second United
10

NAC.105/302, sect. III.
See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, 9-21 August 1982 (Al
CONF. 101/10 and Corr. I and 2), paras. 429 and 430.
11

Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space, in particular the order of priorities and the
carrying out of the studies recommended by the Conference;
10. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments as
well as specialized agencies and other international organizations which acted as hosts to, offered fellowships for, or
otherwise assisted in the holding of, international training
seminars and workshops on space applications, particularly
for the benefit of developing countries;
11. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to continue and, where appropriate,
enhance their co-operation with the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to provide it with progress
reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of outer
space;
12. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with the
present resolution and previous resolutions of the General
Assembly, to consider, as appropriate, new projects in outer
space activities and to submit a report to the Assembly at
its thirty-eighth session, including its views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
100th plenary meeting
I O December I 982

37/90.

Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/16 of 10 November 1978, 34/
67 of 5 December 1979, 35/15 of 3 November 1980 and
36/36 of 18 November 1981 concerning the convening as
well as the preparation of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
held at Vienna from 9 to 21 August 1982,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in developing the rule of law for the advancement and preservation of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space.
Gravely concerned at the extension of an arms race into
outer space,
Aware of the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to an orderly
growth of space activities favourable to the socio-economic
advancement of mankind, in particular the peoples of developing countries,
Taking into account new developments in space science
and technology which are being projected and envisaged in
the coming decade as well as the new applications emerging
therefrom and their potential benefits and possible implications for national development and international cooperation,
Conscious of the need further to increase the awareness
of the general public with regard to space technology and
its applications,
Desiring to enhance the effectiveness of the co-ordinating
role of the United Nations, which is eminently suited to
bring about increased international co-operation and assistance to the developing countries in the field of exploration
and peaceful uses of outer space,
Expressing its satisfaction with the successful preparation
of the Conference through the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space in its capacity as Preparatory Committee for the Conference, and its Scientific and Technical
Sub-Committee in its capacity as Advisory Committee, as
well as through the Conference secretariat.
