S/PV.7169

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7169th meeting

Wednesday, 7 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yun Byung-se/Ms. Paik Ji-ah/Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Labbé
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Husein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Commemorating the Tenth Anniversary of Resolution 1540 (2004) and
Looking Ahead
Letter dated 2 May 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/313)

14-32373 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1432373*

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

resolution has accomplished a great deal. Resolution
1540 (2004) has helped us make important inroads
against the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. The resolution has set in motion a
great number of steps by Member States. Over 30,000
measures and actions taken by States to implement
the resolution have been reported to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Commemorating the Tenth Anniversary of
Resolution 1540 (2004) and Looking Ahead
Letter dated 2 May 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Korea
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/313)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Colombia, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Jacek Bylica, Principal Adviser and Special Envoy
for Non-Proliferation and Disarmament of the European
External Action Service, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/313, which contains a letter dated
2 May 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on
the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I now
give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I want first
to commend the Republic of Korea for convening
this open debate on resolution 1540 (2004). Let us
recognize that in its first 10 years, this landmark

2/70

07/05/2014

This, of course, only tells part of the story. There
have also been setbacks and disappointments, including
the recent use of chemical weapons in Syria. However,
through vigorous diplomatic and administrative
action, and by agreement, over 90 per cent of Syria’s
chemical weapons have been removed even as the
conflict has continued and intensified. We note that
some 20 countries have not submitted a report on their
implementation efforts to the 1540 Committee. In most
cases, these are countries facing serious economic or
social difficulties. I encourage all Member States that
have not yet done so to submit a first report in this
anniversary year.
If resolution 1540 (2004) is to work even more
effectively, it must be a global commitment and a global
enterprise. It is critical for every country to implement
the resolution. Terrorists and traffickers tend to target
countries whose customs, borders, trade, ports and
airports are less well or poorly monitored or controlled.
One promising trend is the preparation of voluntary
national implementation action plans. At the recent
Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague, 32 countries
released a joint statement reaffirming their commitment
to submitting such action plans to the 1540 Committee.
That was an important step forward.
Looking ahead, we hope to see expanded regional
cooperation in implementing the resolution, especially
since States sharing borders often face similar
challenges. Civil society also has a major role to play
in moving the world closer to meeting the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004), and through such joint efforts we
can come closer to an even more ambitious vision — a
world free of all weapons of mass destruction.
Supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a high priority for the United Nations and a
key task for the Office for Disarmament Affairs. We
all share an interest and a duty to prevent individuals
and non-State groups from acquiring and using these
abhorrent weapons. The effective implementation
of this resolution requires a wide scope of measures

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

ranging from legislation to law enforcement. It requires
action on the part not only of Governments but also
of industry and other relevant actors. In this year of
its tenth anniversary, I appeal to all States and other
stakeholders to continue their e fforts to implement this
resolution.
In closing, as the Secretary-General has said several
times, there are no right hands for wrong weapons. Let
us join together in the work against their proliferation
with renewed resolve to ensure a world of greater peace
and security in the years to come.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/7.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea.
Ten years ago, the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) by the Security Council marked a key milestone
in our efforts to address the challenge arising from
the nexus between the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and terrorism. As a
binding international norm under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, resolution 1540 (2004)
complements the existing non-proliferation regime,
which had formerly been focused on States. The
resolution reflects a fundamental shift in our paradigm
regarding the international community’s response to
the threat of WMD proliferation.
Over the past 10 years, resolution 1540 (2004) has
mobilized significant efforts across the globe to combat
new WMD proliferation threats. The number of States
that have implemented legislative measures to prohibit
the proliferation activities of non-state actors has more
than doubled during this period. At the same time, law
enforcement and export control capabilities of these
States have improved steadfastly in recent years.
Despite past achievements, daunting challenges
still lie ahead in an increasingly complex operational
environment, given the rapid advances in science and

S/PV.7169

technology. This is why, on the tenth anniversary of
this landmark resolution, we should step up efforts
to achieve its full and universal implementation. The
presidential statement that we have just adopted sets an
important goal of achieving the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by 2021, and maps out key areas
that we should work on to achieve this goal. Building
on the progress of the past decade, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will
report a comprehensive road map and strategy to the
Security Council by 2016. In this regard, I would like
to stress, in particular, three essential tasks that should
underpin our future efforts.
First, the 1540 Committee’s crucial role in
monitoring the implementation of the resolution should
be further enhanced. To date, 172 out of 193 Member
States have presented their implementation reports.
Considering the voluntary nature of the reporting,
that is a remarkable achievement. In marking the
tenth anniversary of the resolution, efforts should be
redoubled to achieve the goal of universal reporting by
Member States.
Secondly, we cannot overstate the importance of
capacity-building and assistance for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). As the saying goes, a chain is
only as strong as its weakest link. However robust the
security networks may be in many countries, it takes
vulnerability and failing in just one country to spell
insecurity for all. We should continue to strengthen the
matchmaking role of the 1540 Committee to facilitate
the provision of effective and tailored assistance to
States. In addition to the efforts by the Security Council,
we need to expand cooperation among all stakeholders,
including the relevant international and regional
organizations. For its part, the Republic of Korea has
launched the International Nuclear Non-proliferation
and Security Academy, which will contribute actively
to the capacity-building efforts in the region. We will
also contribute $1 million to support the activities of
the 1540 Committee.
Thirdly, we should promote synergy among
resolution 1540 (2004) and other non-proliferation
related norms and initiatives. Resolution 1540 (2004)
imposes an extensive set of obligations that cut
across a broad range of WMD-proliferation aspects,
encompassing nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery, as well as their
related materials and technologies. In today’s security
environment, where non-State actors can easily have

14-323733/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

access to WMD-related materials and technology,
non-proliferation and WMD security are indivisibly
linked. The Hague Nuclear Security Summit, held last
March, reinforced that important point, as more than 30
States announced the joint statement on promoting the
full and universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Such coordination efforts should be expanded
to other areas of WMD control.
Today, North Korea’s nuclear-weapons programmes
have exposed the weakest link in nuclear
non-proliferation, along with nuclear security and
safety. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
the only country in the world to have conducted nuclear
tests in the twenty-first century. Notwithstanding the
efforts of the international community, North Korea
has continued to develop its nuclear weapons over
the past two decades, and is now threatening to carry
out its fourth nuclear test. If North Korea succeeds
in acquiring nuclear weapons, it will seriously
undermine the regime established by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and exacerbate
tension and instability in North-East Asia.
Further nuclear tests by North Korea must be
prevented through concerted efforts of the international
community. If we fail to effectively act upon such a clear
and present threat to international peace and security,
it will critically weaken the credibility of the Security
Council, as well as the integrity of the Charter of the
United Nations, which demands that all Members be
peace-loving States. We must clearly warn North Korea
that, if it challenges the international community with
another nuclear test, it will be met with the most serious
consequences.
Having the honour of presiding over the Security
Council today, I am pleased that we were able to adopt
today’s significant presidential statement. As Chair
of the 1540 Committee, the Republic of Korea will
continue to lead efforts to realize the full and universal
implementation of the resolution over the course of
our remaining term. I look forward to participants’
constructive contributions on the development and
future direction of resolution 1540 (2004) during
today’s open debate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

4/70

07/05/2014

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening this important highlevel open debate on non-proliferation as we mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004). We consider
your presence here today, Sir, as a major commitment
to the overall implementation of the resolution, which
calls upon States to take the necessary measures in
combating the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery. I also
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing.
Today’s debate is a great opportunity to take stock
of our efforts in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) since 2004. It is evident that there was significant
progress in the past 10 years and, more important, on
raising awareness of the goals and the objectives and
obligations of the resolution. We welcome the national
reports submitted by Member States to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Rwanda is among the Member States to have
fulfilled the obligations according to the pertinenent
provisions of the resolution. We will continue to ensure
its implementation within our borders and in our region.
We urge States that have not submitted national reports
and other required information to do so. We encourage
all Member States to cooperate in identifying effective
practices, experiences and lessons learned. Such efforts
will further contribute to the development of a long-term
vision and strategy for the effective implementation of
the resolution.
While we have accomplished raising awareness,
there is still a major challenge when it comes to attempts
to procure weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
related material. Private entities are becoming more and
more involved in the procurement business, as middle
men and for private benefit. We must combat the illicit
trafficking in WMD-related commmodities through a
mechanism that consists of measures against originating
parties, export licensing and control lists, private-sector
internal compliance programmes, financial controls,
international outreach and capacity-building. In view
of emerging potential threats and risks, proliferators
exploit legal loopholes to broker illicit transactions
and cover up end-users; but they also take advantage
of existing poor border-control mechanisms in some
States, which allows diversion. We must tailor our
efforts to address those challenges by setting up effective
export-control systems, processes and methodologies,
while utilizing the World Customs Organization,

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

which has been an indispensible partner of the 1540
Committee with regard to the implementation of border
control-related obligations. Let me also emphasize
the need for raising the political will of Governments,
well-defined
legislation,
information-sharing,
inter-agency coordination, engagement with industry
and international cooperation as crucial elements of
essential control systems.
Proliferation financing remains a key factor that
contributes to the threat to international peace and
stability. As most perpetrators of illicit trafficking
strive to conceal their goods and the related financial
transactions, there remain significant capacity issues in
many States, which lack an extensive legal foundation
on which to build non-proliferation measures. In
that regard, we appreciate the work of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) in collaboration with the
1540 Committee to prohibit the facilitation of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
through financing. From our perspective, targeted
financial sanctions are crucial for the overall success of
counter-proliferation efforts, taking into consideration
the guidelines of the FATF framework.
Rwanda believes that there is a strong link between
the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, owing to the abuse of
the controls on stockpiles and the dissemination of
information and technologies, thus increasing the
possibility for terrorist groups to gain access to and
use such weapons. We reiterate the need to continue
to enhance and strengthen cooperation concerning the
prevention of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. In the same vein, we reiterate
our support for the 2004 Protocol to the Organization
of African Unity Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism. The Protocol obligates State
parties to strengthen national instruments to prevent
terrorists from acquiring WMDs and to cooperate with
the international community in the implementation of
continental and international instruments relating to
disarmament and non-proliferation.
Despite the progress achieved, we acknowledge that
much work remains. Noting the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), Rwanda seizes this opportunity
to encourage Member States to redouble their efforts
to fulfil their obligations and commitments related
to non-proliferation requirements and initiatives. We
reiterate our support for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) and the work of the 1540 Committee.

S/PV.7169

We support the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations. We also reaffirm our
commitment to fully implement the resolution in areas
where we have not already done so.
To conclude, Rwanda commends the Republic of
Korea, Chair of the 1540 Committee, for its leadership
in the Council on the issue of non-proliferation and
for introducing presidential statement S/PRST 2014/7,
adopted today with the full support of Rwanda.
Mr. Labbé (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the presidency of the Republic of Korea for
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). We also appreciate the presence
of Foreign Minister Yun Byung-se in the Council. We
appreciate the leadership of the Republic of Korea in
this and all matters tied to international security. Chile
supports the desire of Korean President Park GeunHye to provide renewed momentum towards a world
free of nuclear weapons, starting with a completely
de-nuclearized Korean peninsula.
Resolution 1540 (2004), adopted unanimously on
28 April 2004, is an historic milestone that Chile helped
to adopt, since at that time my country was serving as a
non-permanent member of the Council. It was the first
resolution of the Council which, under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, addressed the threat
posed by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons among non-State actors, filling a
legal vacuum in the international system. The Council,
continuing the course set by the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) on global counter-terrorism efforts, took
appropriate action on that occasion in the exercise
of the powers conferred on it by the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Today, as was the case then, the terrorist threat is
real. The mere idea that non-State actors have access
to weapons of mass destruction is a source of great
concern, which was made clear at the latest Nuclear
Security Summit of March 2014. In that context, Chile
believes that the goal of resolution 1540 (2004) is still
fully relevant. States must continue to adopt measures
to preclude the financing of prohibited activities
related to weapons of mass destruction, their means of
delivery and related materials, and to account for and
secure materials related to such weapons, guaranteeing
security in their production, use, storage and transport.
Over the past 10 years, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has succeeded in

14-323735/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

raising the international community’s awareness of the
terrorist threat and the serious dangers posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It has done
so by providing assistance in the areas of legislation,
training and equipment, as well as by facilitating
cooperation among various regional organizations and
Member States, fostering better practices in general, in
order to anticipate and reduce terrorist risks. So far, 171
countries have submitted their national implementation
reports on resolution 1540 (2004). However, we must
move on to the next stage, since new challenges show
that the threat is still present, for example, in the area
of financing terrorism.
My country has consistently planned for the full
and effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in an effort in the context of a State policy
that makes the maintenance of international peace and
security one of the priorities of its foreign and defence
policies. In that connection, Chile has duly adapted
and harmonized its national legislation to meet the
standards of resolution 1540 (2004), as reflected in the
various implementation reports transmitted by Chile to
the Committee since 2004. We recently informed the
Committee of the designation of Chile’s focal point as
we begin to update information, using the new matrix
and preparing a national strategy, following the 1540
Committee guidelines.
Chile remains firmly committed to the implementation
of the resolution and, in a broader context, to the global
architecture of non-proliferation and disarmament. Our
participation in the recent Nuclear Security Summit
is proof of that. We should also like to emphasize the
importance that we attach to the dissemination of work
being done by the 1540 Committee and to its facilitation
of cooperation. From that perspective, we believe
that, in order to avoid proliferation, it is essential for
the institutions responsible for local and cross-border
controls to be staffed with people trained in the
relevant legal instruments. We emphasize, for example,
the work being carried out by customs and border
control police. In that regard, we reiterate the need for
States with greater capacity in that area to share their
experience and good practices. I would recall, among
other initiatives at the regional and global levels, the
seminar on legal and normative provisions governing
international trade and security that was hosted in my
country in both Santiago and Valparaíso in September
2009 in conjunction with the University of Georgia.

6/70

07/05/2014

We would also highlight the importance of
providing advanced training to the relevant officials via
seminars and workshops that encourage the sharing of
experiences and practices geared to the needs of each
State with regard to the treatment of non-proliferation
activities. Such activities should also involve civil
society across the most diverse possible spectrum, from
academia to business. In that regard, we particularly
welcome today’s presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7
on that point. Chile believes that resolution 1540 (2004)
supports the effective implementation of the universal
instruments on the issue of non-proliferation and
reiterates its commitment to the objectives and goals
that inspired that resolution.
To conclude, I would like once again to thank the
Republic of Korea for its leadership in this important
sphere.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
welcome Foreign Minister Yun Byung-se to the
Security Council today, and I thank the Mission of the
Republic of Korea for organizing today’s important
debate and for Korea’s leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as we
work together towards the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution in 2016. I also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for his introductory
statement.
Ten years ago, we adopted resolution 1540 (2004).
Since that day, non-State actors have not acquired
weapons of mass destruction, indicating that the
resolution has been effective. But we cannot rest on
that as a measure of our success. We know that terrorist
groups want to and intend to obtain weapons of mass
destruction. As Thomas Jefferson said, “The price of
liberty is eternal vigilance”. That is why States must
continue to implement resolution 1540 (2004) with
the same vigour and commitment as when we first
adopted it. Universal compliance with resolution 1540
(2004) is an essential component of the international
non-proliferation response. The United Kingdom
therefore strongly supports the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its work to
achieve full implementation of the resolution. We will
continue to do our part to bring that about.
On 20 December 2013, the United Kingdom
submitted our fourth national implementation report
and our first national action plan to the 1540 Committee.
Under our 2013 presidency of the Group of Eight’s

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction we hosted an outreach
event for non-reporting States, involving two of the
1540 Committee experts. Some of the States attending
have since submitted their first reports.
The United Kingdom also supports the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in its work with
a number of States. Through our Counter-Proliferation
Strategic Programme Fund we have hosted outreach
and awareness-raising workshops to help States
develop domestic legislation that meets resolution 1540
(2004) requirements. That fund has also enabled us
to collaborate with Canada and Indonesia to produce
a national legislation implementation kit on nuclear
security. We hope that other States find that kit useful
in ensuring that their domestic legislation is in line with
the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004).
The value of the 1540 Committee’s Group of Experts
cannot be underestimated. In addition to performing the
vital role of collating requests and offers of assistance,
the 1540 Committee and its experts conduct countryspecific visits to grasp the challenges of national
implementation and to guide States towards sources of
assistance. That direct engagement has increased the
number of reporting States. I encourage Member States
to take the initiative to reassess their compliance with
the resolution, for example with greater use of peer-topeer review. I also encourage the Committee to work
with a range of actors, including industry, civil society,
academia and the private sector, to support States in
their implementation of the resolution.
Much has been achieved in the past ten years. To
date, 172 States have submitted their national reports
on the implementation of the resolution voluntarily,
and the number of non-reporting countries continues
to decrease. I take this opportunity to urge the
21 States yet to submit national implementation reports
to the 1540 Committee to do so as soon as practical.
Of those 21 States, 17 are in Africa. The reports are
not as onerous as States may fear, and assistance is
available in preparing them, including from the Panel
of Experts and from regional partners. As we enter the
second decade of the resolution, we must look for new
and innovative ways to increase effective practices
to support the resolution and to ensure that non-State
actors never acquire weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the Korean initiative to convene this
public debate commemorating the tenth anniversary of

S/PV.7169

resolution 1540 (2004). China also welcomes Foreign
Minister Yun to preside over today’s meeting of the
Council. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing.
As the first Security Council resolution devoted to
non-proliferation, resolution 1540 (2004) is a milestone
in the prevention of nuclear, biological and chemical
terrorism. Over the past ten years, thanks to the joint
efforts of the international community, the international
consensus on non-proliferation has been deepened.
International mechanisms for non-proliferation based
on multilateralism have been improved. National
capacity-building for non-proliferation has been scaled
up. International cooperation and collaboration for
non-proliferation have been growing deeper.
China attaches great importance to the governance of
non-proliferation at the global level. During the Nuclear
Security Summit in the Hague in March, President Xi
Jinping of China put forward China’s approach to nuclear
security, which will make a significant contribution to
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and to combating nuclear terrorism. President Xi
Jinping also gave an important speech on the overall
national security approach in mid-April, emphasizing
that China must attach importance to both external
and internal security. China must emphasize both
development and security. China will pay attention not
only to its own security but also to collective security.
China will seek to form a community that shares a
common destiny and will advocate that all parties
involved seek mutual benefits and interests in common
security. That position reflects China’s concept of
international security and is the fundamental principle
of China’s participation in international security affairs
in general and in global non-proliferation governance
in particular. As a permanent member of the Council,
China has always taken a highly responsible approach
to issues of non-proliferation. Starting with the two
important links of legislation and enforcement and
taking into consideration international practices, China
has established a complete set of laws and regulations
on export controls for nuclear, biological, chemical and
missile materials and technology and has continued to
improve the export-control mechanims in that regard.
Over the past 10 years, China has actively
participated in the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). In accordance with the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004), it has submitted three national

14-323737/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

reports on implementation, which describe in detail the
Chinese Government’s efforts to prevent and combat
proliferation by non-State actors. China has also
actively participated in non-proliferation exchanges
and cooperation under the frameworks of resolution
1540 (2004), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum, and has endeavoured to fully integrate
the resolution into its non-proliferation mechanism and
legal system.
At present, the international and regional security
situation is facing profound transformation. Traditional
and non-traditional security elements are interlinked.
Non-traditional factors are increasing, while terrorism
and extremism threats remain unabated. International
non-proliferation efforts have a long way to go. In order
to effectively combat and prevent nuclear, biological
and chemical terrorism, the international community
should seize the opportunity of the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004) to take stock of experience
and lessons learned. In that regard, I wish to make the
following three points.
First, a comprehensive approach to address both
the symptoms and root causes is necessary. Only by
securing international and regional peace and security
and achieving sound economic and social development
in all nations will the hotbeds of terrorism and extremism
be eliminated and the motivation of non-State actors in
acquiring weapons of mass destruction be discouraged.
The international community must work diligently
to improve existing non-proliferation mechanisms,
while fundamentally improving the global security
environment at the strategic level.
Secondly, multilateralism must be respected. The
proliferation issue must be addressed via political
and diplomatic means. Non-proliferation is linked to
political, security and diplomatic issues, among many
others. Disputes should be settled via diplomatic and
political means by giving full play to the role of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
Confrontation, pressure or resort to the use of force
will not lead to the settlement of an issue; but rather to
escalation and spillover of conflict, thus increasing the
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Thirdly, efforts should be intensified to promote
the full and effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). All parties should take effective measures
to strengthen their internal management and their
export control over sensitive materials and technology,
8/70

07/05/2014

strengthen enforcement measures and respond actively
to proliferation risks related to globalization and the
dissemination of information.
All countries should implement resolution 1540
(2004) fairly and objectively. Discrimination must
be eliminated to avoid interference with regular
international trade activities.
Strengthening global governance in the field of
non-proliferation, promoting disarmament and the
peaceful uses of nuclear materials and strengthening
international security are in the common interests of
the international community.
China is ready to contribute its effort and wisdom
and to join other countries in promoting the cause of
non-proliferation and realizing the dream of the world’s
peoples in the area of security.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your presence here today and
for convening this important debate. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his informative
briefing.
My Government is pleased to join in commemorating
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004) and
in adopting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7)
regarding our continued commitment to the goals of
that landmark measure.
Over the past year, we have been reminded of
the horror that can result when weapons of mass
destruction are used. Resolution 1540 (2004) was
designed to minimize that possibility through concerted
international action to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological arms and their means
of delivery, especially to non-State actors, including
terrorists.
In 2004, working with many of those present, my
Government crafted a draft resolution specifying some
200 technical and legal obligations every State should
undertake to make proliferation riskier for those who
attempt it, and easier to detect and stop when they do.
Since the resolution was adopted, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has identified hundreds of additional
measures that States on every continent have taken
to prohibit weapons of mass destruction proliferation
activities, secure sensitive related materials and combat
illicit trafficking of such items in response to the
obligations the resolution created.
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Fifteen international organizations and almost four
dozen countries, including my own, have registered as
assistance providers. When a country requests help in
order to meet its obligations, we are prepared to provide
it. Regional groups, such as the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of American States
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, have incorporated elements of the resolution
into their mandates and daily work.
Non-proliferation has also become a major goal
of civil society. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
remarked last week, the resolution has become a key
component of the global security architecture.
Accordingly, I commend the efforts of the
Council’s 1540 Committee, including its current and
highly effective Chair, the Republic of Korea. Since
its establishment, the 1540 Committee has done an
excellent job of coordinating the global effort to
implement that vital resolution.
Looking ahead, we know that there remains much
more that we can and must do. Stopping the spread of
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons is not one of
those fields where a pretty good record is enough. The
potential consequences of failure anywhere, and at any
time, could be catastrophic.
Recognizing that challenge, President Obama
established the Nuclear Security Summit process.
During the third Summit, held in March in The Hague,
over 30 countries produced a joint statement calling for
the full, global implementation of the nuclear security
elements of resolution 1540 (2004) prior to the Council’s
next comprehensive review in 2016 — a welcome sign
that global vigilance is high and that we are determined
to work cooperatively to protect our citizens.
The imperative now is to continue moving
forward with the tasks outlined a decade ago. Each
State must identify its own vulnerabilities and gaps
in implementation. Each must develop a plan for next
steps, based on a clear sense of priorities for action.
Any State that lacks the capacity to take needed
measures should request help. States and organizations
that are in the position to assist should do so. Everyone
involved should be open to sharing useful information
on a timely basis.
The United States is committed to doing its part. As
shown in its most recent report to the 1540 Committee,
my Government meets or exceeds international
standards in implementing all of its obligations. The

S/PV.7169

report documents dozens of measures taken since 2004
that are designed to implement the resolution’s goals.
On the financial side, the United States has
contributed $4.5 million to the United Nations trust
fund to support resolution 1540 (2004). That is in
addition to numerous bilateral aid projects. We have
also emphasized the importance of helping States draft
effective laws to criminalize and prosecute activities
that allow proliferation to take place. We are pleased
that the 1540 Committee has begun working with
parliamentarians, including the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, to organize that assistance.
The widespread availability of information is
a defining characteristic of our age. There are many
benefits to this, but one of the dangers is that people
who wish to inflict great harm on others have access
to the knowledge that would allow them to do so. That
is especially the case with respect to biological agents,
which are often able to reproduce themselves, meaning
that a proliferator need only acquire a small amount
of a pathogen to pose a large risk. For that reason,
my Government proposes that special emphasis be
placed on improving the design of national and global
approaches to the problem of biosecurity, and one way
to do so is to promote the global health security agenda.
We recognize that terrorists and other proliferators
will employ new technologies and methods to gain
access to prohibited materials and to avoid detection in
transporting and possibly using them. In response, we
cannot afford to be complacent. The security system
that was adequate five years ago may not be sufficient
now, and today’s good system may be obsolete within
a few years.
In closing, I emphasize the global nature of the
threat addressed by resolution 1540 (2004). That
includes chemical weapons of the type so ruthlessly
deployed against civilians in Syria, toxins sent
through the mail in the United States, the complicity
of some Governments in proliferation, including that
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and the
knowledge that terrorist and militant groups in many
parts of the world have actively sought to acquire the
means to produce weapons of mass destruction. With
that threat always before us, we must proceed with
renewed vigour to implement resolution 1540 (2004)
fully, cooperatively and urgently.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the Republic of
Korea and you personally, Mr. President, for holding

14-323739/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

this high-level debate, and for the Republic of Korea’s
leadership on resolution 1540 (2004) and efforts to
promote global non-proliferation. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General.
As we all know only too starkly, the threat of
terrorist groups acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction is not a hypothetical or abstract one. In the
years leading up to our adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), international terrorist networks, particularly
Al-Qaida, had unmistakably shown their intent and
ability to commit mass casualty attacks and had
signalled their intent to acquire weapons of mass
destruction. Clandestine networks had significantly
increased the prospect of non-State actors acquiring the
materials and means to follow through on their intent.
The Security Council’s response through resolution
1540 (2004) is still decisive for the international
non-proliferation regime. Our adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) in order to further instrumentalize the
global norm against the proliferation and use of such
weapons has been essential, and we have made progress
towards the universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), but the threat persists and has assumed new
forms. Between 1993 and 2013, almost 2,500 incidents
were reported to the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s nuclear and radioactive material Incident
and Trafficking Database, including 16 incidents of
illegal possession or attempts to illegally trade highly
enriched uranium or plutonium. Others may have gone
undetected.
With today’s increasingly complex landscape of
international trade, technology and financial linkages,
new avenues for non-State proliferation are opening
daily. As we have just been reminded by the previous
speaker, measures to prevent deadly pathogens from
falling into the wrong hands must keep pace with
expanding medical research and biotechnology. Control
regimes and multilateral counter-proliferation efforts
must remain relevant, capable and equipped to succeed.
So how can we continue to strengthen the
implementation of the resolution and tackle existing
and emerging gaps? There are a number of steps we
should take.
First, in an environment where funding and
resources are hard to come by, it will become ever
more vital to leverage links with other United Nations
instruments and multilateral non-proliferation and
export control regimes. By inviting the Committee

10/70

07/05/2014

established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
participate in the workshop for Pacific island States
that Australia is co-hosting with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in May, the
Pacific region is strengthening the implementation of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction and controls on other materials
and technology related to weapons of mass destruction
more broadly. As Chair of the Australia Group, a
multilateral export control regime, we welcome closer
engagement between the 1540 Committee and the
Group. The Group has now formally offered to the
1540 Committee assistance to interested States on the
implementation of export controls related to dual-use
chemical and biological agents and related equipment.
Secondly, leveraging the role of industry and the
private sector in preventing proliferation is crucial.
The relevant sectors of industry must be made aware
of the threats surrounding the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons. Industry must be a
genuine partner in our efforts to inform and strengthen
export controls, in controlling access to intangible
transfers of technology that could be used for the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and in
helping prevent proliferation financing. Together with
Germany, we have submitted an effective practices
paper to the 1540 Committee on our common strategic
approach to engaging industry in national export
controls, which we hope will be useful to others looking
to strengthen their export controls.
Thirdly, we need to overcome the challenges faced
by developing countries in implementing resolution
1540 (2004). Part of the solution is to better harness the
link between security and development. For instance,
export and border controls to detect and combat illicit
trafficking in weapons of mass destruction can also
aid in the prevention of small arms, drugs and wildlife
trafficking. It can enhance a State’s disease surveillance
network, support trade expansion and generate
Government income. The case of Kenya leveraging
1540 Committee assistance to develop a comprehensive
border management plan to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and arms and wildlife
trafficking is an example of establishing synergies
that will reinforce the relevance and sustainability of
non-proliferation programming.
There are also opportunities to better coordinate
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

other Security Council obligations. Developing
States, especially small developing States, need more
coordinated guidance from the Council so that efforts
to enact legislation and improve law enforcement helps
them fulfil the range of Security Council measures to
prevent terrorism, strengthen non-proliferation and
implement relevant sanctions. Today’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/7) recognizes the need to
enhance cooperation between the non-proliferation
and terrorism Committees, and there is certainly an
appetite among States for that, as shown by the first
open briefing held in 2013 by those Committees with
the Financial Action Task Force on counter-proliferation
and counter-terrorism financing issues.
Regions
are
themselves
driving
better
coordination — and we need to leverage that — and
benefiting from it. The Caribbean Community’s focal
point for resolution 1540 (2004) is now supporting
Caribbean States in identifying and filling gaps in their
legislation in order to enable them to implement all of
the Security Council non-proliferation, terrorism and
sanctions obligations.
To conclude, we have identified just a few
proposals to realize the universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the years ahead. Those are
not new, comprehensive or easy options to pursue. This
is why the Committee, as called for in the presidential
statement we adopted today, should develop a precise
strategy for effective implementation as part of the
comprehensive review due in 2016. It is essential that
we both close gaps in implementation and stay ahead of
technological advances, to ensure that weapons of mass
destruction materials do not end up in the wrong hands.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I welcome
you, Minister Yun Byung-se, and congratulate you on
your presidency of the Council. I would like to thank the
Government of the Republic of Korea for its initiative
in holding this open debate on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, and I congratulate it on
its leadership in implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
I would also like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, the Deputy
Secretary-General, for his statement.
Today’s debate is timely, since it is taking place
on the tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004),
which established a committee pursuant thereto whose
main aim is to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery, as
well as any kind of activity on the part of non-State
actors connected to such proliferation, particularly for

S/PV.7169

reasons of terrorism. Unfortunately the current climate,
featuring the re-emergence of global terrorism and fear
that non-State actors may acquire weapons of mass
destruction, is no different from earlier years, and in
some situations has actually worsened.
In the decade since the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), we have seen some significant achievements
in its implementation. As speakers before me have
said, 172 of the 193 Member States have submitted
their national reports to the Committee. Dialogue
between the 1540 Committee and Member States,
including visits to the countries concerned, has
intensified. The sharing of experiences and effective
practices relating to implementation of the resolution
between Member States and internation, regional and
subregional organizations has increased. Cooperation
between the Committee and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prevention
of Chemical Weapons, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
been strengthened. Awareness-raising workshops and
seminars have increased and proliferated around the
world.
Despite these commendable efforts on the part of
the international community, Chad is concerned about
the fact that a number of Member States have porous
borders and do not possess effective security forces
or border officials with the tools necessary to enable
them to detect illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical or
biological materials and to confront terrorist threats. I
should recall that in 2011 terrorist groups acquired arms
from Libyan bases in order to invade a sovereign State,
in this case Mali. What might have happened if they
had been able to get their hands on nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons or their means of delivery?
Paragraph 14 of resolution 2118 (2013) established
Member States’ obligation to inform the Security
Council of any violation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including acquisition by non-State actors of chemical
weapons, their means of delivery and related materials.
How can a State meet such an obligation if it does not
have the capacity to effectively control its borders?
We should stress the importance of strengthening the
capacity of Member States’ security forces so as to
ensure that their border controls are effective, as well
as to promote synergy between non-proliferation and
the fight against terrorism within the framework of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

14-3237311/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The continent of Africa is where terrorist groups
have proved the most dangerous in recent years. The
invasion of northern Mali by drug traffickers and the
armed groups of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the kidnappings and attacks perpetrated by Boko
Haram in Nigeria and the asymmetric war waged by
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and the Horn of Africa are
all serious threats to the Sahel region. Chad therefore
reiterates its commitment to working for the effective
implementation of resolution 154 (2004).
In conclusion, all strategies designed to combat the
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction should include capacity-strengthening for
countries that are exposed to that threat and without the
means to deal with it.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Minister Yun
Byung-se, as you preside over the Security Council.
We are grateful for your convening of this meeting
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), which laid the foundations for
the international community’s collective efforts aimed
at preventing weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
their means of delivery from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, especially terrorists.
Russia was a sponsor of the resolution, which
underlines the indisputable fact that the solution to the
problem of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery continues to be
controlled by the leadership of the Russian Federation.
All of us, as responsible members of the international
community, have a shared long-term interest in
non-proliferation. And one of the most important tasks
is achieving the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in every country. In that contex, we note that the
resolution considers all three WMD types — nuclear,
chemical and biological — as a single issue, emphasizing
that the danger of any of them falling into terrorists’
hands is equal. Over the past 10 years, much has been
done to implement this legally binding international
instrument, and 172 United Nations States Members
have submitted their first reports on its implementation.
The work to ensure international cooperation in
providing effective national export control systems to
countries that do not possess those essential resources
continues, and Russia has been actively involved in it.
In particular, in January 2013 we organized a regional
seminar in Minsk on resolution 1540 (2004) for the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
12/70

07/05/2014

(CIS). In Kazan, in June of that year, we held the fifth
meeting of security chiefs on the problem of terrorism
and on preventing WMD from falling into the hands of
non-State subjects. In December 2013, the CIS countries
held consultations in Moscow on export controls, and
this April we conducted a special seminar on export
control for the relevant CIS agencies.
The Russian Federation has been a responsible
party to the founding international legal instruments
in the area of non-proliferation, including the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, the Nuclear Suppliers Group,
the Missile Technology Control Regime, the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and other
international treaties and multilateral mechanisms.
We are constantly improving our own activities for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). and we plan to
submit an updated national report soon. We are also
playing an active role in the destruction of Syria’s
chemical weapons.
A number of bottlenecks have appeared recently.
Planned and systematic work by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is
often reduced to activity in such secondary directions
as developing voluntary action plans and industrial
and academic contacts, and in participating in
various outreach measures. We see the basic work
of the resolution being done at the level of regional
and subregional organizations without adequate
non-proliferation expertise. In our opinion, those
trends could eventually weaken the 1540 Committee’s
influence on processes linked to the resolution. In that
connection, it is vital that the Committee effectively
carry out its functions as the central coordinator
of global efforts to implement the resolution and in
defining the goals and priorities for those efforts.
In order to do that, we believe it should focus its
main efforts on countries that have not yet submitted
their first national reports. Another important area
of focus is the preparation for the holding in 2016 of
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We believe that further practical
steps for its implementation will be defined following
the review.
We look forward to a constructive and fruitful
cooperation with all partners in the interest of a

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

more effective implementation the provisions of the
resolution.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you, Mr. Yun
Byung-se, for organizing this open debate on a topic
that is of particular importance to my delegation. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his statement.
Let me start by welcoming the adoption by the
Council of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, which
reaffirms the undiminished importance of resolution
1540 (2004) a decade after its adoption.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
Terrorism continues to pose increasing threats
to individual countries, as well as the international
community as a whole. Motivated by extreme ideologies,
characterized by diffused organizational structures and
having no attachment to a clearly defined support base,
modern terrorist groups and illicit networks turn to
indiscriminate violence of a magnitude not previously
imagined. To achieve their aims, those groups have
increasing sought to capitalize on deep-seated and
justified fears associated with the possible harm caused
by nuclear, chemical and biological materials if used to
attack nuclear facilities, poison water supplies or render
entire areas uninhabitable.
The traditional weapons of mass destruction
regimes were established to address non-proliferation
by States. As terrorist threats evolved, they were no
longer sufficient to deal with the new international
security environment. By adopting resolution 1540
(2004), the Council aimed to fill those emerging gaps
by establishing universally applicable measures aimed
at preventing weapons proliferation to non-State actors
and ensuring that States take practical steps to prevent
such proliferation through the adoption of effective
national legislation and the establishment domestic
controls. The resolution also established a universal
means by which to create export control standards
outside multilateral export control regimes.
Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
Lithuania has been a consistent and dedicated supporter.
Through a number of workshops held in Lithuania, we
have sought to focus on the main elements of prevention,
detection and response to illicit trafficking of chemical,
biological and nuclear materials. Lithuania recognizes
the need for a universal and comprehensive reporting
under the resolution. We presented our initial report on

S/PV.7169

the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in 2004
and we continue to provide regular comprehensive
updates, most recently in November 2013.
Let me now turn to strengthening global nuclear
security as a crucial element of achieving the goals set
by resolution 1540 (2004). The Hague communiqué,
adopted at the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit, reaffirmed
that strengthening nuclear security and preventing
terrorists, criminals and all other unauthorized actors
from acquiring nuclear materials remains one of the
most important challenges in the years to come. It
also welcomed the significant work undertaken by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) in strengthening nuclear security.
At The Hague, Lithuania joined a statement
on promoting full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), expressing commitment to its
full and universal implementation and undertaking to
consider a number of measures to that end. We also
co-sponsored the initiative on strengthening nuclear
security implementation, which is a significant step to
ensure continuous improvement of the nuclear security
regime worldwide. During the previous Nuclear
Security Summit in Seoul, Lithuania also announced
its support for two important initiatives — activity and
cooperation to counter nuclear smuggling, by Jordan,
and nuclear security training and support centres, by
the United States.
Established in April 2012, the Nuclear Security
Centre of Excellence in Lithuania is working towards
increasing capacities of national and regional experts
to counter nuclear smuggling and improve nuclear
security culture. Over 400 experts have been trained
so far, including through projects for officials from
Georgia, Ukraine, Armenia and Moldova. Lithuania is
committed to expanding its international cooperation
in that field in the years to come.
We believe that all would benefit from more
cohesion and a communitarian approach to nuclear
security. We are fully transparent in meeting all
necessary nuclear safety and security requirements.
Living in an interconnected world, we want to see
more transparency and cooperation among States,
especially with neighbours developing nuclear
facilities. Any planned or existing nuclear projects in
any State must be implemented via open, transparent
and honest consultations with all affected countries
and by constructively settling transnational issues and
disputes to that effect.

14-3237313/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Ensuring the continued engagement of all States
in implementing the goals of resolution 1540 (2004)
should be Council’s key objective. Whether through
outreach, encouraging the submission and updating
of national reports, or through matchmaking between
States seeking assistance and States able to provide it,
the resolution must continue to be a useful tool for all
States. At the same time, it is important to be very clear
about what the States are required to produce and how
their cooperation contributes to implementing the aims
of the resolution. Overburdening States with numerous
and complex reporting obligations will only result in
reporting fatigue.
It is also important for the Panel of Experts of
the 1540 Committee to continue country visits and
active participation in non-proliferation related events.
Furthermore, the Committee should make further use
of possible synergies with other Council bodies dealing
with non-proliferation issues. We would encourage
closer links between the 1540 Group of Experts, the
panels of experts of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1718 (2006) on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and 1737 (2006) on Iran,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, in particular through making sure that all
Council activities on non-proliferation are sufficiently
reflected in their outreach. Finally, although the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) is due
in 2016, it is important to start preparations early, in
order to ensure an inclusive and productive process.
Let me finish by expressing once again our
appreciation for the efforts of the Republic of Korea,
as Chair of the 1540 Committee, in strengthening the
implementation of the resolution and its universal
application.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to extend
to you, Mr. President, my delegation’s gratitude for
your leadership and for your organization of this open
debate on non-proliferation — a matter of considerable
attention and importance — to coincide with the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004). Similarly, I
thank Nigeria for its able leadership of the Council in
April. I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation affirms that the important
mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) fosters the Council’s work

14/70

07/05/2014

with regard to resolution 1540 (2004) in the areas of
national implementation, supervision, the provision
of assistance, cooperation, awareness-raising and
transparency. A question comes to mind about
facilitating the Committee’s mandate, which will come
to an end in 2021. Is it not high time for our Council
to grant the Committee a permanent mandate like
other subsidiary bodies of the Council, taking into
consideration the international community’s pressing
need for the Committee’s work?
On another score, is it reasonable for the Security
Council to play a significant role, through its subsidiary
bodies, in the imposition of effective sanctions on
terrorists with a view to preserving international
peace and security, even though no general mechanism
exists to curb the smuggling of materials to be used
in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction?
It is time to think seriously about amending the
Committee’s mandate to enable it to draw up a list of
names of smugglers — non-State actors, entities and
individuals — whose persistence in smuggling such
materials has been proven and who have demonstrated
no desire to refrain from that crime.
It is well known that violence in one State may spill
over borders into others. We are therefore duty-bound,
as is the 1540 Committee, to move from a unilateral
approach to tackling States’ adherence to and application
of the resolution to a comprehensive approach to its
implementation from an inclusive perspective. In that
regard, the Council should in future follow up on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by building
regional road maps for implementation by groups of
States and not confine monitoring to implementation
by individual States.
We appreciate the efforts made by the Committee
in facilitating the extension of assistance. We also
appreciate the efforts made by States and international
donor organizations in the provision of technical
assistance. We urge those actors to continue their efforts
given their benefits for recipient and donor States alike.
If we may say so, such assistance should be considered
as mutual assistance, given the shared nature of the
security environment experienced by States.
Jordan has made strides in adhering to the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and relevant
subsequent resolutions. We have taken and enforced a
number of legislative and practical steps at the national
level to develop local controls designed to prevent

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. Jordan has always
favoured accession to relevant multilateral treaties on
non-proliferation. We are looking into ratifying the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. In this connection, we welcome the
outcomes and declaration of the international Nuclear
Security Summit held recently in The Hague with the
participation of 53 leaders, including His Majesty King
Abdullah, in the light of Jordan’s pioneering role in this
area.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our profuse
gratitude to you, Sir. I hope that this meeting will
consolidate Member States’ commitment to enhancing
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004).
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We warmly welcome you,
Sir, to the Council. I also wish to thank the Korean
delegation for convening this debate on a matter of
profound importance to international peace and security
and for the excellent concept note (S/2014/313, annex)
that has provided a good guide for our discussions
today. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his very succinct statement.
Ten years after the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1540 (2004), it is appropriate that we
take stock of the journey so far in its implementation,
and indeed the way forward in terms of what remains
to be done. The tenth anniversary should also serve as a
reminder of the key security challenges of our time and
the need to strengthen the use of this binding instrument
to address the potential threat to international peace
and security if terrorists and other non-State actors
were to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
As the second Council resolution to invoke Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations outside a
country-specific context, resolution 1540 (2004) has
been aptly described as filling a gap in international
law by addressing the risk that terrorists might obtain
and use weapons of mass destruction. Indeed, while
the three main treaties pertaining to weapons of mass
destruction — the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) — address non-proliferation, they
do not take into account the possibility of such weapons
falling into the hands of non-State actors, especially
terrorists. Therein lies the significance of resolution
1540 (2004), which can be said to complement the three
global treaties.

S/PV.7169

The resolution obliges all States to do three key
things: to put in place internal controls to prevent
the proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons, their means of delivery and related materiel; to
refrain from providing any form of support to non-State
actors attempting to develop or possess weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery; and to
adopt effective laws prohibiting non-State actors from
possessing weapons of mass destruction, in particular
for terrorist activities.
In furtherance of these objectives, it is pertinent
to say that resolution 1540 (2004) should not be seen
as a stand-alone instrument. The increasing threat
to global peace and security compels us to act in
unison, including through the consolidation of existing
non-proliferation mechanisms. We should strive to
develop assets and resources at the national, regional
and international levels to sustain the long-term
vision of the resolution. As demonstrated through its
extension in the adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), we
should incrementally build on what has already been
achieved while remaining adaptive to developing new
strategies and a dynamic global security architecture,
to meet new proliferation challenges. Resolution 1977
(2011), for example, emphasized cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Such cooperation, we believe, presents an avenue for
enhancing global engagement on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
The link between resolution 1540 (2004) and
compliance with regimes such as those of the CWC, the
BWC and the NPT, and in particular the contents of
articles 1 and 2 of the NPT, cannot be overemphasized.
It becomes compelling to forestall abuses in the
exercise of article 4 of the NPT by calling on States that
operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities to accede to
the Treaty and bring such facilities under the full-scope
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
across all remaining regions of the world is, we believe,
important to preventing the vertical and horizontal
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Success
in that direction would provide crucial components
of transparency in the overall goal of achieving the
objectives of the second pillar of the NPT, in pursuance
of non-proliferation obligations. The ongoing third
session of the Preparatory Committee for the ninth
Review Conference, to take place in 2015, provides
another opportunity to stridently deepen our resolve to

14-3237315/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

extend the establishment of similar zones in parts of the
world where they currently do not exist.
Africa became a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 2009
when the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty,
better known as the Treaty of Pelindaba, entered into
force. Among its other aims, the Treaty of Pelindaba
seeks to prohibit the development, production,
stationing and testing of nuclear explosive devices in
Africa. It thus represents a significant step towards
strengthening nuclear non-proliferation.
As of today, all 53 members of the African
Union (AU) have signed the Treaty. Morocco, which
is not a member of the AU, signed the Treaty in
April 1996. This implies that the Treaty of Pelindaba
enjoys universal membership in Africa. The African
Commission on Nuclear Energy is the body mandated
to monitor compliance by States parties, and has worked
assiduously to transform the compliance architecture of
the Treaty of Pelindaba.
In July 2002, at its thirty-eighth ordinary session,
the Assembly of the Organization of African Unity
took a decisive step in support of the global chemical
weapons disarmament and non-proliferation regime
by encouraging the universalization of the Chemical
Weapons Convention in Africa. That position
was reaffirmed in 2006 when the African Union
Commission signed a memorandum of understanding
with the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons so as to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention in Africa. As of today, 51 African
countries have signed and ratified the Convention.
Similarly, in collaboration with South Africa as
the then-Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), the African Union, assisted
by the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
in 2012 organized a workshop for African States on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
workshop discussed how best to meet the obligations
of African States to implement the resolution, given the
constraints they faced, linked to their limited capacities
and resources. Following the workshop, the African
Union, at the twentieth ordinary session of its Assembly
in January 2013, underlined the relevance of resolution
1540 (2004) and highlighted the challenges to its full
and effective implementation in Africa.
In December 2013, the AU held another workshop
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). One

16/70

07/05/2014

of the objectives of the event was to discuss challenges
and identify opportunities to address practical issues
relating to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), with the aim of equipping African States with
the practical tools to enable them to achieve concrete
progress in meeting their obligations. All these efforts
demonstrate the genuine desire of the African Union to
play a leading role in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
While we note the encouraging figures reflected
in the voluntary submission of national reports by 172
Member States, we still see a need to consolidate the gains
of the first decade by developing a viable Government
and civil society partnership to aid various national
action plans. An appraisal of the implementation of the
mandate of resolution 1540 (2004) shows a measure of
commitment on the part of Member States. It is worthy
of note that numerous countries have adopted laws and
regulations that comply with a substantial number of
obligations contained in the resolution. These measures
provide reference points and useful mechanisms for
confidence-building measures.
As we respond to the challenges of today, we must
bear in mind that a proactive approach is needed if
we are to develop a long-term strategy to deal with
potential avenues for the illicit acquisition and use of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons by terrorists
and other non-State actors. We must be particularly
vigilant with dual-use technologies that can be readily
applied in ways that may threaten international peace
and security. To ensure this, Member States must be
kept abreast of emerging issues and maintain their
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
Nigeria welcomes the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/7. It is indeed a suitable outcome
of this important debate. It sends a strong message of
commitment on the part of the Security Council to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We owe a
great debt to the delegation of the Republic of Korea
for its leadership of the 1540 (2004) Committee, and
pledge our continued support to the Committee.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg commends the Republic of Korea for
taking the initiative to organize this open debate on
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). Your presence, Sir, bears
witness to the commitment of your country to the

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for
his briefing.
I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by observer of the European Union.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, and the risk that terrorists
and other non-State actors may acquire such weapons
pose an undeniable threat to international peace and
security. To counter this threat, resolution 1540 (2004),
adopted unanimously 10 years ago, establishes a legal
obligation for all United Nations member
“to take and enforce effective measures to establish
domestic controls to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons and
their means of delivery, including by establishing
appropriate controls over related materials”
(resolution 1540 (2004), para. 3).
Since then, as other speakers have noted, many
States have implemented such measures. They have
often been assisted by other Member States or by
international, regional and subregional organizations
such as the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) or the
International Atomic Energy Agency. In the area
of assistance, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role. As a
clearinghouse, the Committee can bring assistance
requesters and providers together. The Committee’s
role is also essential to promoting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) with the aim of achieving its
universality. In this context, we welcome the progress
made in raising the number of national reports to
the Committee, which now stands at 172 out of 193,
representing a rate of nearly 90 per cent. The submission
and regular updating of national reports are important
confidence-building measures in the fight against all
types of weapons of mass destruction.
Despite progress towards universalization, the
challenges remain significant. Measures to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
should in particular be constantly updated and adapted
to changing technologies, since such technological
evolution can facilitate the acquisition of such weapons
by non-State actors.
To counter the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, close and effective cooperation between
the Committee established pursuant to resolution

S/PV.7169

1540 (2004), the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the CounterTerrorism Committee is not only desirable but
essential. Cooperation among the three Committees
and their expert groups has helped to create mutually
beneficial synergies. On 18 November, the Chairs of
the three Committees participated — alongside the
Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1737 (2006) (2006) and 1988
2001), and the Chairman of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) — in a joint open meeting. The meeting
sought to raise awareness among Member States of the
measures imposed by the Council, and of the assistance
that the Committees, their expert groups and the FATF
could provide to Member States. It was an example of
cooperation that could inspire the future activities of
the 1540 Committee could.
The importance of resolution 1540 (2004) as an
essential tool in the field of non- proliferation was
highlighted with the adoption on 27 September 2013
of resolution 2118 (2013) on the elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme. On that occasion, the
Security Council determined that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere was a threat against international
peace and security. It also decided that Member States
should immediately inform the Council of any violation
of resolution 1540 (2004), so that it could take the
necessary measures in that regard.
Luxembourg is aware of the seriousness of the
threat emanating from the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. For that reason, my country
fully supports efforts towards the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Therefore,
in late 2013, in the context of our chairmanship of the
Forum for Security Cooperation of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Luxembourg
worked for the OSCE to increase its assistance to
Member States in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In our national capacity, Luxembourg is
currently making efforts to reform its export control
system in order to strengthen national mechanisms to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and related technologies.
By presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, adopted
this morning, the Council renews the commitment
it undertook 10 years ago. It also recognizes the role
of the 1540 Committee and the essential contribution
that civil society, industry and the private sector have

14-3237317/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to make. To counter the global threat posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, we must
indeed mobilize all energies.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), 10 years ago, on 28 April
2004, was a historic breakthrough in the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. I wish to thank the Republic of
Korea for having organized this high-level debate on the
issue, as well as for submitting presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, which we have just adopted.
Resolution 1540 (2004) was a historic step for
several reasons. For the first time, the Council involved
itself in the issue of the risk posed by biological,
chemical, nuclear and radiological weapons falling
into the hands of terrorist groups or other non-State
actors, thus constituting a threat to peace and security.
Moreover, by framing the resolution under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Naions, the Council decided
to play its role as guarantor of international security
and stability by demanding, in an unprecedented way,
that Member States take concrete measures to prevent
thе risk that weapons of mass destruction could fall into
the wrong hands. Finally, by setting up the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Council gave itself the means to ensure ongoing followup to the resolution and to support cooperation among
States to combat weapons mass destruction.
Ten years after its adoption, we can see undeniable
progress in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Today, a majority of the countries of the world
have adopted measures to enshrine the provisions of the
resolution in their national laws. In that regard, I welcome
the work of the South Korean chairmanship of the 1540
Committee and its experts aimed at encouraging the
few countries that have not yet done so to submit their
reports to the Committee on the implementation of the
resolution in their national legislation.
Moreover, the main international, regional and
subregional organizaions now have adopted strategies
to implement and promote the measures set out in the
resolution. Therefore, since 2004, the European Union
has promoted the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In July 2013, the Foreign Affairs Council of the
Union adopted a new decision specifically addressing
the resolution, allocating more than €1.5 million to
supporting regional efforts to implement it.

18/70

07/05/2014

France is also taking on its responsibilities. In the
1540 Committee, we coordinate the working group
on assistance, which is an essential component of the
work of the Committee. In that context, France, along
with its partners, is continuing efforts towards the
holding of a conference in Paris on this subject, as
we said we would. In addition, in all forums in which
we participate, we advocate for the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and for
strengthening measures under resolution 1540 (2004),
including strict implementation.
Despite the undeniable success of the past 10 years,
much remains to be done. In order to address the issue
of emerging technologies possibly being exploited by
terrorists, all Member States should further strengthen
export controls, prevent and suppress the financing of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
secure sensitive goods and materials. In recognizing
those challenges, at the Nuclear Security Summit held
at The Hague at the end of March, France committed
to launching an initiative aimed at strengthening the
security of radioactive sources, including highly
radioactive sources. Indeed, while fortunately
infrequent, but nonetheless disturbing, cases of theft
illustrate the need for better conceptualizing the
security of such radioactive sources in order to avoid
the fatal consequences of their possible use by groups
or individuals. That is a matter of ensuring that such
sources are not diverted for criminal purposes and
that they continue to be used for purposes in which
they render very important services — in industry,
agriculture, medical and health areas, university settings
and for scientific research. France’s efforts include
working to strengthen the international rules pertaining
to minimizing the use of highly radioactive sources and
establishing a group of exporters of radioactive sources
to strengthen international cooperation to prevent loss
of Government control over such materials.
The proliferation activites of North Korea and
its nuclear and ballistics tests, which we strongly
condemn, illustrate the need to ensure the full
implementaiton of resolution 1540 (2004). In the event
of new provocations, North Korea would expose itself
to new Security Council sanctions. In that context, I
would add that the Republic of Korea and our friends in
the region can count on France’s solidarity.
Lastly, I would like to commend the Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Korea for successfully
energizing the work of the 1540 Committee since 2013,

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

so as to guarantee the optimal implementation of the
resolution throughout the world.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you Mr. President — Minister
Yun Byung-se, member of the Cabinet of the first
woman President of the Republic of Korea, President
Park Geun-Hye — for your initiative in convening
this meeting on an issue of such great importance
for the international community, especially on such a
meaningful date as the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). I should also like to thank
Mr. Jan Eliasson for his statement and his briefing. I
also want to congratuate you Sir, for the excellent work
being done by Ambassador Oh Joon and his team in the
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), thereby continuing the
outstanding work done by his predecessor, the fondly
remembered Ambassador Kim Sook. Above all, Sir, I
commend you for your national commitment behind the
effort to achieve the universal submission of reports by
Member States. You and your delegation have the full
support of my country, both during your presidency of
the Security Council as well as in the 1540 Committee.
In addition, allow me to say that Argentina resolutely
supports presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7,
adopted this morning. As we mark 10 years since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), this debate provides
an opportunity to highlight the challenges as well as
a chance for each of our countries to take stock in
connection with this issue.
Having already referred to this, I should also like
to point to the constructive efforts that were long
made by members of the Security Council, as well as
by countries not serving on the Council, to arrive at
resolution 1540 (2004). I should like to point out that
our colleague Rosemary DiCarlo was working at that
time with a great deal of commitment towards the
adoption of the resolution. All permanent members
of the Council have worked, and continue to work, on
efforts to support those standards.
I should like to emphasize the two pillars of my
country’s approach, as a State policy, to resolution 1540
(2004). The first is respect for the sovereign right of
States to the development and peaceful use of advanced
technologies, and the second calls for disarmament and
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Argentina has submitted its report on its activities
related to the implementation of the resolution adopted

S/PV.7169

in 2004, and has also described what it has done in
subsequent years. In 2009, we were the second country
to present a national action plan. We are currently
working on updating that document.
I would like, once again, to reaffirm the sovereign
right of countries to the development and use of sensitive
and dual-use technologies in advanced industrial
sectors, including in nuclear, chemical, biological,
pharmaceutical, space and nanotechnologies, among
other areas, in coordination with the State and private
sectors, in the case of my country, and as a means of
achieving the development of our industries.
Argentina is actively involved in the initiatives of
the international community to achieve a world free of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction of
any kind, and it upholds the principle of a total ban on
the development, possession, acquisition, transfer or
use of such weapons by State and non-State actors.
As mentioned, Argentina has made significant
progress in the peaceful uses of dual-use technologies.
Even before 2004, we had implemented a series of
national and international control measures. Following
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), my country
expanded those measures in relation to non-State actors
and joined regional and global actions in that area.
Argentina is party to the legal instruments
that constitute the pillars of the disarmament
and non-proliferation agenda: the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and the International Code of Conduct
against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.
Argentina is convinced that an effective system of
export controls must be based upon four fundamental
pillars. First, we need a transparent and standardized
national system for licensing. Secondly, there should
be effective compliance with the current legislation
applicable to export controls. Thirdly, we should
promote corporate awareness of the importance of the
system for industrial development and for security in
international trade. Fourthly, there should be close
regional cooperation.
Reflecting its commitment to disarmament and
non-proliferation, my country is the only one in our
region that is part of the five control regimes for
sensitive exports — the Australia Group, on chemical
and biological material, the Zangger Committee, the
Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile Technology

14-3237319/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Control Regime, in space technology, and the
Wassenaar Arrangement in the field of conventional
arms. We have hosted many events in our country, the
idea being to ensure true cooperation on the regional
and international levels on this agenda.
At the national level, the lists and criteria that have
come out of those regimes nourish the work of our
national commission for the control of sensitive exports
and military material, which has been in operation for
over 20 years.
In addition, Argentina has ratified the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and
the amendment to article 5. We are in the advanced
stages of legislative consideration of the adoption of the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. In that regard, cooperation between
the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the 1540 Committee
has been valuable.
In its commitment to the peaceful use of
technology and non-proliferation, since 2010 and the
inception of the Nuclear Security Summit, Argentina
has actively joined the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism. We are working to strengthen our
capacity to control our ports and have become part of
the Megaports Initiative.
In the area of cooperation, we might mention
what has been done in our region to generate a culture
of security with trained human resources and the
necessary infrastructure and equipment, all of which
are necessary to bring about a culture of security.
I would like to refer to the workshops we have held,
within the framework of South-South cooperation, on
the control of weapons and dual-use technology. A
regional meeting for education about chemical weapons
was held, and an Argentine programme was prepared
for the responsible use of dual-use chemicals.
Finally, within the framework of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, there will be in
August a cabinet-level exercise, held with Chile, on the
response to, and mitigation of, acts of nuclear terrorism.
Other members of the Initiative will also be present.
On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that it is necessary
to reaffirm that there are no good weapons of mass
destruction, where some others are bad. As expressed
by the Secretary-General in his statement of 28 April
(see S/PV.7161), there are no right hands that can handle
these wrong weapons.
20/70

07/05/2014

We believe that the significant efforts of the
international community in the areas of physical
protection, export controls and combating illicit
trafficking in dual-use technologies will achieve
only limited success globally as long as there remain
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction. For that
reason, we believe that there should be universal and
strict compliance with the existing treaties by all States
and under equal conditions. The only way to ensure
that weapons of mass destruction do not fall into the
wrong hands is through their total elimination.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I also wish to inform all concerned that
we will be carrying this open debate right through the
lunch hour as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): At the outset, Mr. President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I would like to welcome
you and to express India’s appreciation for scheduling
this discussion on a subject of great significance for us,
our region and the world. I also would like thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
comprehensive briefing on the subject.
India has an unwavering commitment to international
efforts to prevent non-State actors and terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
their means of delivery. We fully support all efforts of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) to implement its mandate.
We are conscious of the dangers that transfers of such
WMDs to non-State actors could entail. Given the
evolving complex challenges emanating from non-State
actors to international peace and security, such risks
and our responses need to be tailored appropriately, and
the 1540 Committee can play its role in that regard.
The international community must join hands to
eliminate the risks relating to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. The international response to the
threat needs to be national as well as multilateral and
global. India believes that meeting new proliferation
challenges requires reinvigorated approaches in a
variety of multilateral and global forums. The focus

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

on non-State actors must not take attention away from
national responsibility to curb proliferation.
India supported the general objectives of resolution
1540 (2004). That resolution is in line with the General
Assembly resolution entitled “Measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction”,
adopted by consensus every year since it was first
introduced in 2002, and now sponsored by more
than 70 member States. As a member of the Security
Council, India supported resolution 1977 (2011),
which extended the mandate of the 1540 Committee
for a period of 10 years. Following a commitment
announced at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul,
India, in cooperation with the United Nations Office of
Disarmament Affairs, organized a 1540 workshop on
the theme “Building new synergies on nuclear security”
in New Delhi on 30 November and 1 December 2012.
Discussions at the workshop were substantive and
focused on building new synergies for nuclear security.
India has always expressed its readiness to offer
assistance to other countries in capacity- building and in
fulfilling their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
Nationally, India has enacted a number of effective
laws and regulations and put in place institutions and
administrative mechanisms to prohibit WMD access to
terrorists and non-State actors. After the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), India took additional steps to
further strengthen its existing legislative and regulatory
mechanism for exercising control over WMDs and
their means of delivery. The WMD Act enacted in
June 2005 provides for an integrated and over-arching
legislation on prohibiting unlawful activities in relation
to WMDs, their delivery systems and related materials.
Amendments to the 1992 Foreign Trade Act passed in
2010 further strengthened our national export control
system.
India has never been a source of proliferation of
sensitive materials or technologies. We are proud of our
record in nuclear security and nuclear non-proliferation,
but we are not complacent. India is committed to
upholding and strengthening the physical security of
nuclear facilities and materials. India is committed
to maintaining effective national export controls
consistent with the highest international standards, and
is prepared to make its contribution as a full member of
the respective multilateral export control regimes.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has contributed to greater
awareness among Member States on the need for
effective measures at the national level to prevent

S/PV.7169

terrorists and non-State actors from gaining access
to sensitive materials and technologies. Reporting by
States of their implementation measures facilitates the
overview of implementation by the 1540 Committee.
Measures for the implementation of the resolution
should be undertaken by States based on their national
practices and processes. Assistance to and cooperation
with States requesting such assistance are key elements
of the implementation process. Such assistance
programmes should be suited to specific national or
regional requirements.
In conclusion, let me state that the 1540 Committee
has also established cooperative relations with several
international organizations. Consistent with their
respective mandates, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons can contribute to the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). We commend Ambassador Oh
Joon for his stewardship of the 1540 Committee, and
for the professionalism with which the Committee has
been implementing its mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his briefing
this morning. We also thank Foreign Minister Yun
Byung-se for presiding over today’s Council meeting
and commend Ambassador Oh Joon for his very
effective leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Resolution 1540 (2004) establishes obligations on
States to enact and enforce effective measures to prevent
and suppress the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons to non-State actors. Over the past
decade, it has filled a gap in international law to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, helped create an elaborate architecture
of national laws, regulations and administrative
measures, and raised awareness about the complex
nature of the threat we face. Enjoying the support of
the wide membership, the resolution has placed the
United Nations at the centre of the non-proliferation
effort. The 1540 Committee has been a strong catalyst
in preventing proliferation. It supports many treaty
regimes and, even without being a treaty regime itself,
ensures compliance through voluntary measures.
The Committee has worked closely with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the

14-3237321/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and is becoming an essential tool for the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, its 2005
amendment and the International Convention on the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The three
nuclear security summits have recognized the key role
being played by the 1540 Committee to strengthen
nuclear security.
The 1540 Committee’s immediate challenge is
to persuade some two dozen States to file initial
implementation reports. The Committee plays an
important part in mobilizing assistance. It should
enhance its match-making role by mapping assistance
needs and working as a clearing house between
assistance providers and recipients. The Committee
and its Group of Experts could focus even more sharply
on outreach, awareness-raising and complementarity.
Increasing awareness and encouraging action in the
field of emerging cyberthreats, as well as advances
in chemical agents and synthetic biology, should be
given priority. In those areas, Governments, industry
and research and academic institutions should work
together. To broaden the base of ownership and deepen
cooperation, the Committee should organize an annual,
open and interactive briefing in New York. It is also
advisable to enhance the Committee’s cooperation and
coordination with the Councils’ subsidiary bodies, as
well as with international, regional and subregional
organizations.
The possibility of non-State actors acquiring or
using WMDs is a shared concern. Pakistan, as part
of international efforts to address that contemporary
challenge, has contributed constructively to advancing
the aims of resolution 1540 (2004), including during our
last two terms on the Security Council. Pakistan has put
in place a comprehensive export control regime. The
legislative, regulatory, administrative and enforcement
measures of that regime are on a par with the standards
followed by the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile
Technology Control Regime and the Australia Group.
Our export control regime has an elaborate
institutional set-up compromising a dedicated Strategic
Export Control Division, an oversight board and a
standing inter-agency coordination mechanism. The
Strategic Export Control Division has twice notified
and published national control lists, making them
enforceable by Pakistani customs and other relevant
agencies. Those lists, revised last in 2011, are classified
on the basis of the European Union’s integrated system.

22/70

07/05/2014

Our national detection architecture includes the
use of detection devices at several entry and exit points,
as well as other random checkpoints to deter, detect and
prevent the illicit trafficking of nuclear and radioactive
materials. We have also established a centre of
excellence that conducts specialized courses in nuclear
security, physical protection, material control and
accounting, transport security and personnel reliability.
Our Parliament is considering a bill to strengthen and
streamline our legislative and regulatory regime to
meet our obligations under the Biological Weapons
Convention. Our national authority for implementation
of Pakistan’s obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention has been in place since 2000. Pakistan
works closely with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons in that field.
As a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, Pakistan
has enacted an anti-money laundering law, established
a financial monitoring unit in the State Bank of
Pakistan to track suspicious financial transactions,
and frozen hundreds of bank accounts. Pakistan has
engaged international export control regimes. Pakistan
fully qualifies to become a member of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group, where we can share our experiences
and expertise and benefit from the good practices of
other States. As we revive our economy, we look to
international cooperation and assistance for nuclear
energy under the safeguards of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate. We appreciate the fact
that the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea is
personally presiding over today’s meeting. I also wish
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his
briefing.
Brazil firmly believes that the mere existence of
weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to
humankind and therefore to international peace and
security. Throughout the past 50 years, the international
community has succeeded in agreeing on multilateral
legally binding instruments that ban some categories
of these lethal armaments, such as biological and
chemical weapons. We remain frustrated, however, by
the absence of political will and leadership on the part
of States possessing nuclear weapons to initiate similar
negotiations aiming at the complete elimination of
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

these weapons, with clear benchmarks and timelines.
The possibility that weapons of mass destruction could
fall into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, is a matter of additional concern.
Circumscribing our efforts only to fighting
proliferation amounts to a limited perspective, however.
There is an urgent need for concrete action towards
effective disarmament by States possessing weapons
of mass destruction. Also, we remain convinced that
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction has
to be tackled in all its aspects. The risks of vertical
proliferation, especially of nuclear weapons, cannot be
left aside. Today, cuts in nuclear arsenals are quickly
offset by qualitative improvements in nuclear forces,
by the modernization of nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems, and by the roles ascribed to nuclear
weapons in the national defence doctrines of States
possessing these arsenals.
As long as weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons, continue to exist, there will
be States and non-State actors interested in acquiring
and developing them. Let me recall the SecretaryGeneral’s words, issued at a conference in Monterey,
California, in 2013, that “there are no right hands for
wrong weapons”. That statement has also been quoted
by previous speakers today, including in particular the
Ambassador of Argentina.
Despite the shortcomings of any strategy that does
not contemplate the linkage between disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts, Brazil is fully committed to
its obligations in this field, including those arising from
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011). The Brazilian
Federal Constitution already forbids the conduct of any
non-peaceful nuclear activity in Brazilian territory.
Furthermore, my country is a party to all major
treaties and conventions in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation, such as the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We are also one of the
promoters of the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free southern
hemisphere and, in the framework of the zone of peace
and cooperation in the South Atlantic, we have been
highlighting the benefits of a zone free of nuclear
weapons in the southern Atlantic.
We have incorporated into our national legislation
all obligations deriving from those instruments, as
well as those from resolution 1540 (2004), and we
have submitted national reports to the Committee

S/PV.7169

established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). In this
context, we value the important work that has been
carried out by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts in assisting States to promote match-making in
cooperation and assistance, and other activities related
to the implementation of the resolution.
The tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), which falls close to the seventieth
anniversary of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings,
as well as the forty-fifth anniversary of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty, provides an opportunity to
reflect on the achievements and challenges still ahead
in the promotion of a safer world In this context, we
reiterate our concern over the lack of consensus that has
prevented us from further advancing in the disarmament
forums, such as the Conference on Disarmament, for
18 years now, and in the United Nations Disarmament
Commission for a whole decade.
The NPT review cycle, for its part, has been
characterized as a rolling-over exercise every five
years by the nuclear-weapon States with respect to the
implementation of their disarmament commitments.
Brazil also expresses disappointment over the
postponement of the conference on the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East, which should have
taken place in 2012, and supports its convening at the
earliest possible date.
In conclusion, no effort on the non-proliferation
front, valuable as it may be, will suffice without further
steps in disarmament as regards all weapons of mass
destruction. These processes are mutually reinforcing
and must all be pursued with the same vigour by the
international community.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): It is my great personal
pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this important
organ of the United Nations.
In order to respect the time limit of four minutes, I
will circulate the full text of my statement and deliver
only the salient points.
Japan joins others in celebrating the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
and commends the efforts of the Committee established
pursuant to the resolution to strengthen its activities. We
highly appreciate the concept note that the presidency

14-3237323/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

07/05/2014

kindly circulated to us (S/2014/313, annex) to streamline
the discussion. Today, I would like to make comments
related to the section “Looking ahead: challenges and
ways forward” in the concept paper.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jacek Bylica, Principal Adviser and
Special Envoy for Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
of the European External Action Service.

In order to effectively raise awareness of the
importance of non-proliferation efforts, in particular
among high-level policymakers, we should keep in
mind that some States believe that export controls
impede trade and investment. They also believe
that non-proliferation efforts may pose obstacles to
economic growth, but we do not think they do. In this
context, I would like to share what Japan has been doing
in the Asian region, where awareness of the importance
of export control is rising.

Mr. Bylica: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

At the commemorative summit meeting of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and Japan held in Tokyo in December 2013, leaders
agreed to intensify efforts to implement relevant
measures for non-proliferation, including cooperation
in strengthening export control capabilities of ASEAN
Member States. When Japanese Foreign Minister
Kishida delivered a speech on nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation in January, he emphasized the
strategic effects of export control. What he meant was
that strengthening export controls would help foster
confidence in the reliability of trade or investment
among the States and companies involved. Export
control would thereby create a favourable environment
for economic growth, rather than impede trade and
investment. With this in mind, Japan has been carrying
out technical assistance programmes for capacitybuilding, and we will continue to expand these activities.

The European Union wishes to thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea for
organizing and presiding over this important event. In
accordance with your wish, Mr. President, I am limiting
my oral remarks, while the full text of the EU statement
is being made available in writing.

Let me continue with our activities in support of
resolution 1540 (2004). Japan has been hosting the
Asian Export Control Seminar in Tokyo for more
than 20 years. This year, we were pleased to enjoy
the participation of the Panel of Experts of the 1540
Committee. We have also been organizing seminars
under the rubric Turtle Bay Security Roundtable, here
in New York, on non-proliferation and disarmament, in
partnership with the Missions of Poland and Turkey. We
held the sixth round of the Roundtable in March with
the participants of many Member States and, again, of
the Panel of Experts of the 1540 Committee.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reconfirming Japan’s continued commitment to being
deeply involved in the long-term process and reiterating
our strongest support for work towards the full and
universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
24/70

At the outset, I would like to stress that, from the
beginning, the European Union has been a staunch
supporter of the robust and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), with the objective of
strengthening global efforts to prevent the acquisition
and use by terrorists of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and materials and their means of delivery.
Today’s event represents a perfect opportunity to
assess both the work that has been achieved and the
great challenges that remain ahead of us. As the EU
has a long history of supporting non-proliferation
and disarmament, both politically and financially,
the resolution allowed us to give our efforts another
dimension.
In December 2003, the EU adopted its strategy
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, which, inter alia, spells
out the objective of strengthening the role of the
Security Council and enhancing expertise in meeting
the challenges of proliferation. Following the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), a thorough re-examination
of the EU dual-use regulation took place, which led
to the entry into force in 2009 of a revised regulation,
including export controls and controls on transit,
brokering and transhipment issues, which served to fill
any potential loopholes in former regulations. Within
the EU, since 2000, export controls and dual-use goods

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

have been regulated in our member States by community
law, which has since then been repeatedly amended to
respond to the growing and specific challenges in the
field of export controls. In order to give more clarity and
to contribute to a more common policy, the four export
control regime lists — the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Australia Group, the Missile Technology Control
Regime and the Nuclear Suppliers Group — were
merged in 2009. That merger turned out to be a success,
as it led to easier applicability and practical value. The
merged list has therefore become an example followed
and effectively implemented by many countries outside
the EU.
Looking outside of Europe, the EU strongly
supports regional and national efforts towards the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
through information-sharing, enhanced cooperation
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
provision of effective assistance to those States that
require it. Since 2004, the EU has invested €17 million in
an outreach programme in the area of non-proliferation
and dual-use goods export controls with 28 partner
countries, which aims to enhance the effectiveness of
export-control systems for dual-use items.
Two European Council joint actions have been
adopted, in 2006 and 2008, respectively, and a new
European Council decision was adopted in July 2013 in a
total amount of €1.5 million. The EU long-term strategy
is consistent with the three broad obligations under the
resolution: the physical protection of nuclear facilities
and materials; dual-use export control; and border
security. The assistance clause has been recognized
by the EU as a major dimension of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), and therefore was explicitly
included in the most recent European Council decision
on resolution 1540 (2004) .
To develop its strategy on the ground and assist
countries, the EU has defined its actions around
five pillars, under which all the relevant fields of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) are covered:
the subregional workshops with a focus on physical
protection and accounting; country visits at a country’s
request; experts’ meetings and events; the training of
the relevant Government authorities and stakeholders
in the private sector; and public relations efforts, for
example, through the support for the publication of the
electronic journal on issues related to resolution 1540

S/PV.7169

(2004). As those actions are implemented by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Office for their
efforts and effective collaboration with the EU.
In parallel with the European Council decision
adopted under the Common Foreign and Security
Policy, in 2009 the EU adopted a chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear action plan that consists of
133 internal measures to prevent, detect and respond
to chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
threats and risks. Approximately €100 million has
been dedicated to the implementation of that package.
The project, under the Instrument for Stability, also
contributes to the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
through its chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear centres of excellence initiative, which is aimed
at reinforcing the institutional capacity of partner
countries to fight such risks.
We would also like to underscore the issue of
adopting national action plans. In that regard, the EU
welcomes the significant progress achieved. As for
the EU, all our member States have reported on their
implementation to the 1540 Committee, and a number
have issued their national action plans. We encourage
other United Nations States Members to follow those
good examples, report to the 1540 Committee on
measures undertaken to ensure the implementation of
the resolution and consider adopting national action
plans if they have not yet done so. We also encourage
those States to take full advantage of the range of
assistance available to help them to do so, if required.
The EU also believes that the perspective of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its implementation should
not be limited to preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. That is the primary
objective; however, measures taken to fulfil it offer
numerous other advantages in a more holistic and
comprehensive dimension. Capacities built with regard
to border control serve well beyond the purpose of
detecting one type of sensitive material or another.
They significantly enhance and improve a country’s
security, but also collective security in a broad sense.
The EU recognizes the importance of cooperation
with partners from other regions in that respect. As
already mentioned, our action is guided in that respect
by the 2003 EU strategy against proliferation, which
is based on the promotion of effective multilateralism
and the relevant international instruments and is
carried out through specific cooperation and assistance

14-3237325/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

projects with regional organizations. In particular, the
EU welcomes the combined efforts undertaken with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Moreover, in 2011, the EU and the United States of
America signed a joint EU—United States declaration in
which they both committed to undertaking continuous
efforts aimed at the implementation of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1977 (2011).
As the mandate of the 1540 Committee has been
extended until 2021, we would like once again to recall
our full commitment and continuous support to this
issue. Our global struggle against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles is
far from over. Numerous ongoing crises remind us that
our actions in that field are needed more than ever. I
would like to assure you, Mr. President, that you can
count on the EU to continue these efforts, along with
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Republic
of Korea on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for its dynamism,
transparency and able leadership in chairing the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We very much welcome
the personal participation in today’s meeting by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Yun Byung-se, and
we thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
This open debate is an opportunity to assess the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) over the past 10 years and to contribute
to the discussion on the best way to strengthen and
consolidate its achievements and correct its failures.
Resolution 1540 (2004) occupies a significant position
in the area of non-proliferation, and is designed to
strengthen the focus of non-proliferation commitments
without affecting its direct connection to the fulfilment
by all States’ of their obligations in the areas of the
other pillars of disarmament, including the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Its aim is to ensure that all
Member States comply with their obligation to prevent
the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction
and related materials and their acquisition by non-State
actors, and to see that they have the resources and the
capacity to do so.

26/70

07/05/2014

We also acknowledge the valuable work of the
Committee’s Group of Experts and its efforts in the
areas of outreach, awareness-raising, application,
assistance and capacity-building, particularly through
country visits. In addition to country visits, the Group of
Experts participates in numerous workshops, seminars
and events around the world. In a way, they are the
face of the Committee, and the Group’s composition
should therefore reflect the universal nature of this
important resolution and take due account of broad
geographical representation as a factor in integrating
its investigations.
Universal, general and balanced implementation
of the resolution depends on Member States playing
a central role and requires that the Committee fully
comply with its mandate. We support the Committee’s
efforts to fulfil its mandate by increasing the number of
reporting countries, gathering experience concerning
the resolution’s application and promoting international
cooperation and assistance with its core activities.
We believe that the two elements that are key to full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) are assistance
and information exchange. In that regard, in addition
to continuing to seek ways to improve and advance its
role in facilitating assistance between donor countries
and Member States that request it, it would be helpful
to go beyond that one function and play a more direct
role, through training or creating its own assistance
programmess for States, for example.
We also commend the efforts made to set up better
communication mechanisms with Member States, such
as through the establishment of national and regional
points of contact. And country visits should involve other
Committee members besides members of the Group of
Experts. It is also important that close relationships
be established with States. Communication and
cooperation with specialized regional and international
organizations should be established and encouraged in
order to achieve full implementation of the resolution.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the role of
the United Nations Regional Centres for Peace and
Disarmament in this area.
I will conclude by noting that in December 2013,
Guatemala presented its third national report and
updated matrix, in accordance with resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006), and thereby reaffirmed its
unequivocal commitment to the cause of a safer world
in which nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of
mass destruction no longer exist.

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
exchange of views on issues related to resolution 1540
(2004) on this, the tenth anniversary of its adoption.
In 2007, three years after the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), South Africa affirmed the fundamental
principle underlying security from weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) — that as long as such weapons
exist, the world will always be threatened by a weaponsof-mass-destruction catastrophe. Today, 10 years after
that adoption, South Africa seeks to remind all States
that there are no safe hands for these weapons. We
also remain of the view that the challenges facing the
international community in the area of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems can be effectively
addressed only through inclusive multilateralism and
reinvigoration of the relevant multilateral instruments
and organizations. The relevant international regimes
provide a clear recognition of the inextricable link
between disarmament and non-proliferation, and set
out the obligations of those possessing such weapons
concerning their elimination, while upholding the right
of all States to the peaceful use of relevant technologies.
The threat posed by these weapons to international
peace and security cannot be eliminated through
non-proliferation measures alone.
South Africa submitted its first report on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on
31 January 2005. This and subsequent reports
included a comprehensive overview of South Africa’s
domestic legislation relevant to the control of material,
equipment and technology related to weapons of mass
destruction. While we are proud of our control system,
we realize that no system is foolproof or can be static
in a world of rapid technological advances. Reviewing
and implementing additional measures is therefore an
ongoing process. At the same time, we recognize that
such measures should under no circumstances impose
any unwarranted restrictions on the inalienable right of
States to utilize material, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes.
One of the primary requirements of resolution 1540
(2004) is the submission of national reports. Given the
challenges that have been experienced in this regard,
in resolution 1977 (2011) the Security Council called
on all States that had not yet submitted a first report
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution

S/PV.7169

1540 (2004) on steps they had taken, or intended to
take, to implement resolution 1540 (2004), to do so.
In the past three years, South Africa has played its
part in facilitating progress towards the resolution’s
implementation, including by chairing the 1540
Committee, during our non-permanent membership
of the Council. In 2012 and 2013, South Africa hosted
and participated in workshops in Pretoria and Addis
Ababa on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
This year we hosted another workshop in Pretoria,
following Gabon’s successful hosting of a similar
event for French-speaking African countries in March.
Another workshop is planned for Portuguese-speaking
countries, to be held in Togo in June. Those efforts were
all geared towards helping African States to meet their
reporting obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
Although no African State possesses these
weapons and most do not export or produce material
and equipment that fall within the scope of resolution
1540 (2004), South Africa recognizes that any State
could potentially be used as a point of transit or
trans-shipment of goods that could be intended for
non-State actors. However, it should be noted that there
exists little incentive for such States, some of which
are underresourced and overburdened in other areas
of their development, to commit to onerous reporting
standards. States should therefore identify any gaps
they may have in their domestic controls and call on
relevant international expertise if required.
In this regard, it is important to note and respect
the domestic legislation already in place in countries
that effectively regulates all items related to weapons
of mass destruction in accordance with their own
particular circumstances. It is also important that
in countries where such legislation is lacking, best
practices can be drawn upon to empower them to
take sovereign control of WMD non-proliferation, in
conformity with their domestic legislation and in the
interests of their development.
South Africa notes that there are regional and
subregional efforts to implement resolution 1540
(2004) and that activities have taken place within
the Caribbean Community, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Central
American Integration System. In that regard, South
Africa welcomed the submission, in August 2011,
of the African Union Commission’s point of contact
for resolution 1540 (2004) and of the Commission’s
statement on 1 May 2014 reiterating the Commission’s

14-3237327/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

commitment to the implementation of the resolution on
the continent.
South Africa continues to support the African
Union’s mandate as the primary international
organization with the authority to oversee such matters
on the continent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): At the outset, let me express
our gratitude to the Republic of Korea for convening
this open debate on non-proliferation.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by Special Envoy Bylica on behalf of the European
Union and wishes to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.
Today’s anniversary is significant. On 28 April
2004, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1540 (2004), and, if I may add, the Council
did so at the time under the presidency of Germany.
After 10 years, the relevance of resolution 1540 (2004)
is as high as ever. Attempts by non-State actors to
acquire weapons of mass destruction and related
material remain one of the most severe threats to global
security and to humankind.
In that context, we commend in particular the
tireless efforts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) under your able leadership,
Mr. President, as well as its 1540 Group of Experts.
We acknowledge the important role of the Committee
as a forum for assistance matchmaking in moving
implementation forward. Germany continues to
provide substantial direct support and assistance
to other States’ implementation efforts, including
through implementing the European Union’s assistance
programme in the area of export controls.
We welcome the efforts of the Chair to look at ways
to enhance assistance as a key element of resolution
1540 (2004), and would be happy to see that aspect
incorporated in a medium-term strategy yet to be
elaborated. We also believe that promoting synergies
with other counter-terrorism and non-proliferation
bodies would be beneficial to enhance implementation.
Let me highlight one aspect of particular relevance.
The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) needs the
active involvement of all the relevant stakeholders. In
that context, the role of industry and the private sector

28/70

07/05/2014

remains a central concern of the German Government.
That is why two years ago we initiated the so-called
Wiesbaden process in cooperation with the Secretariat.
Wiesbaden, incidentally, is the name of one of
Germany’s most beautiful towns in the neighbourhood
of the Frankfurt airport, which is always worth visiting
in the Rhine valley. It is there where Germany hosted
two major international industry outreach conferences
on resolution 1540 (2004). They were aimed at
facilitating the Committee’s dialogue with industry and
strengthening the partnership between Governments
and the private sector. This year, we envisage a
conference entitled Governance and Compliance
Management. It will further explore how industry can
complement States’ implementation efforts in various
areas, such as biosecurity, chemical and nuclear
security, transport, brokering and export control. We
are confident that this first-ever dialogue process with
industry provides valuable input for the Committee’s
work, not only in view of its upcoming comprehensive
review in 2016, but also for the Committee’s strategy
and future priorities.
Very much in the spirit of the Wiesbaden process
and following the call of the 1540 Committee Chair,
I am pleased to announce that Germany has just
finalized, together with Council member Australia, a
paper on effective practices on how to engage industry
in the field of export controls. We hope that it will serve
as a tool for reference and may guide or assist other
States in their implementation efforts.
Let me, once again reaffirm Germany’s strong
commitment to the full and universal implementation
of Council resolution 1540 (2004).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
speak this morning.
(spoke in English)
The 10-year anniversary of any international
initiative is a notable milestone. After a decade, the
global community is well positioned to assess what an
initiative has achieved and where further efforts are still
required. We have reached that moment of reflection for
resolution 1540 (2004). We have an opportunity to take
stock of what the resolution has helped us accomplish

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to date and to reaffirm our commitment to do what is
needed to achieve its intended objectives.
The proliferation of nuclear, chemical, biological
and radiological weapons remains a serious threat
to global peace and security. An attack using such
weapons would have devastating consequences for
the global community and would directly contradict
the values of human dignity, as well as free and open
societies. At the recent Nuclear Security Summit in The
Hague, our Prime Minister, The Honourable Stephen
Harper, cited the responsibility of world leaders to take
the necessary steps to ensure that an act of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) terrorism did not happen. As
no country is immune to the effects of WMD terrorism,
we must work collectively to prevent weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems and related materials
from falling into the wrong hands.
(spoke in French)
That is the primary objective of resolution 1540
(2004), which the Council adopted unanimously
a decade ago. As we mark the resolution’s tenth
anniversary, Canada remains committed to its full
and universal implementation. We are taking several
tangible steps, including in collaboration with our
partners, to advance that essential goal.
At the recent Nuclear Security Summit, Prime
Minister Harper announced that Canada and the
Republic of Korea were leading a joint initiative on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The initiative,
which outlines a series of concrete steps that countries
can take to advance the effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) both domestically and
internationally, was endorsed by more than 30 Summit
participants and the United Nations. We believe that this
document, albeit focused on nuclear issues given the
context in which it was prepared, can provide valuable
direction to States in their efforts to implement the
resolution, both within and beyond the nuclear security
context. We will submit it to the Security Council for
inclusion in the record of this debate.
(spoke in English)
Canada strongly supports the central role of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its Group of Experts in the implementation
of the resolution. We believe the extension of the 1540
Committee’s mandate to 2021, in resolution 1977 (2011),
is an acknowledgement of the ongoing importance of
our joint WMD counter-proliferation efforts. We must

S/PV.7169

continue to provide support to help the 1540 Committee
advance its work. That is in our interests, as well as
those of future generations.
Reporting is an essential element of the resolution.
Canada has submitted three national reports on our
national implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in
2004, 2006 and 2008. We urge all States that have yet
to submit their initial mandatory national reports to the
Committee to do so as soon as possible, to ensure the
universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Canada is working with partners, through multilateral
organizations, to encourage countries to submit their
initial national reports, and stands ready to provide
assistance, as required, to help meet that objective.
Canada also submitted in 2010 a voluntary National
Summary Action Plan on resolution 1540 (2004).
We plan to soon submit a forward-looking update
outlining our ongoing domestic and international
efforts to implement the resolution. We encourage all
Member States to consider preparing and submitting
such action plans as a way to outline their national
priorities for 1540 implementation. It is also important
that all countries identify a national point of contact
for resolution 1540 (2004) as a tool to facilitate the
resolution’s implementation.
(spoke in French)
Through its global partnership programme, and
in furtherance of the voluntary commitments outlined
in the statement to the Nuclear Security Summit and
the call contained in the resolution itself, Canada is
making a significant and tangible contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) throughout
the world through capacity-building activities in
support of States requiring assistance in implementing
provisions of the resolution.
Canada is supporting six regional workshops and
related follow-up activities to build capacity in States
to implement international legal instruments related to
nuclear security such as the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Materials and its amendment. We
are also providing legislative assistance to countries
in South-East Asia and Latin America to support the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and related
treaties. We are working through the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum
and with the World Customs Organization to support
efforts to counter illicit trafficking of weapons of mass
destruction and related materials in the ASEAN region.

14-3237329/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

As called for in resolution 1977 (2011), regional
and subregional organizations have an important role
to play in the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We encourage countries to consider
the value of establishing and/or funding coordinator
positions for resolution 1540 (2004) within regional
and subregional organizations, as appropriate, in order
to facilitate regional approaches to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), including through relevant
capacity-building events.
(spoke in English)
Ten years after its adoption, resolution 1540
(2004) remains a cornerstone instrument in the global
effort to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Guided by the resolution, the international
community has taken concrete and effective steps to
enhance domestic legal and physical controls over
weapons of mass destruction, their related materials
and delivery systems, and has established mechanisms
to prevent their illicit trafficking.
Despite this progress, we must remain focused
on achieving the full and universal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Canada continues to take
concrete steps towards achieving this objective and we
encourage all Member States, in their respective national
contexts, to do the same. It is only through concrete
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004) that the
international community will be able to effectively
combat the ongoing and serious challenges posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
terrorism. Maintaining global peace and security will
depend on our ability to succeed in these efforts over
the years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I will
deliver a shortened version of my prepared statement in
the interest of time. I ask the Security Council to take
note of my written text.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Republic
of Korea for having organized this open debate, which
is of great importance because this is an issue that
concerns all Member States.
It goes without saying that Switzerland fully
supports the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004) and
its follow-up resolutions. The resolution, unfortunately,
remains important in the light of the persistent

30/70

07/05/2014

threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, and by their
potential use by non-State actors. We should therefore
continue our efforts to effectively implement the
resolution. In that regard, I will briefly address three
points.
The first concers the importance of national
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and role of
international instruments in that regard. Switzerland
has for its part made its expertise availability to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to assist in the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. In the area of exports, Switzerland controls
the transfer of dual-use items in a broad and systematic
manner. The written text of my statement contains
further detail.
Secondly, international assistance can play a useful
role in advancing implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In that regard, in 2011 Switzerland, at Iraq’s
request, provide such assistance in the area of biosafety and bio-security. That cooperation also involved
the Verification Research, Training and Information
Centre, a non-governmental organization.
Thirdly, regional organizations also have a role. For
example, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), with Switzerland’s support, carries
out awareness-raising activities, provides specific
information and assists States in developing national
legislation and national action plans. A few weeks ago,
the OSCE Points of Contacts on resolution 1540 (2004)
met in Vienna.
While the implementation of existing provisions
remains a priority, we must also anticipate new
challenges, such as the implications of dual-use and
convergence in the areas of biology and chemistry
resulting from revolutions in the life sciences, and find
meaningful ways to address them. While such advances
have enormous potential for public health, biomedical
science or agriculture, there is also growing risk of
State or non-State actors exploiting such sciences to
illicit ends.
As current Chair of the Biological Weapons
Convention, Switzerland is aware of such risks and
will therefore launch a series of workshops focused on
the implications of the convergence of chemistry and
biology. We will inform the 1540 Committee regarding
the results of that initiative.

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In conclusion, the international community must
continue its efforts to manage the risks posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Their
use could have severe humanitarian consequences and
major repercussions for security, the economy and the
environment. This also concerns the very existence of
such arms: until they are prohibited and abolished, they
will continue to represent a risk to peace and security
throughout the world.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I too would like to take
this opportunity to convey my congratulations to you,
Madam, and the Republic of Korea, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation wishes to thank you for convening this timely
open debate to commemorate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and for the
useful concept note (S/2014/313, annex) to guide us
in our deliberations today. I also wish to express my
delegation’s appreciation to Deputy-Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his statement.

S/PV.7169

of mass destruction. The legislation was also intended
to protect Malaysian exporters from being exploited by
proliferators and those who profit from such activities
without, compromising legitimate trade in strategic
items.
In the control and monitoring of exports, the
importation of in-transit and trans-shipped goods and
the brokering of strategic items, the Strategic Trade
Act specifically addresses major concerns related
to global trade. They include re-exports, munitions
trans-shipments and trans-shipments of dual-use
controlled items to an end user situated in or acting
on behalf of destinations of proliferation concern. In
order to ensure effective implementation across the
board, outreach programmes seek to help the business
community as it deals with Government enforcement
agencies. That has resulted in increased awareness of
the obligations under the act, as well as high levels of
compliance from the private sector.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was in
many ways a milestone for the Security Council. Ten
years ago, the Council committed itself to combating
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery. By invoking
Chapter VII powers, the resolution sent a strong political
message that there was an urgent need to address this
matter and reaffirmed, at the same time, that there were
legal obligations for States to uphold.

We realize that non-proliferation is a global
concern that requires a global response. Therefore,
Malaysia has also undertaken initiatives at the regional
and subregional levels to complement and strengthen
existing national efforts. In the past year alone,
Malaysia hosted outreach events and capacity-building
workshops, with a focus on related topics ranging from
establishing a bio-risk culture and the implementation
of the Biological Weapons Convention to facilitating
secure trade in the Asian-Pacific region.

My delegation recalls that the sponsors of
the draft resolution took the initiative to conduct
informal consultations with the broader membership,
in the course of finalizing the text. As Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at the time, Malaysia
also conveyed the views and concerns of NAM member
countries, underlining our collective support for
international non-proliferation efforts. Ten years on,
we have moved forward and it is indeed time to take
stock of the current state of play and to forge a common
understanding of the way forward.

I wish to note as well that Malaysia has officially
offered assistance to other Member States through the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We will consider such requests in the areas of
legal and regulatory infrastructure, implementation
and resources for fulfilling the provisions of the
resolution. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
suggest that Council members work with assistance
providers within the larger membership to enhance the
matchmaking mechanism under the resolution in order
to ensure that such assistance is more effective.

Malaysia is strategically located in one of the most
important and busiest international shipping routes.
Our reliance on international trade necessitates a robust
and clearly defined approach to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). In 2010, we enacted the
Strategic Trade Act in line with our commitments to
ensuring that Malaysia is a safe and secure trading
partner, while at the same time shouldering our
responsibilities to combat the proliferation of weapons

Malaysia is a participant in the Nuclear Security
Summit, and more recently the Proliferation Security
Initiative. We recognize that each approach has its
benefits and drawbacks. We have also observed that
international non-proliferation efforts do not exist in
a vacuum. Indeed, one of the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004) is to bridge the gaps between the various
measures. As such, my delegation is of the view that the
1540 Committee can play a useful role in coordinating

14-3237331/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

its work with other multilateral non-proliferation
initiatives. That is particularly important given the
resource needs of developing States for full and proper
implementation.
In conclusion, let me once again underline Malaysia’s
strong commitment to ensuring that weapons of mass
destruction do not fall into the hands of non-State
actors. We will continue to undertake efforts at the
national, regional and international levels towards that
end. In that regard, we reiterate our support for the work
of the Security Council on non-proliferation. We hope
that the Council will continue to take into consideration
the views of countries in the global supply chain as well
as those of other developing countries on this important
matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to begin by congratulating
you, Madam President, on the Republic of Korea’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I would also like to thank the
Korean delegation for having organized this important
meeting. Your initiative in organizing this public debate
is of particular importance at the present time.
Ten years ago, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 1540 (2004), it was unanimous in its
awareness of the need to strengthen efforts to maintain
international peace and security and to limit emerging
threats — in other words, the potential by terrorist
groups and non-State actors to acquire weapons of
mass destruction and/or their means of production
and delivery. Efforts have been made on the national,
regional and international levels to implement the
resolution. Relatively speaking, those efforts have borne
fruit by bridging the gaps that had created openings for
terrorists or transnational organized crime groups to
acquire and trade in weapons of mass destruction. That
also limited the phenomenon of the black market and
made it easier to exercise control over such sensitive
materials.
However, despite all those efforts, we deplore the
fact that there are still major gaps that are being used
by terrorists to acquire weapons of mass destruction
to be used for criminal purposes. Even worse, we see
the involvement of certain Member States in providing
chemical weapons and chemical ingredients to terrorist
groups. We see some States, some members of the

32/70

07/05/2014

Security Council, remain silent in the face of those
violations, which pose a threat to global security. Those
extremely serious events are a reality, and we greatly
deplore them. We have seen them emerge in Syria with
armed terrorist groups using chemical weapons more
than once against civilians and the military, with the
support of the States of the region and the complicity of
the intelligence services of influential States members
of the Council.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
issued warnings, through hundreds of official messages
to the Council, the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the Security Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), alerting them that certain States
were facilitating the acquisition by terrorist groups
active in Syria of chemical weapons. In that regard,
we presented to the Council and the 1540 Committee a
letter dated 8 December 2012, and we continue to send
correspondence, including a letter dated 8 April 2014.
That last piece of correspondence contained detailed
information with regard to the manufacture and testing of
chemical weapons by Al-Qaida elements in a laboratory
in the city of Gaziantep, Turkey, in preparation to use
themagainst civilians in Syria. We warned of attempts
to use civilian flights originating in Libya against the
Syrian Government. We also submitted to the Council
audio and video recordings that showed armed groups
in possession of chemical weapons and intending to use
them. Members and non-members of the Council chose
to ignore our messages calling for compliance with
resolution 1540 (2004), which calls on Member States
to refrain from providing any support whatsoever to
terrorist groups that attempt to use nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons and their means of delivery. Again,
our efforts to inform the Council of those attempted
violations went ignored.
Although terrorist groups have attempted to
illegally smuggle chemical weapons, especially sarin
gas, through Turkish territory and into Syria, and in
spite of our detailed reports on the support provided
by certain States in connection with acts of aggression
that took place within reach of Damascus on 21 August
2013, the Security Council has done nothing. Influential
States have prevented the Council from doing its duty
in the face of a threat of terrorist action to which Syria
was subject, action that also threatened international
peace and security and the entire world. However, those
States did not hold the Governments of Member States
that support terrorism accountable. Once again, we ask
ourselves what point is there for the Security Council to
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

adopt resolutions if they are not implemented, or if they
are implemented only in a selective and self-interested
fashion?
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reaffirms its support for international instruments
and decisions, as well as for measures to promote
cooperation, coordination and information exchange, in
order to respond to the threat posed by the acquisition
by terrorist groups of weapons of mass destruction.
Syria is strengthening its relevant procedures in that
regard, and we have submitted five national reports to
the 1540 Committee.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
calls on the Security Council once again to fulfil
its responsibility to ensure that the terrorist groups
active in Syria are unable to acquire weapons of mass
destruction, to take action against groups that are
perpetrating terrorist actions on the territory of my
country against my people and to uphold international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to commend the initiative
of the Republic of Korea in organizing this highlevel commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). That adoption
reflected the common will to step up the fight against
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery and, in particular,
to prevent their acquisition by non-State actors.
The contribution of resolution 1540 (2004) to
the non-proliferation regime and the fight against
terrorism is undeniable. The ten-year extension in
2011 of the mandate of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) demonstrates the
shared determination to pursue the achievement of
the resolution’s aims, which filled in several gaps in
international law. The proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) is a threat to international
peace and security. The Kingdom of Morocco shares
the conviction of the international community, which
remains concerned by the threat of terrorism and the
risk of non-State actors acquiring WMDs or their
means of delivery. Morocco welcomes the role of the
1540 Committee in the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and supports its activities aimed at

S/PV.7169

preventing non-State actors and terrorist groups from
acquiring such weapons.
The Kingdom of Morocco is a State party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the conventions on biological and chemical
weapons. We neither have nor will we develop
any weapons of mass destruction, and we have no
programmes for ballistic missiles or other means of
delivery. We have also subscribed to The Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.
Morocco plays an active part in international efforts and
initiatives against terrorism and for non-proliferation.
On 26 October 2004, Morocco submitted its report
under paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004) and has
since updated it. Morocco’s efforts to complete its
legal and regulatory arsenal relating to combatting
proliferation and trafficking in equipment or material
that could help non-State actors to acquire or use
WMDs shows our steadfast commitment to working
with the international community to combat terrorism
and the proliferation of WMDs. Those efforts have
helped to strengthen our legal and regulatory system
under international norms and to establish a control
system for the export of dual-use materials.
Paragraph 7 of resolution 1540 (2004) recognizes
that certain States may require assistance to implement
the measures of the resolution. Morocco believes that
only active international cooperation based on the
principles of solidarity and shared responsibility, along
with access to resources and the exchange of information
and experience, will make it possible to bring about the
effective and universal implementation of the provisions
of the resolution. Moreover, the legal and technical
obligations, the one-year extension of the mandate of the
1540 Committee and the invitation to States to develop
national action and implementation plans are all aspects
that require more active international cooperation. The
existing assistance mechanism should be strengthened
in order to be able to meet the expectations of States
for appropriate assistance, particularly in Africa, and to
support States in implementing the resolution.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize that
national efforts will not be sufficient without stronger
regional and subregional cooperation. In that regard,
the international community should speed up its efforts
to seek the total eradication of WMDs as the ultimate
guarantee against their use and acquisition by non-State
actors.

14-3237333/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

07/05/2014

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.

and to prevent non-State actors from gaining access to
sensitive material and knowledge.

Mr. Cardi (Italy): Allow me to begin by thanking
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Korea for organizing and presiding over this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and today’s speakers for
their important contributions to the discussion.

Italy is a member of the Proliferation Security
Initiative. It is also a founding member of the Global
Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction and participates in the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. In
2013, within the framework of the Global Partnership,
we co-chaired with the United States the centres of
excellence sub-working group, which can play a critical
role in strengthening the institutional capacity of States
to mitigate the risks, including criminal activities,
associated with chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear weapons.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and wishes to make
several remarks in its national capacity.
The adoption, 10 years ago, of resolution 1540 (2004)
marked an important step forward in strengthening
global efforts to prevent the acquisition and use by
terrorists of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons and
materials, as well as their means of delivery. Since then,
Italy has adopted legislation, regulations and policies to
comply with the provisions of the resolution. Recently,
at the third Nuclear Security Summit, held in The
Hague, several States and international organizations
gathered to move a step forward in strengthening
nuclear security. On that occasion, a joint statement
on promoting the full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) was presented by a large number
of States, including Italy. It was a valuable opportunity
to reiterate the importance of resolution 1540 (2004)
and its comprehensive and cross-cutting scope, which
goes beyond the nuclear domain.
At The Hague we also submitted a gift basket: a
joint statement on nuclear security training and support
centres of excellence, which serves to reaffirm that
education and training are crucial to the exchange of
information and best practices among States, to the
strengthening of capacity-building and security culture
and to the maintenance of national high-level and well
trained technical experts.
Over the past few years, Italy has paid special
attention to education, training and institutional
capacity-building as essential elements of an effective
safety and security infrastructure. The International
School on Nuclear Security, established in 2010
by the International Atomic Energy Agency at the
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste,
will hold its fourth annual training course in 2014. We
believe that such educational efforts should lie at the
heart of any strategy that seeks to strengthen a global
response to threats from weapons of mass destruction

34/70

The broader scope of resolution 1540 (2004)
relates to major export-control regimes. The current
Italian chairmanship of the Missile Technology Control
Regime is also working to stress that connection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Today’s
Security Council open debate commemorating the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004) provides
an opportunity to reaffirm the need for us as States
Members of the United Nations to fully comply with
our obligations and commitments with regard to the
non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons. We believe that international peace and
security will be fully realized only once the world is
free from weapons of mass destruction, from the threat
that they represent and from the risk that they will be
used by armed non-State actors or terrorists.
Resolution 1540 (2004) not only complements
international efforts to achieve disarmament, to ensure
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and to strengthen the fight against terrorism, it also
identifies a new threat, namely, the possession of such
weapons, their delivery systems and related materials by
non-State actors or terrorists. We therefore reiterate the
importance of effective compliance with international
legal instruments on weapons of mass destruction
and the implementation of their main pillars, that is,
disarmament, non-proliferation and the promotion
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and chemical
substances.
In compliance with paragraph 4 of the resolution,
which provides for the presentation of reports on

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

implementation measures adopted or to be adopted
by members, Colombia has submitted three reports on
its national implementation. The most recent report,
submitted in 2013, sets out, among other things, details
of the regulation of radioactive and/or nuclear materials
in Colombia and of its compliance with Security
Council resolutions on that issue.
Resolution 1540 (2004) also establishes that
international cooperation and assistance provided to
States for effective implementation are crucial elements
for prevention. In that context, Colombia has hosted, in
previous years, meetings attended by representatives of
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and various national authorities
in order to deal with priority areas in the physical
protection and management of nuclear, biological,
chemical and radiological materials. During the
meetings, national authorities reported on progress in
their implementation of the resolution and noted the
need for cooperation on various areas.
Likewise, with the support of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the backing
of the Stimson Center and the Stanley Foundation,
my country organized in 2012 the a seminar for the
Andean Community States on resolution 1540 (2004).
Its objective was to discuss national and regional
compliance with the resolution among representatives
of the Andean countries and a select Panel of Experts,
as well as to explore the possibility of assistance and
international cooperation to strengthen capacity in that
area.
As a result of those two workshops, Colombia
prepared, in coordination with its main partner in
that regard, the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism (CICTE), a national action plan, which
included cooperation guidelines for strengthening
its national capacity in implementing resolution 1540
(2004). My country plans to hold an event to launch the
national plan in cooperation with CICTE and the 1540
Committee in the second half of this year.
That activity will bring together Government
authorities with jurisdiction in the matter and possible
contributors and will seek to reiterate the importance of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the responsibility of national
institutions for its effective implementation. In the
same way, the event will seek to raise the awareness of
national institutions on the clear and concrete benefits

S/PV.7169

of implementing the resolution and to inform the
international community of national efforts to develop
and strengthen institutional implementation capacities.
The role of the national police has been considerable,
given that it has achieved progress in establishing a
response unit on weapons of mass destruction to deal in
a timely and effective way with criminal acts involving
nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical agents.
The unit received support from the Governments of
Canada, through the Royal Canadian Mounted Police,
and the United States, through the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, as well as from international bodies, such
as the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
in training personnel on identifying and responding to
incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
My country sees nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation as part of a comprehensive process
towards general and complete disarmament in all its
aspects. Hence the importance for all bodies of the
United Nations, within their respective competencies,
and the international community to resolutely commit
themselves to achieving concrete goals, such as the
early entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty,
stronger implementation of the Programme of Action
on Small Arms and the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Korhonen (Finland): It is my pleasure to thank
the Republic of Korea for organizing such a timely
and important event. Promoting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is a priority in managing
all kinds of threats that result from the existence and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Finland fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union and would like to add a couple of
remarks from a national perspective.
I will introduce the multi-benefit model used in
our non-proliferation work and extend to all countries
present an invitation to the next plenary of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
International cooperation to implement common
decisions starts at home. Finland is one of the seven
regularly reporting Member States that has submitted
five voluntary reports on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) since 2004.

14-3237335/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In addition, Finland contributes to non-proliferation
projects and cooperative activities in various regions,
ranging from Latin America to East Asia. That effort is
mainly based on a multi-benefit principle in allocating
and using scarce resources.
I will give just two examples, the first of which
is that measures that facilitate the detection of and
response to biological weapons will also improve
disease surveillance and other national public health
capacities. In that context, earlier this week Finland
hosted the Helsinki Commitment Development Meeting
as a part of the Global Health Security Agenda. Nearly
200 health security experts from over 30 countries
gathered in Finland to discuss that initiative, which is
relevant to the topic being discussed today. The aim is
to strengthen our ability to prevent, detect and respond
to emerging infectious diseases, whatever the cost.
As a second example, we would mention that
resources to detect the movement of terrorists across
borders can also help in combating human trafficking,
and vice-versa.
Improving non-proliferation capacities in that way
will also address other needs in a given country. On the
basis of such a strategy with multiple benefits, we can
promote both goals — security and development — with
our partners.
I want to recognize here the role of the Stimson
Center, which is based in Washington, D.C., in designing
that innovative model and applying it to projects
that serve non-proliferation objectives. Finland has
supported the work of the Stimson Center in advancing
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
(GICNT) is one of the efforts that serve the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004). Finland is pleased that the
GICNT takes place in good cooperation with permanent
international organizations. The United Nations, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and INTERPOL
are actively involved in the GICNT as official observers.
Finland has agreed to host its next plenary meeting in
Helsinki in June 2015. The previous plenary was hosted
with success by the Government of Mexico in 2013, and
we strive to reach the same high standard as Mexico did
in organizing our meeting.
The priorities of the GICNT include nuclear
detection, nuclear forensics and response and mitigation
work. Our own national experience shows that sharing
best practices and participating in exercises in the
36/70

07/05/2014

framework of the GICNT is useful and in our interest. I
want to extend our thanks to the Republic of Korea for
taking over the demanding task of coordinating the work
of the GICNT in its Implementation and Assessment
Group. Currently, 85 partner nations are involved in
GICNT cooperation. We very warmly welcome those
States who have not yet joined the Initiative to Helsinki
next year.
To conclude, let me once again thank you, Madam
President, and your Government for your leadership
in promoting resolution 1540 (2004). Finland looks
forward to the comprehensive report that the 1540
Committee will submit to the Security Council in 2016.
We hope that we will be able to offer some of our ideas
and experiences and that they will be useful to the
Committee in its preparatory work.
The President: Before I give the floor to the
next speaker, I would like to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): It is an honour for me to
deliver this statement on behalf of Croatia and my own
country, Poland. As we fully subscribe to the statement
delivered on behalf of European Union, allow me to
present a few remarks that both our countries share
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
Croatia and Poland have a long-standing and
successful history of bilateral cooperation in the sphere
of disarmament and non-proliferation. In the context
of the United Nations, both our countries perceive
resolution 1540 (2004) to be one of the most important
elements of the global non-proliferation architecture. In
that context, both Croatia and Poland have undertaken
various initiatives aimed at promoting the goals and
objectives of the resolution.
In 2004, after the adoption of the resolution, both
our countries took the obligations derived from that
document very seriously. We remain aware of the
impact that the implementation of the resolution has
on international peace and security. To fully meet
high non-proliferation standards, both our countries
have undertaken measures aimed at increasing the
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

capabilities of the relevant national law enforcement
agencies in order to prepare them to respond to the
challenges posed by the illegal smuggling of materials
related to weapons of mass destruction to non-State
actors. I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the following initiatives, which are among the various
steps that both our countries have undertaken.
First, in 2013, the Croatian Government adopted
the National Strategy and Action Plan for the
Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
The Strategy defines the general framework of
actions by Croatia pertaining to the suppression of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It
provides guidelines for strengthening the coordination
and integration of the activities of State and public
authorities and other legal entities in the Republic of
Croatia and their cooperation with other States’ entities
and international organizations.
In 2010, Poland established an inter-ministerial
committee for the prevention of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. It defines Poland’s policy
in the sphere of preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and analysing proliferation trends,
challenges and threats. The committee serves as a
coordinating body for representatives from various
ministries and agencies.
As a result of our national experiences, both
our countries introduced, in 2013, the concept of
the resolution 1540 (2004) peer review, which is a
bilateral framework in which to compare experiences
and examine, jointly and on an interactive basis, the
implementation of policies, approaches and practices
related to resolution 1540 (2004). The basic idea
behind the concept was to move beyond current
implementation activities and simple awareness-raising
towards country-specific dialogue and stronger mutual
cooperation in implementation of that important
resolution. We agreed that the peer review should be
an evaluation carried out in order to enhance national
implementation and identify effective practices.
The peer review consisted of two visits by groups of
national non-proliferation experts representing various
ministries and agencies. Exchanges of ideas and relevant
experiences in implementation of the resolution have
proved to be a mutually beneficial process that has
enabled participating States to learn from each other’s
experiences.
Both our countries are convinced that such bilateral
cooperation provides an excellent framework for a more

S/PV.7169

effective implementation of the resolution. The report
summarizing the initiative will soon be submitted to
the 1Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We also stand ready to share our experience
with all interested States.
To that end, in cooperation with the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, Croatia will host a
regional seminar on the peer review process in June
2014. The seminar aims at taking forward the peer
review process of cooperation between Poland and
Croatia and encouraging a regional and coordinated
approach to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in South-East Europe. It will bring together
participants from the region, a number of countries
interested in advancing peer review cooperation
and representatives from regional and international
organizations and civil society.
In conclusion, let me stress once again that both
Croatia and Poland perceive resolution 1540 (2004) to
be one of the cornerstones of international security. As
we speak, in the Chamber next door, the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is in the final days of its current session.
We are truly convinced that a swift and comprehensive
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) also serves the purposes of the NPT process.
With the peer review mechanism developed by Croatia
and Poland, which could easily be adopted by interested
countries, we can enhance the global response to the
threats posed by weapons of mass destruction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Ibañez Ferrándiz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to express my gratitude for the
convening of this meeting on the occasion of the tenth
nniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004).
We are debating an issue of great importance for
international security. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Republic of Korea for its
contribution to the discussion on non-proliferation in
international forums, highlight its work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and to wish it success in its presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
I would like to voice our support for the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union, to which we
fully subscribe.

14-3237337/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

On 28 April we marked the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). As a member of
the Security Council at the time, Spain contributed to
it through its extensive accumulated experience in the
fight against terrorism. In the years leading up to the
resolution, the international community had witnessed
the appearance of new threats linked to weapons of
mass destruction. In particular, those were the potential
use of technologies and related materials by terrorist
groups and non-State actors, which represented a
great challenge. The resolution offered an appropriate
response, establishing a series of obligations under
which States had to take steps, establish controls and
develop legislation in order to prevent proliferation and
physically protect nuclear, chemical, biological and
radiological materials. Spain has complied with the
resolution and worked in an effective manner in all of
the following areas.
We presented our first report in 2004, and we have
updated it since. We have worked on the gradual review
and development of our capabilities in order to deal with
our security requirements. We have developed a broad
legal framework aimed at preventing proliferation and
the illicit trade of weapons and dual-use goods. We
have developed national and international coordination
efforts and appropriate technical capabilities. Spain
is currently working on developing a national plan
in accordance with the recommendations of the 1540
Committee. I would like to highlight the following
priorities of the plan, which are developing and updating
a legal framework; protecting critical facilities;
controlling sensitive transfers, including that of
intangibles, and the protection of transport protection;
establishing intervention and response mechanisms in
case of an incident; and international cooperation.
Global threats require global responses. Spain
has therefore made particular efforts in the area
of international cooperation. First, to the extent
that we are able, we have responded to requests for
assistance channelled through the 1540 Committee.
We have developed cooperation with various friendly
countries for preventing nuclear, radiological, chemical
and biological threats as well as for mitigating the
consequences in case of an incident. As an example, this
year, together with Mexico, we organized a seminar in
Madrid on the various aspects of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in which we had participation
from countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
as well as the support of the Committee’s Group of

38/70

07/05/2014

Experts, the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
We have also intensified our cooperation efforts
through multilateral forums. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize Spain’s coordination efforts during three
years in the technical programme of the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which today includes 85
countries and four international organizations. That
multilateral and bilateral cooperation has also resulted
in an action plan for the prevention of threats relating
to weapons of mass destruction, which we are currently
developing with Morocco, with whom we recently
carried out a joint exercise of response to a terrorist
attack with a radiological impact.
The risks and threats frequently evolve more quickly
than States’ preventive activity can. Moreover, growth
in the peaceful uses of nuclear, radiological, biological
and chemical technologies, materials and installations
increases the possibility that non-State actors, and
terrorist organizations in particular, can gain access
to such materials and installations and commit crimes,
factors that might facilitate attacks with a huge impact
that could result in serious human and material damage.
One example is the vulnerability of certain critical
facilities where, whether through conventional means
or cyber systems, a terrorist group could cause incidents
with serious consequences, including radioactive,
chemical or biological impacts. Therefore, the security
concepts that gave rise to resolution 1540 (2004) should
be continually updated through the introduction of such
elements as the protection of critical facilities against
terrorist attacks, biosecurity and cybersecurity.
Resolution 1540 (2004) represented a historic
initiative in the international community’s commitment
to combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and fighting terrorism. In that regard,
the tenth anniversary is also a unique opportunity to
reaffirm its principles and goals. Today, therefore,
Spain wishes to express its commitment to those
principles and goals, as well as to reaffirm its readiness
to develop dialogue, joint efforts and cooperation with
other countries and international organizations in order
to confront our global security challenges decisively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Aware of the danger that the mere existence of weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, poses

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to all humankind, Cuba remains firmly in favour
of their prohibition and elimination. For Cuba, the
prohibition and total elimination of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons is the only way to ensure their
non-proliferation and to prevent them from falling into
the hands of terrorists or from being used by accident
or mistake.
Cuba does not possess or intends to possess any
weapons of mass destruction of any kind, and possessing
them has never formed part of our national defence
strategy. In Cuba, all programmes related to the nuclear,
chemical and biological fields have always been strictly
peaceful in nature and their benefits have been used
solely for the welfare of the Cuban people and their
socioeconomic development. All such programmes are
continually and rigorously monitored by the relevant
national authorities and subject to supervision by the
competent international entities.
Cuba rejects the selective focus and double
standards that some countries attempt to impose
in addressing issues related to disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control and their connection
to the threat of terrorism. This focus promotes measures
against horizontal proliferation while ignoring vertical
proliferation — that is, the improvement of nuclear
weapons by States that possess nuclear weapons.
It also ignores the goal of the total elimination of
weapons of mass destruction. For its part, Cuba has
an impeccable record in the fight against terrorism
and has never allowed, and never will allow, terrorist
acts against any country to be conducted, planned or
financed on Cuban territory. Cuba is a party to 16 of the
existing international conventions on terrorism and has
complied strictly with its obligations under resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and other
related Security Council resolutions.
We reiterate our absolute rejection of all terrorist
actions, methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations by anybody, against anybody and
wherever they are committed, whatever their motives
may be, including those actions in which States are
directly or indirectly involved. We also condemn any
action aimed at encouraging, supporting, financing or
concealing any terrorist actions, methods or practices.
We believe that the international community
should not accept that, under the banner of an alleged
fight against terrorism, certain States commit acts of
aggression and interfere in the internal affairs of other
States, execute or permit gross violations of human

S/PV.7169

rights and international humanitarian law or commit
unilateral actions that are contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles and norms of
international law.
We vehemently reject the arbitrary and
unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba on the annual list of
the State Department of the United States on so-called
State sponsors of international terrorism, which was
issued on 30 April. That absurd designation reflects
the manipulation of the highly sensitive issue of
international terrorism to make it an instrument of the
policy against Cuba. We demand that our country be
permanently excluded from that spurious, unilateral
and illegitimate list, which violates the principles of
international law, is an offense to the Cuban people and
discredits the United States Government.
International cooperation by all States in the
framework of the United Nations and the relevant
international treaties is the way to deal with the use of
weapons of mass destruction by terrorists. In particular,
the General Assembly, as the most democratic
and representative organ of the Organization, is
the appropriate body to comprehensively address
that threat, without double standards and with true
international cooperation in that area on the basis of
mutual respect, sovereign equality and the principles
and norms of international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations.
We reiterate the position of the Cuban Government
against weapons of mass destruction and with regard
to the prevention and confrontation of international
terrorism. As a demonstration of our Government’s
commitment to that issue, Cuba will soon submit to the
Security Council a new compliance report on resolution
1540 (2004).
I conclude by urging all delegations to actively
celebrate the International Day for the Total Elimination
of Nuclear Weapons on 26 September.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to congratulate you,
Sir, on your presidency of the Council for this month
and I wish you every success in your work. I am also
pleased to express my appreciation to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for her
leadership of the Council last month.

14-3237339/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

For more than 60 years, the entire world has relied
on the Charter of the United Nations and the Security
Council as instruments of the international community
to ensure peace and security in the world. The Security
Council was given the mandate to implement that
crucial role, and today we are trying to carry out to
nuclear disarmament and the elimination of all weapons
of mass destruction.
Saudi Arabia has made great strides in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). With a view to strengthening
cooperation at the regional and international levels to
maintain peace and security in the area of disarmament,
the resolution aims at preventing non-State actors from
manufacturing, possessing, developing, transferring,
transforming or using weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) through national legislation and foreign
policy.
Saudi Arabia was one of the first countries to adopt
international resolutions on nuclear disarmament,
including resolution 1540 (2004). It has paid special
attention to developing an infrastructure for nuclear
security and to training in the area of human resources.
It established an academic programme on nuclear
science and organized an international workshop on
resolution 1540 (2004) in Riyadh in January 2011, with
a view to raising awareness of the resolution through
the participation of many delegations from countries in
the region.
In 2012, Saudi Arabia contributed $500,000 to
help the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) fulfil its mandate.
Three different events were organized in cooperation
with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Nations
University and the 1540 Committee. Many officials
from countries, universities and specialized institutes
participated in those events to raise awareness of
the work of the 1540 Committee and its impact on
international peace and security. Your own delegation,
Mr. President, had a very important role in the success
of those events, since it was Chair of the Committee at
that time.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has clearly
demonstrated its international commitment to resolution
1540 (2004) by acceding to international conventions
and treaties on WMDs, nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, as well as to the 1925 Geneva Protocol on
toxic gases. That reflects Saudi Arabia’s commitment
to support international efforts to eliminate WMDs for
the achievement of international peace and security.
40/70

07/05/2014

Saudi Arabia has announced its intention to
develop an ambitious programme to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes to achieve the sustainable
development goals and preserve the hydrocarbon
resources for the coming generations. That programme
is completely in line with the nuclear security
requirements and use the guidelines of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the planning, establishment
and operational stages. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
is committed to the establishment of an international
monitoring system to control nuclear material. We
make every effort to control our borders, customs and
all law enforcement agencies to stop any illegal trade in
those materials.
We reiterate that nuclear security strategies must
be cooperative and based on mutual confidence. They
must not obstruct peaceful nuclear programmes around
the world. We would also like to reiterate the legitimate
right of all countries to possess nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes, in accordance with the guidelines of
the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia emphasizes the
importance of the efforts to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the need for the
international community to adopt similar measures
through legal frameworks to achieve a world free
of terrorism and nuclear weapons, especially in the
Middle East. Security and stability in any region cannot
be achieved through weapons of mass destruction.
However, it can be achieved through cooperation
and consultation with other countries, development,
progress and by avoiding a destructive arms race.
Israel’s possession of nuclear weapons therefore
represents a major obstacle to the achievement of
stability and security in the Middle East. We therefore
reiterate our call for the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East, including by inviting Israel’s to
declare its nuclear weapons and submit it nuclear sites
to the supervision of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
Based on our position on the need to rid the Middle
East of nuclear weapons, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
reiterates its regret at the failure to hold the conference
on establishing a zone free of nuclear weapons and
all weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East
scheduled to be held in Helsinki in 2012 because of
Israel’s refusal. Such a conference must be held as soon
as possible in 2014. One single country in the region

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

must not be allowed to spoil the chance for all countries
to live in peace, free of nuclear terror.
Saudi Arabia underscores that the Syrian regime
must remove and destroy all chemical weapons and
materiel and end all relevant activities in implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the resolutions of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We express our concern at the Syrian regime’s failure
to meet its deadlines, most recently on 27 April. It is
unacceptable to use the security situation as a pretext.
Indeed, it should be a reason to accelerate the removal
of such weapons, and not the contrary.
We would like to draw the attention of the
international community and the Council to the fact that
the chemical weapons declared destroyed was based
only on what was declared by the Syrian regime. We
would like to see the Syrian regime held accountable for
all chemical weapons and weapons of mass destruction,
which should be kept in a secure place and must not be
transferred to any other party. It is extremely important
that the international community and Security Council
remain vigilant in that regard.
My Government would like to affirm that eradicating
weapons of mass destruction is the only genuine
guarantee against their use or threatened use. Saudi
Arabia reiterates that the concerns of non-nuclearweapon States must be taken into account through an
international instrument guaranteeing their safety and
stability. We also emphasize that nuclear-weapon States
must eliminate their weapons as soon as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): At the outset, I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his remarks
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004).
It is almost 70 years since the first nuclear-weapon
State in the world emerged, in 1945. International
efforts to build a nuclear-weapon-free world, thereby
creating a peaceful world, have continued unabated.
However, the number of nuclear-weapon States has
increased, standing at nine countries today.
The dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki by the largest nuclear-weapon State,
demonstrating the most brutal and destructive power of

S/PV.7169

such weapons, immediately sparked the proliferation of
such weapons. The overall process of overheated EastWest confrontations during the Cold War also gave rise
to the emergence of new nuclear-weapon States under
the protection and patronage of the largest nuclearweapon State. One such country was Israel, which
emerged as another nuclear-weapon State. On the other
hand, under increasing pressure — torrents of so-called
Security Council sanctions and increasing nuclear
blackmail — countries such as the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea cannot have nuclear weapons even
for the purpose of self-defence.
Recently there has been an increasing tendency
towards nuclear-weapon modernization programmes
and nuclear umbrellas are continuing to open up for
so-called allied countries, with massive build-ups
of nuclear weapons — a trio, by air, sea and ground,
with aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered submarines
and strategic bombers carrying nuclear weapons. That
gives further rise to the fear of the vertical proliferation
of nuclear weapons and increased concern about a
nuclear arms race among nuclear-weapon States. All
of these facts clearly indicate that the mastermind of
nuclear-weapon proliferation is none other than the
largest nuclear-weapon State, the United States. The
propaganda being produced by that country is nothing
but hypocrisy seeking to deceive the world.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
consistent in its opposition to all types of weapons
of mass destruction. We strongly insist that the total
elimination of all existing nuclear weapons in the
world is the only single measure that can guarantee the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
delegation would like to take this opportunity to briefly
draw the Council’s attention to the recent developments
in the situation on the Korean peninsula and to clarify
its position on the nuclear issue on the peninsula.
First, let me turn to the efforts of my Government
with regard to national security and peace. In his 2014
address, Marshall Kim Jung Un, the respected leader
of the entire Korean people, made a warm appeal to
the entire Korean nation to move, at a historic turning
point, towards the reunification of the country and
safeguarding national security and peace. Upholding
the warm appeal of the supreme leadership, the
National Defence Commission of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the supreme governing
body of the country, last January advanced crucial

14-3237341/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

proposals addressed to the South Korean authorities.
Those proposals concerned very important issues.
First, there was the question of suspending all acts
of mutually slandering each other, thereby creating a
better planet and improving North-South relations.
They also concerned the question of suspending all
hostile military acts against each other. In particular,
they referred to suspending the joint military exercises
that were going to be held as planned.
After advancing those crucial proposals, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took unilateral
initial steps by suspending any slander against the other
side. Furthermore, it went ahead with its suspension
of all its military movements along the full length of
the military demarcation line, so that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would not be misinterpreted
as an instigator of provocations or threats, as one
country is continuing to serve as an adversary to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to mislead
the world.
In February, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea made another proposal on holding high-level talks
between the two sides, which were held successfully.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea boldly
accepted the request from the South Korean authorities
to hold reunions for families separated throughout parts
of North and South Korea. Most of those were held
successfully. Those very positive initiatives, although
they were in the initial stages, gave rise to great
expectations and hope among the entire Korean nation
for a broader and greater path towards reconciliation
and the easing of tension in the Korean peninsula. It
was highly welcomed by the international community.
Secondly, there is the question of the United
States response with its increased hostile activities
and policies against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and its increased nuclear programmes. As
I mentioned earlier, there had been positive moves
towards easing tensions. It was only the United States
that instead of encouraging them, totally ignored those
moves and intentionally proceeded to escalate tension
on the Korean peninsula. As soon as we advanced the
crucial proposals, the United States totally rejected the
proposals, declared that there would be no change in
its policy towards the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and stated that the joint nuclear military exercises
would be held as planned.

42/70

07/05/2014

Upon our initiative, the North-South dialogue
was being held. At that time, the United States did
not hesitate to fly strategic bombers carrying nuclear
weapons into South Korea. As the two sides were
holding the separated-family reunions, in an atmosphere
of blood relations and warm feelings after a long time
of separation, the United States went ahead with its
opening of joint military exercises — which was very
dangerous and provocative — pouring cold water on
the positive move towards the easing of tension and
fostering reconciliation on the Korean peninsula. For
two months, from the end of February to the end of
April, the United States held joint military exercises in
South Korea. They brought in a massive arms buildup of all kinds of the most powerful nuclear weapons
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
They held the largest ever joint landing exercises. And
they began joint air-strike exercises, declaring that they
were targeted at so-called Pyongyang occupation.
In addition to that, the United States made gangsterlike advertisements, referring to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as a provocation and a threat.
On the other hand, they were advertising their own
aggressive joint exercises as annual and routine. The
were held on our doorstep in South Korea, far across
the ocean from the United States mainland, threatening
the very security of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. They went so far as to raise the issue of our
legitimate self-defence rocket launches at the Security
Council and to condemn them, which were held on our
land and territorial waters.
The United States still remains quite silent. This
is a very serious issue: the question of South Korea’s
ballistic missile launches with a 500-kilometre range.
Instead of raising the topic of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s legitimate self-defence launches at
the Security Council, The United States has remained
silent until today.
Thirdly, there is the question of the position of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the face of
increasing nuclear blackmail by the United States. I
mentioned earlier the hostile acts of the United States
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. All
those facts clearly indicate that there has been no change
at all. The ambition of the United States Government
has been to eliminate the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea politically, isolating it economically and
annihilating it militarily. On 14 March, the National
Defence Commission of the Democratic People’s

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Republic of Korea issued a statement in the face of the
grave, destructive situation being created intentionally
by the United States.
The President: We would like to remind the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that the speaking time limit for non-members of
the Security Council is four minutes. I think that the
representative has used quite a lot of time. I would ask
him to conclude his statement.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): I will finish in just a few sentences.
As long as the United States maintains more than
1,000 nuclear weapons and continues to increase its
nuclear threats and blackmail against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s already diversified nuclear strike
means will be targeted at the United States.
On 28 April, a spokesperson of the National
Defence Commission of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea again made a statement in the face
of the rumours wildly spread by the United States
Government that it would not recognize or accept the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as a nuclearweapon State, and that therefore the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should abandon nuclear
weapons. Again, the spokesperson made it very clear
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did not
make nuclear weapons to be recognized by the United
States nor, did it make nuclear weapons to be approved
by the United States.
I will finish soon.
The President: If you have not finished and you
have more remarks, you can circulate your written
statement. You have actually used up your time limit of
four minutes. Could you conclude in 10 seconds?
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Annually, on the grounds of it being “annual
and routine”, the United States continues to hold joint
military exercises. This August, the United States is
going to hold another very dangerous and provocative
joint military exercise.
I am finishing. This is the last sentence.
The President: Your 10 seconds have elapsed.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): The self-defence missile launch and military

S/PV.7169

nuclear tests of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea for the same purpose will become annual.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
delegation of the Republic of Korea for convening this
important meeting today.
Ukraine welcomes the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the forthcoming 2016
comprehensive review as important milestones and as
opportunities to identify realistic goals for the future.
Ukraine attaches great importance to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and the
subsequent resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).
We participate actively in projects to advance the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
In March 2013, Ukraine approved the concept of
combating terrorism, including nuclear terrorism.
Measures to respond to the threat of terrorism are being
implemented on a permanent basis. Nine anti-terrorist
exercises have been carried out.
A State plan has been approved that provides for
interaction among central and local authorities in the
event acts of sabotage involving nuclear facilities,
nuclear materials and other sources of ionizing radiation
during their use, storage or transportation, as well as on
nuclear waste in the process of treatment.
A common tactical and special training session was
held to test the capabilities involved in ensuring the
physical security and anti-terrorist security of nuclear
power plants in Ukraine.
In October 2013, Kyiv hosted a joint training
session on combating acts of nuclear terrorism for
law enforcement officials and other central authorities
of Ukraine and Belarus, aimed at improving the
professional abilities and skills of relevant experts in
nuclear and radiological terrorism resistance.
The work is ongoing, with the goal of enhancing
the efficiency of radiation monitoring systems along
Ukraine’s national borders. At the beginning of 2014,
such systems had been installed at 57 checkpoints.
Eventually, there are plans for their installation at 150
checkpoints. The use of mobile radiation-monitoring
systems that provide monitoring of “green borders” is
also being expanded. In June 2013, Kyiv held a meeting
of the interagency expert working group on countering

14-3237343/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the threat of the proliferation of weapons and materials
of mass destruction and related terrorist threats and on
protecting State infrastructure critical to supporting
life.
International and regional cooperation among States
is a crucial step towards achieving the key objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). That is why, in November 2013,
in Kyiv, the Government of Ukraine, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the Conflict Prevention Centre of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, held a regional
workshop on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The resolution is an international legally binding
instrument that addresses the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and that has played a crucial role in
global and regional non-proliferation efforts.
I would like to underline that the existing global
non-proliferation regime is based on the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Ukraine
became a member of the Treaty 20 years ago. Since
then, Ukraine has been thoroughly implementing all
the provisions of that document. Moreover, Ukraine
has undertaken and successfully fulfilled additional
obligations within the Nuclear Security Summit
framework by eliminating all its stockpiles of highly
enriched uranium.
Ukraine’s decision to remove all nuclear weapons
from its territory and to accede to the NPT as a
non-nuclear-weapon State was adopted under strict
conditions. In the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, the
United States of America, the Russian Federation and
the United Kingdom not only welcomed Ukraine’s
actions, but also established their commitment to
respect the independence, sovereignty and existing
borders of Ukraine.
The Russian Federation’s deliberate aggression
against Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea, as well
as its support for the separatist groups operating in the
eastern regions of Ukraine, has provoked an imbalance
in the existing international security system. Today
we have a situation where the Russian Federation is
undermining the NPT regime not only by violating
the Budapest Memorandum but also by violating the
Non-Proliferation Treaty itself. At the same time,
Ukraine considers the NPT a cornerstone of the
global non-proliferation regime and an essential basis
for achieving the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
My country commends the efforts of States that have
reaffirmed their commitment to guarantee the territorial
44/70

07/05/2014

integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine and counts on
their support and engagement for those commitments
to be further fulfilled. We still count on their support,
because my country will never agree to recognize the
deliberate annexation of a part of its territory by the
Russian Federation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this very relevant
meeting on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), which is a vital component of
the global security architecture. My delegation would
like to register its deep appreciation for the efforts made
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) under your chairmanship, Madam, as well
as that of your predecessors.
The 10-year extension of the Committee’s
mandate until 2021 has effectively led to a permanent,
institutionalized 1540 Committee. Yet much more
needs to be done. To start with, steps must be taken to
encourage United Nations States Members to accurately
comply with resolution 1540 (2004) in a timely manner
by adopting national legislation, in conjunction with
other legal instruments and mechanisms such as the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Proliferation Security Initiative, which is also known
as the Krakow Initiative. The key is to intensify efforts
to promote full implementation through outreach,
dialogue, assistance and cooperation by leveraging
the capabilities and experience of international
organizations and regional bodies. We will need to
address such institutional challenges as the timely
submission of State reports in order to regularize the
flow of information to the Committee, the provision
of feedback to interested States and the collection and
dissemination of best implementation practices. We
must also coordinate the efforts of the 1540 Committee
and the Group of Experts and build relationships with
the relevant organizations and partners.
All those steps will help to develop transparency
and political will with respect to internal issues,
institutional capacity and the availability of resources.
Resolution 1977 (2011) goes a considerable distance in
bridging that gap. Those goals must be accomplished
with the understanding that the Committee is a
subsidiary body of the Security Council, and not the
secretariat of an international treaty organization.

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

For its part, Kazakhstan has been actively engaged
in several initiatives. The decisions of the three Nuclear
Security Summits are being seriously implemented. My
country proposes that the cycle be extended beyond
2016. Kazakhstan is willing to convene such a summit
in 2020.
We seek to support the Department of Nuclear
Safety and Security of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which has a special role to play in
assisting countries with the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. To further the cause of non-proliferation, my
country will shortly host the IAEA international lowenriched uranium fuel bank, under the supervision of the
IAEA, negotiations for which are nearing completion.
We will also convert high-enriched uranium reactors
to low-enriched fuel, establish a regional nuclear
security training centre and strengthen its emergency
preparedness, response and mitigation capabilities.
As indicated, regional organizations and
institutions also play a pivotal role. For that reason,
Kazakhstan has cooperated actively in the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Commonwealth of Independent States and
OSCE countries. In particular, the States parties to
the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia are focused on strengthening nuclear safety and
resolution 1540 (2004). Two workshops were hosted by
my country, in Astana in 2011 and 2014, to enhance
cooperation in preventing illicit trafficking in nuclear
materials and to combat nuclear terrorism in our region.
Kazakhstan is the larger producer and supplier
of uranium, and therefore introduced the 2007
Export Control Act, which follows the most stringent
international standards. We are strictly committed
to implementing all Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is one of the priorities of our
non-proliferation policy. We have joined virtually all
global treaties and conventions related to combating
weapons of mass destruction, and also acceded to
all 13 universal international conventions against
terrorism.
My country is a member of the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, the International Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation and the Zangger
Committee. While awaiting accession to the Australia
Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime and the
Wassenaar Arrangement, Kazakhstan is unilaterally
committed to implementing the demands and regimes
of those bodies.

S/PV.7169

Kazakhstan is fully committed to joining the
international effort in strengthening the work of the
1540 Committee.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to start by
thanking you personally, Madam President, for the
patience that you showed towards the representative of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. One can
understand that someone such as him who is usually
deprived of speaking about anything in his own country
is sorely taking advantage of the opportunity to speak
freely and at great length. It is too bad that it is at our
own expense.
I wish to commend you, Madam President, on your
able stewardship of the Security Council this month and
for holding this important debate.
Yesterday, Israel celebrated its sixty-sixth
anniversary. Across the country, there were parties
and picnics, fireworks and festivities. Amid the joy
and celebration, the day was touched by sadness
because, right before celebrating Independence Day,
Israel observes Memorial Day. For 60 seconds a siren
wails across the entire country. Cars racing down the
highway slow to a halt, and drivers step out onto the
road. Children pause their games and fall silent. Men
and women stop working and stand at attention. Where
else in the world does an entire nation stop everything
to remember its fallen heroes? In Israel, we bow our
heads and pay tribute to the people who enabled us to
live freely in a democratic country.
In its 66 years of history, Israel has not known a
single day in which it has not fought for its survival. In
Israel, every child grows up with armed guards outside
his school. Every home has an emergency bunker.
Almost every family is bereaved, having lost a loved
one to terrorism or war. For the 8 million citizens of
Israel, that abnormality is the reality.
Ten years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1540
(2004) to enforce measures against the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery to terrorists. Yet it is clear that a great
deal more must be done to stem the flow of weapons,
particularly in the Middle East.
Earlier this year, a shipment of advanced rockets
was loaded onto a plane in Damascus and flown to
Tehran. From there they were transported over land

14-3237345/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas and loaded onto
a civilian vessel, the KLOS-C. From the outside, it
looked like an ordinary cargo vessel but the KLOS-C
was not carrying parcels for UPS. It was operating as
T.P.S. — the Terrorists’ Proliferation Ship.
The KLOS-C set a course towards Port Sudan, a
transit point in a weapons supply route used by Iran to
move arms to the Gaza Strip. On 5 March, the Israeli
Defense Forces intercepted the ship in the southern
Red Sea. Our forces discovered tens of thousands
of munitions and tons of sophisticated rockets. The
advanced weapons onboard the ship would have placed
millions of Israelis in the crosshairs of terrorists.
This is not the first time that Iran — the world’s
leading State sponsor of terrorism — has been caught
red-handed. In 2002, the Karine-A was intercepted
while carrying 50 tons of Iranian weapons. In 2009, the
Israeli Navy seized the MV Francop carrying hundreds
of tons of weapons bound for the Hizbullah terrorist
organization. And in 2011, the MV Victoria was caught
carrying illicit arms destined for terrorists in the Gaza
Strip.
The KLOS-C was a close call and a reminder that
each and every day, illegal arms are being smuggled
across the sea, over land and through the skies. In the
Middle East, radical groups are taking advantage of that
instability to learn about the ABC of terrorism — atomic,
biological and chemical weapons.
In Syria, they learn from the dictator in Damascus,
who sees no problem in dropping barrel bombs packed
with explosives, shrapnel and chlorine on homes,
hospitals and markets. For years, Al-Assad and his
regime denied having chemical weapons, I remind
all members. In its reports to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Syria declared that “the Syrian Arab Republic
is a State that neither possesses nor intends to acquire
WMD [weapons of mass destruction], their means of
delivery or related materials”.
As Sherlock Holmes said, there is nothing more
deceptive than an obvious fact. And the obvious fact
is that Syria is deceiving us. It is a regime that lies in
bed with Iran and sees no problem with lying to the
international community.
It is not enough to take Syria at its word when it
says that it is complying with the elimination of its
chemical weapons. We must verify and validate the

46/70

07/05/2014

situation on the ground. The failure to do so could have
deadly consequences if Syria’s stockpiles were to fall
into the hands of terrorist groups such as Hizbullah.
Just as it is with one’s family, we do not get to
choose our neighbours on the map. Israel finds itself
in one of the most hostile parts of the world and so,
out of necessity, we have become leaders in combating
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.
In addition to developing state-of-the-art
technologies and tools, Israel has instituted significant
legal measures to fight terrorism. Israel is party to the
core universal instruments on counter-terrorism, fully
implements resolution 1373 (2001) and has enacted
legislation to reduce threats against our citizens.
The Israeli export control legislation restricts the
goods and technologies that can be used by non-State
actors, States supporting terrorism and other countries
of concern in the manufacture, development and use
of WMDs and their means of delivery. That legislation
incorporates lists of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Australia Group and the Missile Technology Control
Regime.
Not long ago, Israel joined the handful of countries
that ratified the 2005 amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. That is in
addition to having signed the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Israel has a policy of supporting efforts to promote the
universality of those two important conventions.
In addition, we are closely engaged in
non-proliferation initiatives, such as the Global
Threat Reduction Initiative and Proliferation Security
Initiative. Israel is also sharing its unique expertise with
other nations. From the plains of Africa to the jungles
of Central America, Israeli experts have contributed
their knowledge on a range of issues — from terrorist
financing and forensic investigation to aviation security
and border protection.
As we speak, smugglers are transporting cargoes
loaded with rockets, missiles and explosives across the
Middle East. One of those rockets could spark the next
major conflict. One of those missiles could trigger the
next terror attack. One of those shipments could carry
a dirty bomb.
Winston Churchill said,

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

“One ought never to turn one’s back on a threatened
danger and try to run away from it. If you do that,
you will double the danger.”
The world is more dangerous than ever before. From
smartphones to smart bombs, technology has made it
easier for terrorists to inflict mass destruction. Each of
us is an eyewitness to this danger, and we cannot turn
a blind eye when rogue States’ regimes cross red lines.
Resolution 1540 (2004) must be strengthened
with real preventative measures, real enforcement
mechanisms and real consequences for terrorists and
rogue regimes. In conclusion, if we work together,
we can ensure that the world’s most dangerous people
never acquire the world’s most dangerous weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
appreciates the initiative of the Republic of Korea to
convene this debate and welcomes the participation of
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of that country.
In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), Mexico has derived great satisfaction from the
fact that, throughout this decade, the Security Council
has promoted measures to prevent the manufacture,
acquisition, possession, development, transport,
transfer and use of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their delivery systems by non-State actors.
My country’s Government reaffirms its commitment
to the resolution and emphasizes its importance as a
crucial mechanism for coordinating the efforts of the
international community to face the challenges of the
non-proliferation regime, in particular by preventing
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction.
Successfully combatting that threat requires the
implementation of the commitments and obligations
undertaken in existing international instruments. We
reiterate that non-proliferation and disarmament are
complementary and mutually reinforcing processes
that require balanced and parallel progress. The best
formula for non-proliferation is the prohibition and
elimination of weapons of mass destruction.
Mexico has fulfilled all its commitments on
nuclear security, radiological security and the physical
protection of nuclear material. We have undertaken a
strategy to promote the ongoing strengthening of the
system of export controls and controls for the transfer

S/PV.7169

of technologies, equipment and materials that could be
used in the production of weapons of mass destruction,
and we support the strengthening of the strategic
control of international trade in dual-use goods and
technology. Those measures have led Mexico to
join three multilateral export control regimes: the
Wassenaar Arrangement, the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Australia Group.
At the international level, Mexico cooperates with
international organizations and other countries to
undertake efforts focused on expanding its capacity in
this area and in the field of atomic energy. We have
controls for radioactive sources aimed at ensuring
regulatory verification for such sources in compliance
with the International Atomic Energy Agency’s Code
of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive
Sources. These examples demonstrate that the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) is contributing to the reconfiguration process
that the global cooperation architecture is undergoing,
with a focus on inclusion. States parties are potential
providers and recipients of such cooperation.
The trade in strategic goods involves a certain
risk of the proliferation of conventional weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. Governments must
establish effective controls and restrictions on the
transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use
items or technology, and ensure that such laws and
procedures are compatible with the obligations arising
from international treaties on disarmament and
non-proliferation.
We believe that it is important that the work of the
1540 Committee universalize the practice of submitting
national reports, which are the most important tool for
strengthening transparency and building confidence.
We encourage those nations that have not yet done so to
present such reports as soon as they can.
The Government of Mexico believes that
international cooperation is essential for resolving
issues of global impact. In line with its tradition of
pacifism, Mexico will continue to work actively on
initiatives that strengthen the aforementioned regimes
and contribute to a safer world that is based on
international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to congratulate the Minister for

14-3237347/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, in his capacity
as President of the Council, for having organized this
open debate. We also wish to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria for the distinguished manner
in which she led the Council’s work last month.
My delegation welcomes the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) adopted on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004). Iraq has acceded to all international treaties
and conventions on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and has voted in favour of all the
relevant international resolutions. On more than one
occasion, we have expressed our support for efforts
to strengthen the universality of those international
instruments and their implementation in order to realize
the objectives for which they were promulgated. Iraq
welcomed the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) by the
Security Council and considers it an effective tool for
strengthening international measures to deal with one
of the major threats facing the international community,
and for preventing weapons of mass destruction from
finding their way into the hands of non-State actors and
terrorist groups.
At this juncture, I would like to reiterate Iraq’s
respect for and total commitment to the international
treaties and conventions in accordance with paragraph
1 (e) of article 9 of the Iraqi Constitution, which
stipulates that the Iraqi Government respects and
implements Iraq’s international obligations in the fields
of the non-proliferation, development, production
and use of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons
and related equipment, and prohibits any effort to
develop, manufacture and produce them, including
for related equipment, material, technology or means
of communication. The Government of Iraq has taken
a series of measures and steps, including the adoption
of legislation, to prohibit the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery and to impose
suitable local controls on the relevant materials in order
to prevent the illicit trade in such materials. Over the
past few years, Iraq has enacted several laws aimed
at enforcing the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and combating money-laundering and
terrorism.
I would like to focus on some of the steps my
Government has taken pursuant to its commitment to
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). Most important
is our submission of four national reports for the years
2005, 2006, 2007 and 2013, which included legislative

48/70

07/05/2014

measures and activities for implementing the resolution.
We have submitted one national report that includes
experiences, lessons learned and practices, and another
on cooperation and assistance in implementing the
resolution. Iraq’s national control agency has taken
effective measures to monitor the export and import of
dual-use materials that coordinate with the European
Union’s laws relating to resolution 1373 (2001) regarding
the illegal use of such materials.
My delegation regrets North Korea’s lack of respect
for the decisions of the international community in
continuing its experiments, contrary to international
conventions and agreements.
We have submitted proposals to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with the General Assembly
resolutions entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction”, that
include the following.
First, we should achieve the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004)’s provisions on preventing
non-State actors’ access to weapons of mass
destruction and related materials, and countries
should be encouraged to voluntarily submit additional
information on the steps they have taken or intend to
take.
Secondly, we should work together to devise
international, regional and subregional strategies
aimed at developing joint measures that can contribute
to preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction and related materials, and their use
by terrorists.
Thirdly, Member States should be urged to
strengthen their national efforts, and encouraged to
cooperate among themselves and with regional and
international organizations in strengthening their
national capacities to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and the related materials and technologies needed to
produce them. My delegation is grateful to the United
States of America, Switzerland and the European Union
for organizing training courses aimed at strengthening
Iraqi capacity in the areas of chemical, radioactive,
biological and nuclear security, and border control.
In conclusion, the implementation of international
resolutions on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, including resolution 1540 (2004), requires
that practical measures be taken through the collective
efforts of all members of the international community,
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

not limited to any particular groups, and that developing
States’ ability to build their technical capacities be
improved so they can fulfil their obligations according
to the relevant resolutions. We also wish to thank the
Republic of Korea for taking the initiative to convene
this meeting, which is so important to international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia.
Mr. Och (Mongolia): On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to congratulate you, Madam President, on the
Republic of Korea’s accession to the presidency of the
Council, and to applaud your leadership in organizing
this open debate commemorating the tenth anniversary
of the historic adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). I am
confident that the debate will contribute to our efforts
to realize the global agenda of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
I also wish to express our appreciation to
Mr. Jan Eliasson, the Deputy Secretary-General, for
his statement.
Mongolia welcomes and supports the presidential
statement adopted today by the Security Council
(S/PRST/2014/7). We reaffirm our strong commitment
to contributing to international efforts to ensure the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The potential spread of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery continues to
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Mongolia shares the view that the international
community should redouble its efforts to promote full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We believe that the 2011 extension for 10 years of
the mandate of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) was a significant step in
strengthening its role in facilitating the provision of
technical assistance and in enhancing its cooperation
with the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prevention of
Chemical Weapons. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Committee’s intensified efforts to fulfil
its mandate, including by encouraging universal
implementation through reporting by Member States,
as well as improving mechanisms for sharing effective
practices for strengthening national capabilities for
implementing their commitments.

S/PV.7169

In compliance with paragraph 4 of resolution
1540 (2004), the Government of Mongolia submitted
its initial report in 2005; its second national report,
which provides additional information on measures
undertaken after 2005, was submitted to the Committee
last month.
Mongolia has worked to promote the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by becoming a party to
all the major international frameworks and it continues
to fully implement its obligations under the relevant
multilateral agreements. At the national level, we
have also been taking measures to establish a relevant
domestic monitoring mechanism. That enforces a
series of laws prohibiting any non-State actor from
manufacturing, acquiring, possessing, developing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery,
particularly for terrorist purposes. With a view to
strengthening its legal environment for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), Mongolia has reviewed its
national laws and policies. In that regard, my delegation
wishes to specifically highlight Mongolia’s foreign
policy outlines, renewed and approved by Parliament in
2011, which stipulate that Mongolia shall refrain from
stationing nuclear weapons or any other type of weapon
of mass destruction on its territory.
In addition to this, Mongolia has taken steps to
strengthen its monitoring mechanism for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). In January, Parliament’s
standing committee on security and foreign policy set
up a working group to monitor the implementation of
laws relating to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. The working group has recommended
that its sub-group, made up of representatives from
15 ministries and agencies, intensify efforts to improve
border controls, export and import controls and lawenforcement measures.
My delegation welcomes the continuing outreach
activities designed to promote national implementation
arrangements, including strengthening the close
collaboration of all stakeholders at the international,
regional and subregional levels. As a beneficiary,
Mongolia is grateful to the donor community for its
financial and technical contributions in support of
our activities related to resolution 1540 (2004). We
also note the efforts of the Office for Disarmament
Affairs to assist Member States in implementing their
obligations with respect to the resolution, and we ask
that it continue to do so.

14-3237349/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Despite the progress we have achieved, many
countries still face challenges in maintaining effective
border controls and enforcement mechanisms aimed
at combating illicit trafficking and brokering in items
related to WMDs. Recognizing the need to continue our
concerted efforts to improve our capability to address
the threats posed by weapons of mass destruction,
Mongolia shares the view that the 1540 Committee
should continue its work to further enhance its role as
assistance facilitator to better respond to the needs of
Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I thank the Korean presidency
for organizing this meeting on such a crucial issue and
would like to express my appreciation to Ambassador
Oh Joon for his able chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and their means of delivery constitutes a
vital threat to peace and security and hampers social
and economic development. Located in a region with
particular challenges with respect to proliferation,
Turkey values all initiatives aimed at preventing such
activities. Turkey will continue to support mechanisms
designed to prevent WMDs and their material from
falling into the wrong hands.
In that spirit, Turkey has thus been fully supporting
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
extending the mandate of the Committee. Turkey
possesses the necessary legislation to fully implement
the resolution and is party to all relevant international
instruments and export control regimes to that effect.
To date, Turkey has submitted national reports and
matrices to the Committee on more than one occasion.
Our latest national report and matrix are currently
being updated. Turkey also joined the joint statement
on promoting a full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), at the Nuclear Security Summit
held in the Hague.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a solid and compelling
basis for the universalization of efforts to prevent WMD
proliferation, complementing existing international
treaties and conventions. Over the past decade,
resolution 1540 (2004) has become a key component
of the global security architecture. We welcome the
efforts exerted in the past decade to implement and
raise awareness on resolution 1540 (2004). It is an

50/70

07/05/2014

important achievement that 172 States have submitted
their national reports to the Committee. We hope for a
universal reporting as soon as possible. Turkey would
also like to express its appreciation for the work of the
Panel of Experts.
Robust export controls are crucial to combat
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their means of delivery and all related
technology. Needless to say, effective interagency
coordination and cooperation, as well as timely and
effective intelligence sharing, are very strong elements
in that equation. We also would like to hereby draw
attention to cooperation with industry for more effective
counter-proliferation efforts.
Regimes or systems are as strong as their weakest
links. Resolution 1540 (2004) is being implemented
on an uneven playing field, as States have differing
capacities. We therefore strongly support the full
utilization and strengthening of the assistance and
cooperation mechanisms regarding resolution 1540
(2004), in close coordination with the 1540 Committee,
and upon request. The resolution’s regional and
subregional coordinators can play an important role
in facilitating regional approaches to assisting States.
Therefore options for funding such positions within
international and regional organizations should be
closely examined.
In every part of the world, transit and trans-shipments
are usually the most susceptible rings, in the chain of
export control, to exploitation. Devising realistic and
applicable methods to reinforce transit controls should
continue to remain among our priorities in order to
strengthen export controls. It would, however, be
unfair to levy the whole burden of controlling goods
to transit countries alone. More effective and equitable
burden sharing is needed. We should therefore strongly
highlight the importance of strengthening controls at
the origin.
Terrorism will remain a key challenge to peace
and stability, particularly through its ability to use
asymmetric methods to bypass traditional security
and defence systems. The essence of export control
measures is to prevent transfers of WMD-related
sensitive materials to undesired destinations and
individuals alike, including terrorists.
We welcomed resolution 2118 (2013) on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme
of Syria. We regret, however, the delays in the

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

implementation of the calendar determined by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
As the Secretary-General has reiterated in his various
reports, the situation in Syria only underscores the
importance of expediting the removal of all chemical
weapons from Syria. We are additionally concerned by
reports indicating non-declared WMD capabilities of
the Syrian regime and the use of non-listed chemical
agents for chemical attacks.
We are prepared to listen to all proposals on
enhanced coordination between national export control
and counter-terrorism bodies by creating a broadened
network of information and intelligence sharing
at global and regional levels. We would therefore
encourage cross-reporting on the progress of efforts
and sharing lessons learned at regular intervals in
relevant forums, such as the 1540 Committee and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as the
Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and
Material of Mass Destruction, the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and other international and
regional meetings and events.
Moving forward from a decade of awarenessraising to a decade of full and sustained implementation
will indeed require long-term vision and strategy. We
therefore look forward to the comprehensive review to
be submitted to the Security Council in 2016, pursuant
to resolution 1977 (2011), and stand ready to contribute
in that regard.
I would like to add a few words in response to
one speaker’s statement. Our track record in the fight
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and our commitment to the international mechanisms
to which we have been party is clear. I reject the
baseless allegations arguing otherwise. Needless
to say, we will continue to contribute to the regimes
combatting proliferation in line with our international
commitments and we expect all respectable actors of
the international community to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Republic of Korea and its Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Yun Byung-se, for convening this meeting. I also
thank the Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General,
for his statement.
Resolution 1540 (2004) affirms that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to

S/PV.7169

international peace and security. The Islamic Republic
of Iran, as a State party to all major international
treaties banning weapons of mass destruction, strongly
supports that assertion. As the Secretary-General has
rightly put it, “there are no right hands for these wrong
weapons”. Therefore, the only absolute guarantee
against the threat or use of such weapons is their total
elimination.
Iran firmly believes that every effort should be
made, in accordance with international law, to rid the
world of the menace of those inhumane weapons and
to ensure that such weapons do not fall into the hands
of terrorists and non-State actors. At the same time, we
believe that our efforts to prevent the potential threat
of weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of terrorists should not distract our attention
from the real threat posed by the continued existence
of thousands of nuclear weapons in the stockpiles of
nuclear-weapon States.
The silence of the resolution on the imperative
of disarmament, as well as its failure to acknowledge
the link between non-proliferation and disarmament,
was one of the major deficiencies referred to by some
States, including mine, at the time of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). Those arguments are still
pertinent and valid. Accordingly, in our view the
international community should exert its maximum
efforts for the fulfilment by States of their legal
obligations and commitments under treaties on
weapons of mass destruction, in particular the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
In that context, utmost attention should be paid to
the universality of such treaties, in particular in such
a volatile region as the Middle East, where the nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction in the hands
of the Israeli regime not only continue to threaten
neighbouring and other States, but have so far thwarted
all efforts towards the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear and all other weapons of mass
destruction.
We strongly share the view that, while the Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, it has no right
to assume the role of prescribing legislative action
by Member States, since this is in conflict with the
political sovereignty of States and the independence
of their legislative powers at the national level. We
also continue to strongly support the view that there
is a clear conflict between the Council’s adoption of

14-3237351/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

resolution 1540 (2004) and the power and functions of
the General Assembly in the progressive development
and codification of international law.
Likewise, we believe that issues related to
preventing terrorist groups from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction should be addressed by the General
Assembly in an inclusive and transparent manner, based
on consensus. We firmly believe that, as recognized
in existing international treaties on weapons of
mass destruction, efforts to prevent access to such
weapons should not hamper, in any way, international
cooperation to promote the use of materials, equipment
and technology for peaceful purposes. This inalienable
right of States cannot and should not be compromised
under any circumstances.
As a State party to major international treaties on
weapons of mass destruction, the Islamic Republic of
Iran is fully committed to the objective of the total
elimination of all such weapons. Iran has enforced
crucial laws and regulations to prevent the access
of terrorist groups to such materials, equipment or
technologies, as stipulated in the resolution. Iran has
submitted reports required by resolution 1540 (2004)
and continues to support relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.
In response to the unfounded allegations made
against my country by the representative of the
Israeli regime, while I categorically reject all of those
allegations, I would like to bring to the attention of the
Council the fact that, over the past 65 years, the Israeli
regime has waged more than 10 wars in the region. It
has aggressed all of its neighbours without exception
and attacked several other countries of the region. It is
the only country in the region that possesses all types
of weapons of mass destruction. It is the only country of
the region not to be party to any of the treaties banning
weapons of mass destruction. It is the only obstacle to
the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction in the region. It
is the only country that refused to participate on the
Helsinki conference on the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East mandated by the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and it
is the only country to have attacked peaceful nuclear
installations in two countries in the region, one of those
attacks being condemned by the Security Council.
The Israeli regime is well known to be responsible
for many acts of State terrorism and cannot and is
52/70

07/05/2014

not eligible to point fingers at others as a tactic for
diverting attention from its extremist and terrorist
policies. Its network of State terrorism has carried out
deadly operations all over the world, amounting to
a long list. To refer to just one very recent example,
innocent Iranian scientists working for the development
of their beloved country were brutally killed before
the terrified eyes of their families by agents of that
regime. They continue to threaten to kill more. The
international community should first and foremost stop
such heinous acts of terrorism supported and sponsored
by that regime, whose representative now attempts to
hide behind the camouflage of unsubstantiated attacks
against others.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam, for having convened this
open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction — an issue of great importance for
all Member States, including the Kyrgyz Republic. We
welcome the statement by the President of the Security
Council adopted this morning (S/PRST/2014/7) on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004).
The commitment to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is a fundamental principle
of the foreign and domestic policy of my country.
Kyrgyzstan does not possess nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons or their means of delivery. It
undertakes effective measures to bolster the national
export control regime and to strengthen oversight and
monitoring of the flow of materials and equipment
used in the development and manufacture of weapons
of mass destruction.
Kyrgyzstan has ratified the primary international
agreements on non-proliferation and regards international
safeguards and the physical protection of nuclear
materials and facilities as the first line of defence
against nuclear terrorism. The Kyrgyz Republic also
supports efforts to strengthen the Convention on
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material in order to
address the proliferation challenges posed by non-State
actors. We welcome the practical measures identified
in the communiqués of the 2010, 2012 and 2014 Nuclear
Security Summits. Fully recognizing the dangers
that the possession of weapons of mass destruction
by terrorist groups would pose, the Kyrgyz Republic

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

signed the International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is an international legal and
political instrument of great significance that has the
real potential to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. The Kyrgyz Republic is taking
consistent measures to effectively implement it. My
country is among the 172 Member States that have
presented their implementation reports so far. Pursuant
to paragraph four of the resolution, Kyrgyzstan has
submitted its initial report and additional information
three times, in 2004, 2006 and 2008.
Furthermore, on 2 April 2013, the Kyrgyz Republic
submitted its national plan of action on implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The plan was developed
by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic with
the support of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. Civil society
also played an active role in preparing the plan. It
includes specific measures and concrete actions for
the implementation the resolution and identifies the
State agencies responsible for implementing them in a
specific timeframe.
I would like to underline that the national action
plan was developed on the basis of the idea that countries
with the appropriate capacities may provide assistance
to other States that need help in implementing the
resolution. In this regard, Kyrgyzstan has submitted
to the 1540 Committee a request for technical and
financial assistance. I take this opportunity to thank
those countries and organizations that have offered
their assistance in implementing the national action
plan and express our readiness for further cooperation
in this sphere.
One of the most promising approaches to
disarmament and non-proliferation is the creation
of nuclear-weapon-free zones. The Kyrgyz Republic
takes pride in the entry into force in 2009 of the Treaty
on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia.
Kyrgyzstan, as the depositary country of the Treaty,
welcomes the signing by the nuclear-weapon States
of the protocol on negative security assurances. We
call for its early ratification by the nuclear five. It will
mark an important milestone for strengthening both
regional security in Central Asia and the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime.

S/PV.7169

Kyrgyzstan attaches great importance to the
issue of mitigating the environmental consequences
of uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle
activities in the production of nuclear weapons. In
this regard, I would like to refer to General Assembly
resolution 68/218 of December 2013, entitled “The role
of the international community in averting the radiation
threat in Central Asia”. It calls on the international
community to continue the active sharing of experience
and knowledge so as to effectively resolve the problems
of uranium and other radioactive and toxic tailings in
Central Asia.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Kyrgyzstan
supports the full implementation resolution 1540
(2004) and remains firmly committed to the global
non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate. Ten years ago,
resolution 1540 (2004) filled what was then a very
significant gap in multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes — the lack of any coherent
and consistently applied global framework for
preventing humankind’s most destructive weapons from
falling into the hands of non-State actors. At that time,
we hoped that despite the less than ideal circumstances
surrounding its negotiation and adoption, resolution
1540 (2004) would be effective in filling that gap and
that it might do so in a manner sensitive to the differing
circumstances and capacities of individual Member
States. And so we are pleased that, 10 years later, we
can judge resolution 1540 (2004) to be a success.
What, might we ask, has underpinned that success?
The approach of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) has been a critical factor in
overcoming the initial misgivings and concerns that
were held and expressed by many Member States. Its
efforts to engage constructively with Member States on
their capacity needs and to coordinate assistance with
other relevant national capacity-building priorities,
rather than imposing a punitive, one-size-fits-all
approach, should be applauded; so too should its
proactive attempts to capture the synergies between
implementation of the resolution and other development
and capacity-building needs — an approach that has
been particularly important for small States with
limited institutional capacities.

14-3237353/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

But even more significant has been the collective
political will of States to apply considerable effort
and resources to securing existing weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and to place effective controls
on the materials contributing to their manufacture and
use — as, for example, was outlined somewhat earlier
by the representative of Kazakhstan. New Zealand
takes this opportunity to recognize the strenuous efforts
undertaken by some of the smallest States Members of
the United Nations, for which compliance on almost
any issue requires considerable resources and attention.
We have played our own part in those efforts. New
Zealand is one of the 47 countries providing assistance
to others in implementing the requirements of resolution
1540 (2004), both bilaterally and in partnership with
the United Nations and with others. We have put
resources — more than $7 million since 2004 — into
the Group of Eight Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction,
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism,
the Nuclear Security Summits, the Proliferation
Security Initiative and the additional security and
non-proliferation programmes run by the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. New Zealand is also
looking to include a practical resolution 1540 (2004)
implementation component in the tabletop exercise
it will host for Asia-Pacific regional partners in
September 2015, in connection with the Proliferation
Security Initiative.
But it is an understatement to say that challenges
still remain. Last year’s confirmed use of WMDs
against a civilian population in Syria was a stark
reminder of the horrific power of those weapons and
justifies even greater political support to efforts to
prevent their proliferation. We can today say that so far,
our combined efforts appear to have been successful in
keeping such weaponry out of the hands of non-State
actors. That is what resolution 1540 (2004) is all about.
But when it comes to such powerful and horrific
weapons, phrases such as “so far” and “appear to have”
are quite simply not good enough. We cannot afford to
relax our vigilance or our efforts.
Looking forward, the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to be
reported to the Council by the end of 2016, will provide
a very useful stocktaking to help identify where we need
to focus our future efforts. And, given the constantly
evolving nature and scope of all the global and regional

54/70

07/05/2014

WMD proliferation threats that the Committee has to
address, it will be vital to ensure that the Committee’s
priorities and activities remain strictly relevant to those
threats.
But ultimately, only continuing stringent
verification and, as the representative of Mexico
emphasized, the complete elimination of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons will ensure security
for all. New Zealand has long called for the elimination
of all such weapons, and that remains our foremost
objective, as it is, we know, of many other like-minded
countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): With respect,
Madam President, to your presidency of the Council
this month, I will try to speak in Korean.
(spoke in Korean)
(spoke in English)
My delegation feels deep appreciation for the
convening of this meeting marking the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). We pay
tribute to the work of the Republic of Korea in chairing
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We align ourselves with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (EU).
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) 10 years
ago was historic; it was a crucial step in preventing
terrorist groups from gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. To realize that important goal, we all must
work together. Even today, the risk that non-State actors
may acquire nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
is real. Effective multilateralism, strong bilateral
partnerships and robust national implementation are
key to achieving our common aim, namely, to prevent
that from happening.
The Netherlands has taken robust measures to
ensure compliance with resolution 1540 (2004). Those
include effective controls to prevent non-State actors
from developing, acquiring or transferring weapons of
mass destruction. We continue to review our policies.
A good example is the current review of our biosecurity
regime. We intend to present that new regime at the
upcoming Meeting of Experts of the Biological Weapons
Convention. We also take innovative measures to
improve chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
safety. For example, Rotterdam, one of the largest
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

ports in the world, scans all containers for nuclear and
radiological materials, and we share best practices like
those with other countries.
We truly believe in the power of sharing information
and providing assistance to other countries. Therefore
we support other countries in strengthening their legal
and regulatory infrastructure, both on a national basis
and through the EU. We invest in global cooperation
in countering nuclear, chemical and biological threats.
The Netherlands is a strong supporter of effective
multilateral export control regimes and assists other
countries with their implementation. Furthermore,
the Netherlands actively lobbies in favour of making
multilateral treaties truly universal. And of course, my
country and Government hosted the recent Nuclear
Security Summit. We welcome the reference to the
Summit in the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2014/7).
The Nuclear Security Summit two months
ago contributed to higher awareness and better
implementation of nuclear security worldwide, and
thereby promoted the agenda of resolution 1540
(2004). For my country, it is crucial that the results
of the Nuclear Security Summit not be limited to its
participants. Therefore, we actively share the outcomes.
This afternoon, for example, our sherpa presented the
achievements here at United Nations Headquarters to
all Member States.
The Summit resulted in The Hague communiqué,
which was agreed upon by the leaders of the 53
countries and four international organizations that
participated. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon took part.
The participants welcomed the significant contribution
made by the United Nations to strengthening nuclear
security. The participants urged States to fully
implement resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent
resolutions and to continue to report on such efforts on
a regular basis.
The Netherlands is proud to be one of the
33 countries that signed the joint statement on
resolution 1540 (2004) in The Hague. The group, led
by Canada and the Republic of Korea, committed to
fully implementing resolution 1540 (2004). The main
purpose of the group is better implementation, reporting
and providing assistance within the framework of
resolution 1540 (2004). To strengthen the Nuclear
Security Summit process, we also hosted summits for
industry and for the scientific community. The nuclear
industry summit in particular was of great importance,

S/PV.7169

because implementation of nuclear security and control
measures very often must be carried out by industry.
Summing up, inspired by spirit of the Nuclear
Security Summit, the Netherlands would like to set the
bar high for the next 10 years. The focus of our work
should further shift from awareness-raising to effective
implementation. Only together can we achieve the
important objectives of resolution 1540 (2004). The
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to be an
effective partner for both the United Nations and other
Member States in realizing those goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus): The challenge of
addressing threats posed by weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) by ensuring effective non-proliferation is
not simply and maybe not very a technical one. To be
successful, a long-term non-proliferation strategy must
have a solid moral core. The increasing sophistication
of deception mechanisms must be accompanied by a
more sophisticated understanding on the part of leaders
and the public at large of the morally corrosive nature
of weapons of mass destruction and of the unbearable
moral responsibility that goes with their possession.
For as long as weapons of mass destruction
continue to be regarded as a prized and much soughtafter possession and a legitimate entitlement of the
very few to the right to dominate, and not as an evil
that has to be done away with, our technological
advances aimed at stopping the WMD plague on this
planet will never prove to be sufficient. For as long
as we focus our main efforts primarily on managing
the consequences — the proliferation of terrorism and
radicalism in our world — rather than on addressing
their root causes — political, social and economic
injustice — we may as well start preparing ourselves for
commemorating the centenary of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Effective non-proliferation
will not materialize in an environment where everyone
mistrusts everyone and where honouring one’s word is
not considered a virtue.
One may ask: What is this country with the
habitually mispronounced name whose Ambassador
considers himself entitled to preach morality to the
members of the Council? Belarus is a country that,
in the Second World War, became an place of mass
destruction, although by conventional means, and lost
more than one-quarter of its population in the fire

14-3237355/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of war. Belarus is a country that, in 1986, received
three-quarters of the entire radioactive fallout from the
largest civil nuclear disaster in history, the Chernobyl
disaster. Belarus is a country that, by joining the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as a non-nuclear State, became the first State in
the world to renounce voluntarily and without any
preconditions the possession of operational nuclear
weapons deployed on its territory. Belarus is a country
that, since the mid-1990s, has been a lone proponent
for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central and Eastern Europe. Belarus is a country that
for decades has been advocating in the United Nations
the prohibition of development and manufacturing of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons.
It would, of course, be naïve to expect that those
and similar idealistic initiatives and actions alone can
stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
But it would be reckless to dismiss the effect that the
elimination of double standards in world politics and
the relegation to the dustbin of history of the realpolitik
mentality can have on our ability to build a world that
cannot only survive through the balance of mutual
annihilation capability, but that can thrive through the
proliferation of the ideals of peace, good-neighbourly
relations, and the promotion of the rule of law.
Of the many extinction-level events that humankind
may be preparing itself for, the possible use of the
weapons of mass destruction is the only entirely
anthropogenic factor. Unlike climate change or a
dreaded encounter with an asteroid, WMDs do not
provide the excuse of a shadow of doubt — the excuse of
the uncertain and the unmanageable. Not just stopping
the proliferation of WMDs, but getting rid of them
completely is the most serious maturity test humankind
faces.
A hundred awareness-raising and outreach events a
year on resolution 1540 (2004) may be a righteous way
of keeping ourselves busy, but the real breakthrough will
happen when world leaders collectively come to realize
that the truest expression of real power is magnanimity,
that the surest way to influence one’s opponent is to
empathize with him, and that when people talk, great
things happen. It is too bad that the United Nations
summits that we contemplate are unlikely to have much
to do with achieving that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
56/70

07/05/2014

Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I wish to thank the
Republic of Korea for organizing this timely celebratory
meeting and to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your excellent stewardship both today and during your
presidency of the Security Council .
Romania fully aligns itself with the statement made
earlier in this meeting by the observer of the European
Union, but I would also like to underline a few points of
national relevance.
Romania’s policy on promoting non-proliferation
is an important part of its foreign and security policy.
As a State party to the international non-proliferation
regimes, Romania remains committed to contributing
to regional and international security and stability by
fully implementing its non-proliferation commitments
and promoting transparency and responsibility in its
export-control decisions.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is widely recognized as
complementing the multilateral non-proliferation
regimes. Romania co-sponsored it and humanitarian
actively supported its implementation by all States,
including during its chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in
2004 and 2005. We recently reaffirmed our strong
commitment by signing the joint statement on promoting
full and universal implementation of Security Council
Resolution 1540 (2004) at the third Nuclear Security
Summit in The Hague.
A decade after the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), we are encouraged by the steady progress that
Member States have reported in enacting national
measures to implement its provisions. The 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts play an important
role in advancing the implementation of the resolution,
and they need to be supported to continue their
important work ahead.
While there has been progress in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), challenges still remain,
as some Member States continue to need additional
assistance to consolidate their national implementation
capabilities. Implementation remains a long-term
objective that requires continuous interaction and
cooperation among States and between States and the
Committee and its experts. All States in a position to
provide assistance should continue to do so. Romania
has provided technical assistance to countries in our
region to help develop export-control legislation, and
it is willing to continue to do so, upon request. State

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

ownership of the implementation process remains
essential.
The requirements under resolution 1540 (2004) are
too diverse to be addressed by one national authority
only. During the past 10 years, Romania has organized
more than tens of national seminars dedicated to the
implementation of the resolution, in cooperation
with several international and regional organizations
and with the participation of the 1540 Committee
and United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
representatives. The seminars have been attended by
Government experts and representatives of industry
and research institutes.
Romania’s experience has developed and
strengthened as we have adhered to various international
non-proliferation instruments, which has required, inter
alia, enacting national legislation for implementation and
establishing the necessary regulatory infrastructure.
We are ready to share our experience in that regard,
and we have done so recently in the context of several
regional training courses on nuclear security, organized
in cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
In a globalized world, the risk of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction is more often associated
with transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking
and corruption. That reality requires integrated efforts
and approaches to address such risks in a comprehensive
manner, at national, regional and international levels.
Integrated approaches are also necessary given the
scarcity of resources at the national and international
levels to prevent and respond to such risks.
A similar coordinated approach by the 1540
Committee is very welcome. Forging partnerships and
increasing cooperation among the Security Council’s
committees and with international institutions and
organizations will support the further promotion of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In addition,
developing means and ways to better coordinate and
integrate the goals pursued by the resolution, with the
objectives that other assistance-oriented international
structures are following, is most welcome. Ultimately,
the responsibility for implementing resolution 1540
(2004) remains with national Governments, but
better targeted and more coherent and coordinated
support of the international community would have a
significant impact in improving the effectiveness of the
increasingly limited resources with concrete results at
the national level.

S/PV.7169

In conclusion, Madam President, I wish to express
our gratitude for all the efforts by the Republic of Korea
to advance the goals of resolution 1540 (2004), to wish
you great success in your endeavours and to assure you
of Romania’s constant support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting to mark the tenth anniversary of resolution
1540 (2004). This open debate provides an excellent
opportunity to review the ground covered over the
past decade since the adoption of this landmark
resolution, to assess achievements and remaining
gaps in implementation and to reiterate our collective
commitment to the promotion of the goals of the
resolution.
We welcome the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) as an outcome of today’s meeting.
In many parts of the world, including the South
Caucasus, the direct relevance of resolution 1540 (2004)
is obvious. Any region affected by armed conflict,
aggression, foreign military occupation, violent
extremism, terrorism and transnational organized
crime can easily become a proliferation-prone area,
where non-State actors may seek to exploit State
vulnerabilities in order to benefit from the prevailing
impunity for apparent violations of international law.
The accumulation of large quantities of armaments
and munitions in areas beyond international control
and the risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and related materials falling into
the hands of non-State actors pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. We are also concerned
by the existence of an outdated nuclear facility in our
neighborhood and erroneous State policies in the sphere
of nuclear safety and security, which pose a potential
threat for the whole region and beyond.
Therefore, the national security concept and the
maritime security strategy of Azerbaijan define the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction as one of
the key challenges to national security. Countering that
menace is also among the priority areas of Azerbaijan’s
bilateral relations and international cooperation.
Azerbaijan has always been a staunch supporter
of a world free from weapons of mass destruction,
including through the universalization of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the

14-3237357/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

establishment of WMD-free zones throughout the
world. Aside from being a party to relevant international
legal instruments, including the Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Materials, my country also participates in various
multilateral initiatives, such as the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
At the national level, Azerbaijan makes all
necessary efforts to maintain an effective exportcontrol system in order to prevent illegal activities
relating to arms, military and dual-use goods, including
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials. Azerbaijan’s
export-control system takes full account of our
international legal obligations, including those under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Moreover,
the relevant State agencies in Azerbaijan constantly
enhance their counter-proliferation capacities and
physical protection measures and improve inter-agency
cooperation to strengthen control over related materials.
My country has hosted a number of national and
international events on the effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) in cooperation with various
intergovernmental organizations, including training
sessions and workshops for law-enforcement agencies.
At a time when challenges to international
peace and security remain unabated, more concerted
action and greater synergy are required at all levels.
By striving to implement their national obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004), Member States would
contribute significantly to global non-proliferation
efforts. Likewise, there is still an acute need for
increased international assistance, including from the
United Nations, to help individual member States fulfil
the requirements of the resolution.
I would therefore like to stress the particular
importance of the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We take note of
the Committee’s review of the implementation of the
resolution in 2013. We welcome its recommendations to
facilitate Member States fulfilment of their obligations
and we encourage the Committee to continue its
valuable assistance to them.

07/05/2014

convening this important open debate on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004).
My country has aligned itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union; nonetheless,
I would like to make a few additional remarks.
Serbia shares the conviction that the risks from
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery, including the growing danger
that non-State actors, especially terrorist groups and
individuals, might acquire such weapons, present the
greatest challenge to international peace and security
today. Resolution 1540 (2004) continues to be one of
the most important international documents related
to combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. The fact that it
presents some 200 new obligations and recommendations
to Member States is telling evidence of its relevance
and importance, as well as of the need to take concrete
and effective measures for its implementation. Since
its adoption, in 2004, a very small number of countries
have adopted their own national action plans, which
proves that we still face considerable difficulties and
challenges in the implementation of the resolution.
My country continues to attach great importance
to the fulfilment of its obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) and has pursued numerous activities
with the aim of improving its legislation, standards
and practices in that regard. In April 2012, the
Government of Serbia adopted a national action plan
for the implementation of the resolution covering the
period 2012 to 2016, becoming the first country in the
wider region to do so. The document was drafted in
cooperation with the experts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Representatives of all relevant ministries and
Government agencies took part in its preparation. Our
experience throughout the process was very positive.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.

On the basis of our national action plan, also in
2012, the Government of Serbia decided to set up a
working group to oversee the plan’s implementation
and appointed its members and chair. The working
group has completed the first stage of its tasks related
to the preparation, adoption and initial work on the
implementation of the provisions of the plan.

Mrs. Lalic Smajevic (Serbia): First of all, I would
like to thank the presidency of the Republic of Korea for

Notwithstanding the relatively short period of time
that Serbia has had at its disposal for the establishment

58/70

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of implementation instruments, it has achieved several
significant results. On 30 April 2013, my country
regulated its status within the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, thereby becoming the forty-ninth member of
that prestigious international control regime. Also
in 2013, we adopted a new law on the export control
of dual-use goods and completed the drafting of two
new laws, on the export control of arms and military
equipment and on the implementation of international
restrictive measures. In addition, significant progress
has been made in the preparations for ratification of
the Additional Protocol and the amendments to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. They are expected to be ratified soon.
Furthermore, my country has completed its work on the
elaboration of the matrix to resolution 1540 (2004), and
will presently deliver it to the 1540 Committee. Finally,
Serbia took an active part in the latest OSCE meeting
held in Vienna, on 10 April 2013, which was organized
in close cooperation with the 1540 Committee. At the
meeting, we presented our experience, as well as the
lessons learned in the process of the adoption of the
national action plan and the activities embarked upon
in the process of its implementation.
The regional approach is another important
contributive factor in the coordination and
harmonization of these activities. From 9 to 10 May
2013, Serbia hosted the first regional workshop on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It was the
first such event in that part of Europe. The workshop
adopted informal recommendations, with a focus on
topics considered to be the priorities for the countries
of the region.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Madam President,
that my country will continue to closely cooperate
with the 1540 Committee and to further improve its
administrative and regulatory frameworks for the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
resolution and the relevant physical and technical
safeguard standards. I would also like to point out that,
based on its own experience, Serbia believes that all
countries should make every effort to adopt their own
national action plans. Encouraging them to do so is one
of our priorities. For its part, Serbia is willing to share
the lessons it has learned and the experience gained in
that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

S/PV.7169

Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Allow me, first, to
congratulate the Republic of Korea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
you, Madam President, for convening and organizing
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing to the Security
Council today.
I would like to align my statement with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union earlier
this morning. In my national capacity I would like to
make a few points that are particularly important to
Slovenia.
Slovenia is a staunch supporter of resolution 1540
(2004), its effective implementation and the follow-up to
resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008). From the very
beginning, my country has supported the objective of
strengthening global efforts to prevent the acquisition
and use by non-State actors of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons and materials, as well as their
means of delivery. Slovenia has adopted the necessary
legislation, established an effective national control
system and engaged in regional and global endeavours.
We note with satisfaction that, after 10 years,
resolution 1540 (2004) is a success story. Much has been
achieved over that period. Hundreds of projects have
been launched and many Member States in need have
been assisted. Today, the world is better equipped to
counter the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors. I would especially like to commend
Ambassador Oh Joon of the Republic of Korea for
effectively chairing the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). Furthermore, I would like to
commend all Committee members and experts for their
work. Slovenia is pleased to note that 172 countries
report on the implementation of the resolution. However,
we should not be complacent. We should strive for
universal reporting and urge the remaining States
to submit their reports to the Committee as soon as
possible. Reporting lies at the heart of all international
instruments and demonstrates their efficiency and
health. The same applies to resolution 1540 (2004).
Let me also credit international efforts to
strengthen export control. Such efforts, notably those
of the international export regimes, and initiatives such
as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
and the Proliferation Security Initiative are vital for the
success of the resolution. Slovenia actively engages in
the activities of all those regimes and initiatives, except

14-3237359/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

07/05/2014

the Missile Technology Control Regime. Slovenia urges
all States Members of the United Nations to establish
and ensure the effective functioning of their national
export controls.

the resolution has the advantage of allowing each State
to assess its own actions for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and to then consider the
necessary means to achieve the desired progress.

There is still a great deal of work ahead of us. The
time is limited. The year 2021, when the Committee’s
mandate expires, is not far away. We should use the
remaining time effectively and enhance our cooperation
within international and regional organizations, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and work together for better implementation
of the resolution. One of the key issues that we have
to thoroughly address is the challenge of proliferation
financing. We have to work closely with the financial
institutions that control international transactions.
At times, such institutions do not know for what
kind of transactions their money is used. Sometimes
it is channelled through complicated transactions
to proliferators. We should also engage our national
financial intelligence units in our activities. They
should work closely with export-control authorities and
law enforcement agencies.

While progress has been made since the adoption
of the resolution, even if the ultimate goal is still far
from being achieved, several challenges remain.
Those include the universalization of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
setting deadlines for the total elimination of chemical
weapons, and the convening of a conference to bring
about a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle
East, in accordance with the action plan of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Finally, Slovenia welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, adopted earlier at today’s meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
I would like, first of all, on behalf of my delegation,
to extend to you, Madam President, my sincere
congratulations on your country‘s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
holding this debate on the future of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction regime on the occasion
of the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). Allow me also to
pay warm tribute to the Chair, members and experts
of the Committee establishsed pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for their tireless efforts in promoting and
raising awareness on a future world free from the fear
of nuclear disasters.
Resolution 1540 (2004) recognizes the strong
commitment of the international community to provide
an effective response to the threat of the proliferation
of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons facing
the world, through the implementation of appropriate
measures and devices to prevent the acquisition or
misuse of such weapons by non-State actors or terrorist
groups. Designed as a flexible tool for cooperation,

60/70

In addition to those challenges, we must condemn
the continuing desire to acquire and develop nuclear
weapons, the stagnation of the disarmament mechanisms
and the lack of consensus on starting negotiations
on crucial treaties, such as those on military fissile
material, the prohibition of nuclear weapons and
negative security assurances.
Today, as in the past, although it does not possess
weapons of mass destruction, Burkina Faso still strives
to uphold and ensure compliance with resolution 1540
(2004). That is why during its term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in 2008 and 2009,
Burkina Faso spared no effort to promote the ideals of
resolution 1540 (2004) through several initiatives.
Burkina Faso has submitted reports to the 1540
Committee and received its members and experts from
10 to 16 November 2013 to assess the implementation
of the resolution and to identify opportunities for
capacity-building so as to strengthen existing capacity.
The visit allowed the Committee’s experts to observe
Burkina Faso’s true commitment to fully respecting
resolution 1540 (2004), as reflected, inter alia, in
its accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as well as 12 of the 18 international
instruments for combating terrorism. In addition, the
members of the Committee welcomed the existence
of monitoring and control mechanisms, relevant legal
and regulatory frameworks and appropriate security
and safety measures. I wish to reiterate the gratitude
of the authorities of my country to the Committee, in
particular the experts for their professionalism and
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

clear cooperation. That contributed to the success of the
visit, whose conclusions, we hope, will lead to follow
up on the ground and technical cooperation.
The coming of a world free of nuclear weapons, far
from being a utopia, is within the realm of possibility, as
long as we can outlaw the famous doctrine of strategic
deterrence, which functions as an alibi for nuclear
proliferation.
In conclusion, my delegation takes the opportunity
provided by this commemorative meeting to remind
us all of the importance of demonstrating openness,
mutual trust, transparency and genuine political
will in the service of establishing conditions and
dialogue frameworks conducive to disarmament and
non-proliferation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
the Republic of Korea for organizing this open debate
on non-proliferation in commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004).
Our meeting coincides with the third session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, and thus rightly shows the degree to
which the issue of non-proliferation is a serious matter
of concern for the international community. I would
also like to thank Mr. Eliasson for his comprehensive
briefing.
Algeria wishes to reiterate its full confidence in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) as the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, and considers that full
implementation of its provisions is a prerequisite for
ending both the vertical and horizontal proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I would like to emphasize that
non-proliferation should be pursued in all its aspects,
and I would also like to stress the importance of the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards
agreements. We urge all States that have not yet done
so to put comprehensive safeguards agreements into
force as soon as possible in the interests of achieving
their universality and consolidating and enhancing
the non-proliferation regime’s verification system. In
that regard, my delegation reaffirms that we accept
safeguards with the purpose of preventing diversions
of nuclear power, and that they should therefore be
implemented without affecting countries’ inalienable

S/PV.7169

right, as set out in article IV of the NPT, to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy, and without obstructing the
economic or technological development of States that
are parties to the Treaty
Ten years ago, the legal framework of the
non-proliferation regime was strengthened by the
adoption, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, of resolution 1540 (2004). Affirming
that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery constitutes a
threat to international peace and security, the resolution
obliges States to refrain from supporting non-State
actors in developing, acquiring, manufacturing,
possessing, transporting, transferring or using such
weapons, and to pass and enforce effective laws and
establish domestic controls. Resolution 1540 (2004)
was unquestionably adopted at the right time, when it
became important to deal with the risk of the dangerous
nexus between weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and global terrorism. Any increase in potential access
to WMDs for non-State actors who belong to terrorist
networks could have dangerous implications for any
State or group of States, and would constitute a threat
to international peace and security.
As long as the proliferation of WMDs remains
a great challenge, we should recognize that the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term
task that requires continuing efforts at the national,
regional and international levels. In that context, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) has a crucial role to play in facilitating the
provision of assistance, enhancing cooperation with the
relevant international organizations and reinforcing its
outreach efforts.
Since today we are assessing the status of the
resolution’s implementation, I should mention that
Algeria, in fulfilment of its obligations, has already
submitted its national report to the 1540 Committee.
We have participated in the three Nuclear Security
Summits with a view to contributing to the international
efforts to strengthen nuclear security and reduce the
continued threat of nuclear terrorism. In that regard,
I would like to highlight Algeria’s ongoing efforts at
the national level, whereby we submitted our national
progress report at the Nuclear Security Summit held
in March in The Hague. Algerian delegations also
regularly attend international events on implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), and in that regard, Algerian
representatives participated at a regional workshop held

14-3237361/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

07/05/2014

last December in Addis Ababa by the African Union
Peace and Security Council, in collaboration with the
1540 Committee and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs.

Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): I would first like to
join others in congratulating you, Madam President, and
your delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.

I should also add that Algeria has been a member
of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
since February 2012. Moreover, we have taken
various appropriate measures, such as ratifying
all the international legal instruments relevant to
nuclear security, including the 2005 amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We have
also adopted the Code of Conduct on the Safety and
Security of Radioactive Sources of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) constitute one of the pre-eminent
threats to global collective security in the twenty-first
century. Acts of terrorism continue to pose a grave
challenge to humankind, as terrorist groups choose
their targets indiscriminately, change their modes of
operation and improvise more complex ways to carry
out their heinous acts with deadlier consequences.

At the domestic level, in December 2013 Algeria
amended its penal code in order to criminalize the
malicious use of radioactive materials, including general
acts of nuclear terrorism, based on the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism. In that connection, Algeria is putting in
place a strong legislative and regulatory framework in
the area of the physical protection of nuclear materials
and facilities and the security of radioactive sources.
In addition, the import, detention and export regime
of radioactive sources has been strengthened through
rigorous border controls.
During the period 2012-2013, Algeria hosted
several IAEA nuclear safety and security workshops. In
the upcoming months we plan to organize more national
and regional workshops and training courses on nuclear
security, some of them supported by the IAEA. I should
also add that Algiers is host to the regional office of
the European Union’s Centre of Excellence for North
Africa for chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
threat reduction. The Centre is involved in coordinating
several cooperation projects in that area, particularly in
capacity-building.
Finally, on behalf of my country, I would like
to stress that we feel this open debate is timely and
constructive beyond the expected adoption of today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7). Both will
strengthen the political will needed to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in our efforts
to combat the proliferation of WMDs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.

62/70

The Council will no doubt agree that the use of
technology, information and social media, as well as
the existence of the nexus between terrorist networks,
non-State actors and transnational criminals with
varying motives but unremittingly lethal intentions to
acquire, target and use weapons of mass destruction,
poses new challenges to States’ apparatus and the
traditional lines of national defence. Coupled with
these are the threats emanating from the rising
extremism and radicalization of various ideological
groups and networks that use indoctrination, terrorism
and violence as a tactic for attacking peace, democracy,
development and the peaceful coexistence of nations
and communities.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), to which
Bangladesh also contributed proactively as a member
of the open-ended group of the General Assembly that
negotiated the basis of the resolution, along with the
series of follow-up resolutions adopted subsequently, has
therefore been a watershed achievement. The resolutions
demonstrate the determination of the membership of
the United Nations to pursue comprehensive efforts to
address the nexus between WMDs and terrorism, and
to close the gap in international law regarding non-State
actors and WMDs.
Let me reaffirm the strong commitment of the
Government of Bangladesh to the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as we unequivocally support
all international efforts at promoting a more peaceful
and safer world. The Prime Minister of Bangladesh has
been a strong voice on behalf of the complete elimination
of all weapons of mass destruction and upholds her
own foreign policy conviction — “disarmament for
development” — and a nuclear-weapon and terrorismfree world. Our commitment to a WMD-free world
is manifest in the fact that we are signatories to all
major multilateral disarmament treaties, including the
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, the Certain Conventional
Weapons Convention, the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty and the Arms Trade Treaty. We have also
maintained a zero-tolerance policy to terrorism and in
recent years adopted a number of bold, concrete steps
to combat terrorism, the financing of terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Bangladesh is well aware of its legally binding
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). It has already
fulfilled its reporting obligations by submitting two
reports to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). As part of efforts towards
better implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
last month our capital organized a workshop on its
implementation that was attended by focal points
of key national agencies as well as members of the
1540 Committee’s Expert Group and representatives
from Office of Disarmament Affairs. The workshop
helped us to identify gaps in our legal, regulatory and
national coordination infrastructure and deficits in
our agency-wide capacities and experiences to enforce
various provisions of the resolution. The Government
of Bangladesh will be taking concrete steps to address
the gaps and factors that impede the implementation of
the resolution.
While countries such as ours are doing their best
to ensure the non-proliferation of WMD, concomitant
actions from others that possess WMDs towards
dispossession of those deadly weapons are conspicuously
absent. To be sure, as long as there remain WMDs at
the hands of some States, there will exist motivation for
other States to acquire them, the risk of their use, either
by accident or by design, and the grave danger of their
falling into the hands of terrorists. The only absolute
guarantee against the possible use, abuse or misuse of
WMDs and their acquisition by terrorists and non-State
actors is therefore their total abolition.
Unfortunately, hundreds of billions of dollars,
together with the human, technical and technological
resources, are spent annually on the manufacture,
maintenance and qualitative refinement of such
weapons. That represents a colossal waste of scarce
resources that could be freed up and diverted towards
saving millions of lives and addressing pressing
development needs. Obviously, the proliferation of
WMDs by new countries is unacceptable. But so is
the lack of progress towards the fulfilment of the

S/PV.7169

disarmament commitments by States with nuclear and
other weapons of mass destruction. Both disarmament
and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing and
should be pursued in tandem to make the world free
from the menaces of WMDs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): Denmark associates
itself with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union.
Denmark strongly welcome’s today’s debate. The
presidency’s initiative to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of the resolution 1540 (20040) and to
hold an open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) is most pertinent. The
Proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery is one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security in
the twenty-first century.
Since its adoption, in 2004, the resolution has
been a vital instrument in our efforts to prevent WMD
proliferation, blackmail and terrorism. The catastrophic
consequences that would ensue if we were to fail in
those efforts would be of a global and cross-sectorial
scale, with damage to the environment, socioeconomic
development and health for generations to come.
We must continue to work for the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons within the framework of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We are deeply concerned that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has withdrawn from
the Treaty and continues down its dangerous and
irrational path of ballistic missile launches, nuclear
tests and nuclear-weapon material production, in
flagrant violation of its international obligations. The
international community must continue to make clear
that this behaviour is not acceptable and will have
consequences.
With regard to Iran’s nuclear programme we share
the hope and optimism brought about by the joint plan of
action agreed between the E3+3 and Iran in November.
That is an important first step, but the focus must
continue to be on achieving a comprehensive, longterm settlement that restores international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of the programme
and the absence of any military dimensions. Denmark

14-3237363/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

continues to support the international community’s
efforts in that regard and has this year donated €270.000
in support of the IAEA’s work to monitor and verify the
implementation of the joint plan of action.
The risk that nuclear materials could fall into the
hands of terrorists or other none-State actors should be
taken most seriously. In the Nuclear Security Summit,
process we have committed ourselves to securing
nuclear installations and materials to ensure that nuclear
terrorism never happens. We believe that the IAEA
plays a central role that should be enhanced, and we
have this year pledged an additional €1.1 million to the
Agency’s Nuclear Security Fund to further strengthen
efforts in developing countries.
There are other WMD threats than nuclear
proliferation. The identification and destruction of
Syria’s chemical weapons remain a vital task for the
international community. Denmark is leading the task
group in charge of the maritime transportation of the
declared chemical substances out of Syria for their
destruction. Less than 10 per cent of the declared
substances now remain inside Syria. However, in order
to finish the job, it is vital that the remaining substances
be transported out of Syria without further delay. We
call for full cooperation from all parties, not least the
Syrian regime.
As the world’s attention focuses on nuclear and
chemical weapons, we should not forget the threat
from the proliferation of biological weapons either — a
weapon much easier to acquire than, for example, nuclear
weapons. In the hands of actors with malicious intent,
such weapons could cause unimaginable devastation.
They are rightfully referred to as weapons of mass
destruction on a par with the two other categories. We
have a joint obligation to ensure that such a situation
never arises. The Secretary General’s mechanism to
investigate allegations of the use of biological weapons
should be strengthened, and biosecurity awareness
should be raised around the world. With that in mind,
Denmark will increase its efforts to contribute to
international biosecurity. A pilot project is about to start
that will aim to transfer Danish biosecurity experiences
and best practices to partners in East Africa.
Non-proliferation is an ongoing effort on all levels,
from a rural veterinary laboratory in a developing
country to the NPT Review Conference in New York
next year. Resolution 1540 (2004) has helped us to
focus our attention and pool our commitments. It is
appropriate to celebrate its tenth anniversary while
64/70

07/05/2014

underlining that the work today is just as relevant as
in 2004.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 14 States members of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
On the occasion of the commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), CARICOM wishes to underscore its continued
commitment to the full implementation of the
resolution and, in that regard, welcomes the adoption
of resolution 1977 (2011), which extends the mandate
of the 1540 Committee until the year 2021. CARICOM
strongly supports the mandate of the 1540 Committee
to strengthen its role in facilitating the provision of
assistance, enhancing cooperation with the relevant
international organizations and reinforcing its outreach
efforts.
Without question, the obligations pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) have served to precipitate
unprecedented action by States to develop
implementation approaches that are consonant with their
domestic realities and constraints and which allow for
the development of national engagement strategies that
can be implemented in close coordination with existing
security and economic priorities. It is that latitude that
enabled CARICOM, in June 2009, to develop a unitary
approach to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and that has led to the significant gains in the
implementation process.
The genesis of the CARICOM resolution 1540 (2004)
implementation programme was largely precipitated by
the reality that CARICOM members, both structurally
and resource-wise, faced significant challenges in
meeting the obligations emanating from the resolution,
particularly in relation to the enactment of strategic trade
legislation, including the implementation of domestic
export controls. Additionally, it was recognized
that national competences critical to increasing port
and border capacities to prevent the import, export,
re-export, transit, trans-shipment or brokering of
strategic goods were also limited, and would continue
to be so for the foreseeable future.
The CARICOM experience demonstrates that
all States, regardless of economic, trade or strategic
standing, should assume a collective responsibility to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004),
regardless of the level of participation in the strategic
global supply chain. It also effectively underscores the
notion that, if availed with appropriate resources, even
small States such as those in CARICOM can develop
mechanisms to effectively and measurably advance
non-proliferation.
Prior to the CARICOM initiative, there had not been
a single instance where a group of States endeavoured
to implement a major Security Council mandate in a
unitary manner. The success of CARICOM’s experience
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has
served to underscore the merits of innovative thinking
in dealing with the region’s pressing international
security obligations. It is for this reason that other
regional organizations have adopted the CARICOM
approach and sought to leverage common structural and
administrative assets along the security and political
continuum to advance 1540 implementation.
These gains would not have been possible without
the political support of important regional organs under
the aegis of CARICOM, including the CARICOM
Council of Ministers for National Security and Law
Enforcement and the Council of Ministers for Foreign
and Community Relations. In addition, national support
from Member States, including Trinidad and Tobago,
has been consequential in ensuring the viability and
indeed the success of the CARICOM 1540 programme.
It would be remiss if CARICOM did not take
this opportunity to recognize the work of the 1540
Committee and in particular its Chairman, Ambassador
Oh Joon, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea, and its Group of Experts, for their efforts to
actively support the work of CARICOM. CARICOM is
grateful for this productive partnership, which, along
with the support of critical entities such as the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, has allowed
the region to realize meaningful and concrete progress
in relation to resolution 1540 (2004). This partnership
with the Community was clearly exemplified by the
visit of the 1540 Committee Chairman to the Republic
of Trinidad and Tobago a year ago, the first such visit of
any Chairman of the 1540 Committee to the Caribbean
since its inception in April, 2004.
Indeed, following the visit to Trinidad and Tobago,
the 1540 Committee also paid an official visit to
Grenada, which again constituted the first time since
the adoption of the resolution that the Committee
had engaged with two Member States in the same

S/PV.7169

geographic area within a relatively short period of
time. This is again indicative of the emphasis that the
Committee continues to place on supporting Member
States in fully implementing the resolution.
Without question, regional progress in preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is inextricably linked to the economic viability of
CARICOM member States. We are all too cognizant of
the region’s susceptibility to external shocks, including
those occasioned by acts of terrorism, as was the case
with the attacks on the United States in September,
2001. Notwithstanding the fact that those events took
place outside of the Caribbean, the economic impact
within the first year after the attacks reverberated
throughout our region’s markets and resulted in the loss
of over $900 million in revenue and thousands of jobs,
particularly in the tourism and hospitality sectors.
This is a major reason why terrorism and the
proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear materials continue to be of significant
importance to CARICOM. At the same time, regional
Governments have been grappling with the influx of
small arms and light weapons, as well as the deleterious
impact of the drugs trade and spiralling gun related
crime that has ensued from the confluence of these
events.
CARICOM’s regional focus on the issues of
terrorism, furthering non-proliferation and building
capacity with respect to the prevention and mitigation of
a possible chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
attack is not new. Indeed, these issues constituted core
components of a regional report, which followed an
assessment of existing security threats facing the region
in early 2002. These recommendations ultimately led
to the establishment of the CARICOM Ministerial
Subcommittee on Resource Mobilization for Crime and
Security by the Conference of Heads of Government
at its Twenty-Fourth Meeting in Jamaica in July, 2003.
In order to place non-proliferation firmly and
securely within the contemporary regional security
framework and to elevate it to actionable levels within
CARICOM Member States, engagement on this issue
cannot be piecemeal or sporadic. It requires sustained
interaction with both policy and enforcement entities
in the region and the provision of equally sustained
material support going forward. CARICOM therefore
views this open debate as a useful forum to further
the global discourse on non-proliferation and sees this
exercise as particularly valuable in advancing efforts

14-3237365/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

07/05/2014

to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) within our
region and beyond.

dangerous nexus between weapons of mass destruction
and global terrorism.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.

To address these issues comprehensively and
successfully, we have to commit to continuous and longterm efforts and actions, while at the same time finding
innovative ways and means to engage all stakeholders,
first and foremost Member States. By doing so, we will
ensure that our global campaign truly provides for the
minimizing of risks associated with the acquisition and
use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists.

Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): At the outset, I
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea for organizing and
chairing this important meeting. We appreciate the
concept note you prepared for the debate (S/2014/313,
annex). I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing. Montenegro welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7).
Montenegro fully associates itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I would, however, like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
Today’s debate on the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) offers a timely
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved so
far, as well as to look at the challenges ahead in terms
of compliance and fulfilment of the letter and spirit of
the resolution. Many positive developments were made
possible over the past decade towards the realization
of universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and its subsequent resolutions. These have included
awareness-raising about the principles and objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004) and about the complexity of
the terrorist threat, increased commitment of Member
States to submit reports and develop national action
plans, match-making of assistance requests and
offers, and numerous initiatives of Member States and
regional and international organizations contributing
to strengthened international cooperation, capacitybuilding and assistance. I would like in particular
to single out the role and contribution of Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts to these efforts and advancements.
Despite these achievements, challenges still remain
in the global fight against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destructions. Numerous crises, the globalized
and interconnected world, and constant improvements
in science and technology serve as serious reminders
that our common mission is far from finished. Increased
potential access to weapons of mass destruction and
related materials and technology demonstrates the
growing need to remain on constant alert against the

66/70

Here, I would like to raise one question that, in our
opinion, is particularly relevant and deserves careful
consideration going forward. With respect to countries
that are, on the one hand, willing and ready to contribute
to actions related to resolution 1540 (2004), yet on
the other hand have limited capacity to deal with the
challenges and threats of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and do not recognize that as the
most pressing priority area of security concern — as is
the case of my country — how can they be encouraged
to buy in and show the requisite determination and
leadership at the national and regional levels regarding
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)?
In that vein, we note with satisfaction the progress
made in the understanding of the multiple benefits
of the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
that are not related or limited to preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. While
that remains a primary objective, measures taken in
accordance with the resolution will generate various
other benefits to bolster national, regional and global
security well beyond the core purpose of discovering
weapons of mass destruction and related materials.
Those include in the domain of border control, the
prevention of illicit trafficking of various sorts,
among others. That is why synergies related to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) should be
further promoted.
My country’s strategic orientation is to contribute to
regional and international peace and security, including
through active participation in combating terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Montenegro would like to state its full commitment and
firm support for the robust and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).
As a reflection of its resolve, Montenegro has
finalized its national action plan for the period 2014-

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

2018 and its latest report on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), both of which are expected to
be adopted by our Government in the coming days.
The national action plan, as a guiding document with
concrete steps and measures prescribed for all actors,
will contribute to more effective and comprehensive
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) through enhanced national capacities for the
control and prevention of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and through the harmonization of our
legislation with international standards. In accordance
with the national action plan, the Government of
Montenegro will soon establish a coordinating body,
comprised of representatives of relevant institutions,
that will be tasked with monitoring and reviewing
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
In closing, let me convey Montenegro’s unwavering
intention to continue to work diligently to aid in
improving the prospect of weapons of mass destructions
never falling into the hands of terrorists in any location.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): At the outset, let me
express my delegation’s appreciation to Mr. Yun Byungse, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea,
for organizing and presiding over today’s open debate,
and to Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing delivered today.
Armenia also strongly welcomes the Council’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7) under the
agenda item on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs), adopted earlier today.
It again reaffirms that the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery constitutes a threat to international peace and
security.
While Armenia fully associates itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
(EU), I would like to make some brief comments and
remarks in my national capacity.
The Republic of Armenia considers resolution
1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004 to be one of the
fundamental international instruments in the sphere of
non-proliferation of WMDs and related elements, and
attaches paramount importance to its implementation.
Armenia was among the countries that fully supported
the extension of the mandate of the relevant United

S/PV.7169

Nations committee on the implementation of the
resolution until 2021. Since the adoption of the
resolution, Armenia has undertaken several measures
for its comprehensive implementation. In particular,
Armenia has completely reformed the national expert
control system on dual-use and military goods by
adopting a new law and relevant Government decrees.
In July 2013, by decision of the Prime Minister, an
inter-agency working group was formed to develop a
national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In September 2013, at Armenia’s Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, the first workshop of the working
group and international experts took place in Yerevan.
Recently, a draft action plan was put on paper and
submitted for review to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Conflict Prevention
Centre, and the EU Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear Centres of Excellence Initiative.
In conclusion, while reiterating our strong support
for the 1540 Committee, and in particular its leadership,
I would like to inform the members of the Council that
Armenia expects to finalize its national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) no later
than July, and to start its implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Madam President,
the convening by your presidency of this open debate
on an issue of great importance is very timely. I do not
wish to use the phrase “in the wake of”, but maybe I
should say “while the third meeting of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is taking place”.
Resolution 1540 (2004) reflected a vision and
clearly set forth actions for States to follow up on, in
order to achieve the objectives, including refraining
from supporting non-State actors in developing,
acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting,
transferring or using nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, adopting and enforcing effective laws,
establishing domestic controls, and affirming support
for multilateral treaties that aim to eliminate or prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs).

14-3237367/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

A decade since the adoption of the resolution,
a lot has been achieved. First, a group of sizeable,
important countries has participated in the Nuclear
Security Summits. It is noteworthy to recognize that
the specific initiatives, measures and actions that
must be undertaken have been clearly identified. That
is quite an achievement in relation to securing fissile
or radiological material. Secondly, more countries
have now adopted the Additional Protocol to the
NPT. It is well known that it is an additional burden
and an additional commitment of countries, over and
above their obligation in terms of comprehensive
safeguards once they have become a member of the
NPT. Thirdly, more countries have truly acceded to a
number of agreements or conventions inspired by the
International Atomic Energy Agency on securing such
material. Fourthly, of course, there is the inspiring
continuing work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
The Philippines takes its responsibility seriously
and has accordingly demonstrated its will to pursue
positive action, including, among others, the following:
the regular provision to the Chair of the 1540 Committee
of a comprehensive list of measures undertaken by the
Philippine Government to ensure implementation of the
resolution. Those include the development of counterterrorism capacities and the upgrading of facilities,
such as the establishment of a transport control
communications centre at the Philippine Nuclear
Research Institute, to monitor, control and coordinate
the movements of category 1 and 2 sources within
the country. There is also the Megaports Initiative
project, which includes the establishment of a central
alarm station monitoring unit and the National Single
Window project.
Secondly, we have developed the code for the
Philippine National Research Institute, part 27,
“Security Requirements in the Transport of Radioactive
Material”, aimed at ensuring the security of radioactive
materials during transport and preventing illegal
diversion, trafficking, theft and/or sabotage of such
materials during transport. The Philippines has, of
course, ratified the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) Additional Protocol.
To further strengthen the national legal framework
for non-proliferation, the Philippines is finalizing the
Chemical Weapons Prohibition Act of 2013, known
as an act prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling, use of chemical weapons and on their

68/70

07/05/2014

destruction, and providing penalties therefor. The
draft legislation is now pending review. Moreover,
the Philippines has also prepared a strategic trade
management act, the purpose of which is to prevent
the proliferation of WMDs and their means of delivery
through the establishment of a national strategic goods
control list and providing a regulatory framework for
dual-use goods. The bill has already been filed with
both houses of Congress.
But we all have to do a lot more. We need to do
much more. First, for instance, when we talk about
the nuclear security initiative of a group of sizeable
countries, there is a great need to make multilateral
what has been been agreed there in order to secure
real and multilateral traction for its implementation.
Secondly, we need more countries. Not all members of
the NPT accept the additional protocol, mindful that
those are additional obligations for themselves. These
highlights the fact that even those outside the NPT must
in fact adhere to safeguard measures under the IAEA
that approximate those obligations. Thirdly, it is very
important to encourage more countries to ratify and
accede to all the conventions that secure the transport
and storage of fissile radioactive materials. Of course,
there is a disquieting effect in the disregard for the 1994
Budapest Memorandum, which has a direct bearing on
the issue of non-proliferation.
Following the success of 2010, I note that the
clarion call on the international community to move
forward quickly and to work together even more closely
concerns the overriding issue of nuclear disarmament.
Why, for instance, in the preamble of resolution 1540
(2004), are all Member States enouraged to implement
fully the disarmament treaties and agreements to which
they are party? We must do our very best to secure all
fissile radioactive material. We must attempt to do our
very best to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) for
as long as we nuclear arms exist. Thus, one day we may
not be so worried about this, and all that remains could
be only those materials intended for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
Following the success of the 2010 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, of
which I had the honour of being Chair, there was much
optimism owing to the adoption by consensus of the
64-point action plan — 62 action points plus two major
issues of concern. One was related to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the Six-Party Talks;
the second was related to the implementation of the

14-32373

07/05/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

1995 resolution on convening a conference on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of a nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.
There was some optimism after the Conference. It was
a watershed moment. Given the obstacles and differing
positions of Member States, there was certainly
difficulty in achieving consensus. Yet we managed to
arrive at that point.
The challenge now, however, is in the
implementation. My country is disappointed that, four
years after the 2010 NPT Review Conference, we have
not yet convened the conference on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction. I wish to briefly
recall that this is one of grand designs that ensured
the success of 2010. It worries me in the wake of the
third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015
Review Conference, which may put us on shaky ground
as we move into the coming years.
In many ways, that sums up the circumstances
in which we find ourselves. We have been most
active in expressing our views on our commitment to
non-proliferation initiatives. Our responsibility, and
indeed challenge now is to match those words with
clear and concrete actions, fulfilling our commitments.
Pacta sunt servanda. Only then will we be able to
positively answer the hard questions we ask ourselves
and secure for ourselves and our posterity the safe
future we deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me congratulate the Republic of Korea on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council,
and welcome its initiative to convene an open debate
to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). Likewise, we appreciate the
briefing by the Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson.
Since the establishment of the Organization,
the international community has encouraged the
construction of a comprehensive and global legal
regimen aimed at nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. In that context, the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004) represents a milestone in the treatment
of the new threat to international peace and security
embodied in the possibility that non-State actors might
gain access to weapons of mass destruction.

S/PV.7169

Peru considers it essential to address the issue of
weapons of mass destruction at the global level, since
no country is exempt from the potential of terrorist
activities in its territory. It is therefore essential to
strengthen measures at the international level to combat
that scourge, always in strict respect for human rights. In
that regard, we must jointly implement the international
instruments on weapons of mass destruction — such
as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Biological Weapons Convention, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 1540
(2014) — with the goal of preventing the dual use
of nuclear material, biological agents and chemical
substances, as well as the ability of terrorist groups to
manufacture or obtain access to nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons.
My country is firmly committed to efforts to
achieve complete disarmament and the non-proliferation
of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and
their means of delivery, which constitute a threat to
international peace and security. My country therefore
supports the strengthening and universalization of the
relevant legally binding multilateral agreements and
has adopted various administrative and penal measures
towards the effective implementation of its obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004), primarily in the areas
of immigration and customs control, air and maritime
control, and intelligence activities, in order to avoid
the production and the illicit trade in weapons of mass
destruction.
In that respect, Peru has aligned its domestic
legislation with the standards established in resolution
1540 (2004), as demonstrated in the three reports
submitted by my country on its implementation of the
resolution. The various relevant sectors are currently
working on the development of a new national report
for submission to the Committee. In that regard, Peru
reiterates its full support for and commitment to the hard
work being conducted by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Peru’s commitment
to resolution 1540 (2004) was also demonstrated in its
organization, with the support of the United Nations, of
two regional workshops in Lima, in 2006 and 2010, to
disseminate the content and scope of application of the
resolution, and to identify areas of possible cooperation
among the countries of the region.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
task that requires the participation of the international

14-3237369/70

S/PV.7169

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

community as a whole. We therefore call on all Member
States to step up their efforts to that end. The Security
Council can count on Peru to continue to do its part in
this collective effort.

07/05/2014

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

70/70

14-32373
