General Assembly -Thirty-eighth Session

272

Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on its third session, 39
Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary to fundamental principles of international law, such
as non-interference in the internal affairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the
process of self-determination of peoples struggling against
colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of foreign
domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security.
Considering that the progressive development and codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries
would contribute immensely to the implementation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
Taking account of the fact that, although the Ad floe
Committee has made substantial progress. it has not yet
fulfilled its mandate,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
and the progress made by the Ad Hoe Committee, especially during its third session:
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall continue
its work, with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, an international convention against the recruitment.
use, financing and training of mercenaries:
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment of
its mandate, to consider the suggestions and proposals of
Member States, bearing in mind the views and comments
submitted to the Secretary-General and those expressed at
the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee, including
the various views expressed on the definition of the term
"mercenary"; 40
4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account
the draft articles contained in paragraph 56 of its report y,
for the elaboration of the provisions relating to the scope
of the convention, the definition of the term "mercenarv"
and the obligations of States, as well as the propos~ls
which have been made and which may be submitted at it~
next session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its fourth session any up-to-date
and relevant documentation on the subject;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities ii
may require for the performance of its work, such as preparing a topical summary of the discussions that have
taken place in the Sixth Committee during the thirtyeighth session of the General Assembly;
7. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
fourth session for four weeks, from 30 July to 24 August
1984;
8. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to make every
effort to complete its mandate at its fourth session;
9. Also requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Report of the Ad
39 Offic,a/ Records (!(the Ucncrul .·I ucm/,/1·, Ihtrl\'·<·iglllh Sc.1.11<11J. Su{l/111·
men/ No. 43 (A/38/43).
40 !hid.. Thirtv-eighth Sessum. Sixth ·,11,i11llllff. i 9th-29th and 57th•n I ,1

c

meetings: and ifod., Sixth Comm1llee, \'esswnal Fa\(tde. corrigendum

floe Committee on the Drafting of an International Con-

vention against the Recruitment. Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries".
Wist plenary meeting
19 December J 983

38/138.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General .-tsscmbly.
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-fifth session, 41
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations 42 and to give increasing importance to its role in
relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
which might be submitted to the International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
progressive development of international law and its codili.cation,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed interest for the contemporary international community, may be
suitable for progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the
future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-fifth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the International Law Commission should continue its work on all
the topics in its current programme;
4. Expresses its sati.~faction with the conclusions and
intentions of the International Law Commission concerning its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in
paragraphs 305 to 307 and 310 to 314 of its report: 41
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
documentation of the International Law Commission and
endorses the request of the Commission contained in paragraph 310 of its report:
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to
international organizations to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments, observations and replies to
questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
4 ~ lbtd.. lhirtr·c1ghth Snsum. Supplement No. /0 (A 38. Ill).
4" Resolut,on 262' (XXV). annex

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

progressive development of international law and its codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary -General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly 43 and to
prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
JOJ.1·1 plenary meeting

19 Deccmher 1983

273

mit, within the same period, their written comments and
observations on the subject;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion on the subject
at the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
6. Appeals to potential participants in the Conference
to undertake consultations on the draft articles concerned
and other related questions prior to the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly, in order to facilitate the successful conclusion of the work of the Conference;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirtv-ninth session an item entitled "United Nations
Conference on the Law of Treaties between States and
International Organizations or between International
Organizations".
JO 1st plenary meeting

38/139. United Nations Conference on the Law of
Treaties between States and International
Organizations or between International
Organizations

38/140.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/112 of 16 December 1982,
by which it decided that an international convention
should be concluded on the basis of the draft articles on
the law of treaties between States and international organizations or between international organizations, adopted by
the International Law Commission at its thirty-fourth session, 44
Recalling further that, by its resolution 37 /112, it agreed
to decide at its thirty-eighth session upon the appropriate
forum for the adoption of the convention in the light of the
comments received in accordance with that resolution,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General 45
which contains the comments and observations submitted
by a number of States and principal international intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 37/112, and having further received
the statement adopted by the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, 46
I. Decides that the appropriate forum for the final consideration of the draft articles on the law of treaties
between States and international organizations or between
international organizations, adopted by the International
Law Commission at its thirty-fourth session, shall be a
conference of plenipotentiaries to be convened not earlier
than 1985;
2. Agrees to decide at its thirty-ninth session upon the
question of the date and place for the convening of the
United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties
between States and International Organizations or
between International Organizations, as well as upon the
question of participation in the Conference;
3. Invites States that have not already dune su tu submit, not later than I July 1984, their written comments
and observations on the final draft articles on the law of
treaties between States and international organizations or
between international organizations prepared by the International Law Commission, as well as on the questions
referred to in paragraph 60 of the report of the Commission on the work of its thirty-fourth session; 44
4. Invites also the principal international intergovernmental organizations that have not already done so to sub-

The General Assemhly.
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, 47
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations 48 and the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 49
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those missions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 60 of its report; 47
2. Strongly condemns any acts violating the security of
missions accredited to the United Nations and their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to continue to take all necessary measures to ensure effectively the protection, security
and safety of the missions accredited to the United
Nations and their personnel, including practicable measures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage
in the perpetration of acts and activities against the security and safety of such missions and representatives;
4. Recalls that continued adherence to the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations remains an indispensable condition for the normal functioning of the Organization;

43 Official Records of the (ieneral Assemhlv. Thirty-eighth Sc.man. Sixth
Committee, 34th, 36th-50th, 54th and 70th mectmgs: and 1hid.. Sixth Committee, Sessional Fasc,cle, corrigendum.
44 Ibid., Thirty-seventh Sessum, Supplement .Vo /0 (A/3710). chap. II.
45 N38/ I 45 and Corr. I and Add. I.
46 NC.613814. annex.

19 Decemher 1983

Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country

47 Official Records o(the General Assembly. Thirty-eighth Session, Supplemrnt No. 26 (N38/26).

48 Resolution 22 A (I).
4" Resolution 169 (II).
