S/PRST/2000/41

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4252nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 December 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea following recent attacks along its borders with Liberia and Sierra Leone”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at developments on the
border that Guinea shares with Liberia and Sierra Leone.
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the recent
incursions into Guinea by rebel groups coming from Liberia and Sierra Leone
that have affected villages and towns along the entire length of Guinea’s
border, including in Gueckedou on 6 December 2000 and in Kissidougou on
10 December 2000. The Council deplores the fact that these attacks claimed
many lives, in particular the lives of civilians, and caused an exodus of local
inhabitants and refugees, further exacerbating an already grave humanitarian
situation. The Council also condemns the recent looting of the facilities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian organizations. The Council demands an immediate halt to all acts
of violence, especially those directed against civilians, as well as the
infiltration of displaced persons camps by armed elements, and that those
responsible for the violations of international humanitarian law be brought to
justice.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of Guinea. It expresses its
serious concern, in this regard, over reports that external military support is
being provided to these rebel groups. It calls on all States, particularly Liberia,
to refrain from providing any such military support and from any act that
might contribute to further destabilization of the situation on the borders
between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The Council further calls upon all
States in the region to prevent armed individuals from using their national
territory to prepare and commit attacks in neighbouring countries.
“The Security Council notes with interest the common undertakings
assumed by Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone at the Conference of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) held in Bamako on 15 and 16 December 2000 (S/2000/1201,
annex) and calls upon them to implement those undertakings fully and without
00-80967 (E)

211200

*0080967*

S/PRST/2000/41

delay. It again pays tribute to the current Chairman of ECOWAS and to that
organization for the important role they play towards restoring peace and
security to the three countries of the Mano River Union. The Council requests
the Secretary-General to consider what support the international community,
and in particular the United Nations, might provide to ECOWAS in order to
ensure security on the border that Guinea shares with Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and to report in that connection to the Council as soon as possible. The
Council supports the appeal made by the Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS for an urgent meeting of the Heads of State of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone under the auspices of ECOWAS and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU).
“The Security Council expresses deep appreciation for the Government
of Guinea for hosting a large number of refugees. The Council is concerned by
the growing hostile attitude among the local population towards refugees, and
urges the Government of Guinea to take urgent measures to discourage the
propagation of such anti-refugee feelings.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern over the fate of all
those who continue to live in a state of insecurity, especially the local
populations and the tens of thousands of refugees and displaced persons. It
urges all the competent organizations to ensure that humanitarian relief
continues, and it underlines the importance of integrated action by the United
Nations agencies, acting in coordination with the Government of Guinea and
with the support of ECOWAS. The Council believes that humanitarian
assistance in secure locations must be made available not only to displaced
refugees and Guineans, but also to those refugees returning to Sierra Leone.
The Council calls on the Secretary-General and UNHCR to ensure that suitable
programmes of reintegration and assistance exist and are enhanced where
security permits in Sierra Leone. It also recognizes the important role of the
international community and the competent non-governmental organizations in
providing the humanitarian relief which the local populations, the refugees and
the displaced persons so sorely need. The Council is concerned over the
security of humanitarian personnel working in Sierra Leone and Guinea. It
calls on all the parties concerned to facilitate the work of the humanitarian
organizations. It urges the parties to guarantee the security of refugees and
displaced persons, and the security of the staff of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations. The Council also reaffirms the need to respect the
civilian character of refugee camps.
“The Security Council welcomes the proposed Inter-Agency
multidisciplinary mission to West Africa, supports its earliest possible
departure to the region and looks forward to its report and recommendations.”

2
