94

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

dependence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably the
peoples of Africa and the Palestinian people;
9. Strongly condemns the massacres of innocent
and defenceless people, including women and children,
by the racist minority regimes of southern Africa in
their desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate demands
of the people;
10. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result
of their struggle for self-determination and independence, and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights under which no one shall
be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, 4 and their immediate release;
11. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and alien
regimes continue to receive from Governments, United
Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and calls for a maximization
of this assistance;
12. Keenly awaits the conclusion of the following
studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:
(a) Historical and current development of the right
to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United Nations organs, with particular reference to the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and alien
domination to self-determination;
13. Decides to remain seized of this item at its
thirty-second session on the basis of reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations are requested to
submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to
colonial Territories and peoples under alien domination
and foreign subjugation.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/35.

Report of the United Nations High Com•
missioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 5 transmitted by the
Economic and Social Council under its resolution 2011
(LXI) of 2 August 1976, and having heard his statement,6
Recalling its resolutions 3454 (XXX) and 3455
(XXX) of 9 December 1975 relating to the activities
of the High Commissioner for the benefit of refugees
and displaced persons,
Recognizing the importance of the essential humanitarian tasks which the High Commissioner is called
4 Resolution 217 A (III).
5 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/31/12), Supplement No. 12A
(A/31/12/A?d.1) and Supplement No. 12B (A/31/12/Add.2).
6
lbtd., Th1rty-fir~t. Sessio1;, Third C?mmittee,. 49th meeting,
paras. 1-12; and 1b1d., Third Committee, Sesswnal Fascicle
corrigendum.
'

upon to perform and for which his Office has acquired
particular expertise and experience,
Bearing in mind the increasingly useful co-operation
between the High Commissioner and other members of
the United Nations system, resulting in better co-ordination of action and greater efficiency,
Recognizing the need for further strengthening the
international protection of refugees,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2011 (LXI) on the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Commends the High Commissioner and his staff
for the efficient manner in which they continue to discharge their manifold activities on behalf of refugees
and displaced persons;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to intensify
his efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing his
Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance in
rehabilitation of returnees, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
4. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue his humanitarian assistance on behalf of refugees
and displaced persons in Africa and urges the fullest
co-operation of all concerned for this purpose;
5. Urges Governments to strengthen further their
support for the humanitarian activities which the High
Commissioner is carrying out in accordance with pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council by:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection by means of accession to international instruments relating to refugees and respect for
the rights of refugees;
(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
and speedy solutions to the problems faced by his
Office;
( c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain the objectives of his humanitarian assistance programmes.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/36.

Question of the establishment, in accordance with the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, of a body to which
persons claiming the benefit of the Convention may apply

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3274 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High CoI?mission~r for Refugees: on the question of
the establishment, m accordance with the Convention on
the Reduction of Statelessness of 1961, 8 of a body to
which persons claiming the benefit of the Convention
may apply,
Noting_ that th~ High Commissioner is carrying out
the fu1;1ct1?ns r_equ_rred under the Convention without any
financial 1mphcat10ns for the United Nations
7 Ibid.,

'

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 12B (A/31/12/

Add.2).
s A/CONF.9/15, 1961.
