UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
cou~m
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
:

;
.

I,

.b
.i

.,“.

,...

;,.
,’

FORTIETH

MEETING:

:

.~ ‘J i’$
,‘.. .‘,; & > “;;,;“5

YEAR

2615th

,‘.

4 OCTOBER 1985

>.,

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/26 15) . . . . ..*..............................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia .to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17509) . . .

1

WPV.2615

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters.combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Record of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2615th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,. Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (Wigenda12615)

of the agenda

Letter dated 1 October. 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17509)
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Reuresentative of Tunisii to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Couqcil (S/17509)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance’with decisions taken
previously [26ZOth, 2611th and 2613th meetings], I invite
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia to take a place
at the Council table; I invite the representative of Israel to
take a place at the Council table; I invite the observer for
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a
place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Cuba, the German
Democratic Republic, Greece, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lesotho, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the President, hr. Cafd Essebsi (Timisia) and Mr. Netanyahu (Israel) took places at the Council
table; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organisation) took a
place at the Coun&l table; Mr. Zurif (Afghanistan), Mr.
Taleb Ibrahimi (Algeria), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bang&esh), Mr.
Malmierca Peoli (Cuba), Mr. Ott (German Democratic

4 October

1985, at 3.30 p.m.

Republic), Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr. Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia), Mr. Rajaie--Khbrassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. Masri (Jordan), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr.
Makhele (Lesotho), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Gauci (Maita), Mr. Ould Boye (Mauritania), Mr. FilaI
(Morocco), Mr. Chamorro Mora (Nicaragua), Mr. Ononaiye
(Nigeria), Mr. Yaqub Khan (Pakistan), Mr. Shihabi (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. Sarr& (Senegal). Mr. EI-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. HaIefo&lu (Turkey), Mr. Al-Eryany (Yemen)
and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Viet Nam in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet
Nam) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the following documents:
letter dated 2 October 1985 from the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania to the Secretary-General
[S/I7523j; letter dated 3 October 1985 from the representative of Brazil to the Secretary-General [S/17532j; letter
dated 4 October 1985 from the representative of Mongolia
to the President of the Council [S/Z7.533j.
4. The first speaker is the representative of Nigeria, who
wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of
the Group of African States for October. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
5. Mr. ONONAIYE
(Nigeria): On behalf of the Group
of African States at the United Nations, I wish to express
heartfelt appreciation to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Council for this opportunity to address the
Council.
6. It is a matter of the utmost regret and serious concern
to us that so soon after the historic meeting of the Security
Council to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of our
cherished organization-a
meeting at which Council

‘”

members rededicated themselves to upholding the enduring principles and laudable tenets of the Charter-there
should remain a disturbing cause for convening the Council. It is none the less worth noting that this meeting is a
welcome testimony to the dedication to the preservation of
peace and security and ,an expression of concern about an
unnecessary and unjustified threat to peace and security.

11. However, Israel seems to be taking an unduly longer
time to realize that the application of force in whatever
form can never guarantee it peace in that region. Rather,
the use of force or the threat of its use only reinforces the
general insecurity of all States in the region, including
Israel.
12. The Israeli raid in Tumsia has without doubt further
complicated the peace process in the Middle East and
abysmally reversed the fruitful prospects just beginning to
glimmer. By perpetrating ‘this act of terror against a
member State of the Organization of African Unity and
member of the United Nations, Israel has demonstrated
the extent to which it will go to aggress upon the sanctity
of independent and sovereign States.

7. The Council has been convened against the backdrop
of a mindless attack launched by a Member State against
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of another Member
State. A situation in which the State of Israel can decide to
launch an aerial bombing attack and cause the destruction
of the lives and property of people in another country,
without regard to international opinion or the provisions
of the Charter, calls for serious reflection and appropriate
action.

13. We note with regret and disappointment that .the
Israeli Government has been able to persist in its defiance
of world opinion and treat the decisions and resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly with utter
disregard because of the unlimited political, diplomatic,
economic and military support it receives from a member
of the Council. Especially worthy of mention is the continuous supply of weapons of aggression that a founding
Member of the Organization and permanent member of
the Council makes available to Israel on a scale far in
excess of its security needs. The African Group is appalled
at the open support given to the Israelis by President Reagan, support which, according to The Christian Science
Monitor of 3 October 1985, surprised and pleased the Israelis. Through this open support the United States Govemment has demonstrated unmitigated though predictable
prejudice in support of Israel’s unjustified behaviour, without compassion and feelings for the innocent lives lost in
the course of the air attack.

8. The Israeli air raid on Tunisia vividly demonstrates
the impulsive readiness of the Government in Tel Aviv to
resort to brutal force in pursuit of its goals, regardless of
whether such a measure contradicts all known standards
of behaviour for civilized States and is in conflict with the
principles of the Charter.
9. The Group of African States at the United Nations
vigorously condemns this barbaric and unjustified attack
by Israel against the independent and sovereign State of
Tunisia. We condemn without reservation the spurious
attempt by the Government of Israel to justify this sordid
attack and this violation of the principles of State sovereignty by insisting that the attack was targeted not at the
Tunisians but at the headquarters of the PLO.
10. For a variety-of reasons, the outrage committed by
Israel against Tunisia must alarm the international community, whose security the Council has a duty to guarantee and uphold. The Israeli attack does not set a
precedent in the Middle East: since 1948, when the State
was established, Israel has unleashed a combination of
violence, terror and naked force not only against the
Palestinians but also against its Arab neighbours under
the pretext that those States provided refuge to individuals and groups opposed to its existence. For several
years, the systematic annexations of Arab lands and the
resettlement of Israelis in those lands have continued
unabated in spite of international condemnation of such
activities, as is evident in several resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. In 1981, in a
brazen violation of Iraqi sovereignty, Israel raided that
country’s nuclear reactor and pleaded that it had caused
that havoc because it perceived the construction of the
reactor as posing a threat to the Israeli nation. In 1982, it
mounted an attack against Lebanon in an ostensible bid
to secure its northern border and rid Lebanon of Palestinian freedom fighters. The rape finally succeeded in
undermining
Lebanon’s sovereign rights and caused
thousands of deaths and untold economic and social dislocation among the inhabitants of that country. There is
no question that for far too long Israel has taken the
international community for granted.

14. The perception of the Group of African States as well
as of the majority of other States is that the Palestinian
question stands at the core of the problem of the Middle
East, and that until the problem of the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the oppressed people of Palestine is
solved, genuine peace and stability will not be restored in
that region.
15. On behalf of the Group of African States, we convey
sincere condolences to the Government and the people of
Tunisia, who have placed their country at risk in order to
discharge the lofty obligation to uphold the cause of freedom and provide a haven for all persecuted people. We
commend their indomitable courage, We also salute the
courage of the Palestinian people and assure them of our
continued support in their legitimate struggle.
16. We call upon the international community not only
to denounce the intransigence and atrocities of Israel and
the complicity of its backers but to recognize fully those
explosive elements which greatly jeopardize the cause of
international peace in the Middle East, and take appropriate and speedy measures to deal with them. We demand
that the proposal endorsed in General Assembly resolution 38/58 C of 13 December 1983, which requests the
holding of an international peace conference on the Mid2

’ dle East, be implemented without further delay. We
believe that such an international conference would greatly
assist the United Nations to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Middle East problem.

23. The acts of aggression and State terrorism committed
by these forces against sovereign Member States and
against the Palestinian people enjoy the sympathy and
unqualified support of the main imperialist Power. Is it not
characteristic that this criminal Israeli raid against Tunisdenounced immediately all over the world-should
have
found approval only in Washington?

17. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

24. What Israel and the imperialist forces have in mind is
to revive the policy of separate deals, to delete the question
of the Middle East and Palestine from the agenda and to
perpetuate the illegal occupation of Arab territories.

18. Mr. On (German Democratic Republic): Permit me
at the very outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. In doing so, my delegation
expresses the hope that the questions to be dealt with by
the Council under your presidency can be brought to a
positive solution. Our ,appreciation also goes to the President of the Council for the month of September, the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John Thomson.

25. Joint and resolute action by all peace forces must put
an end to these plans and practices. Therefore, it is only
natural that the non-aligned countries in their latest communique [S/17528, annex] demanded that the Security
Council impose sanctions against Israel.
26. Finally, I should like to read out the text of a message
sent by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Socialist Unity Party and Chairman of the Council of
State of the German Democratic
Republic, Erich
Honecker, to the Chairman of the Executive Committee of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasser Arafat:

19. It was with indignation and repugnance that the German Democratic Republic received the news of the criminal raid by the Israeli air force on the headquarters of the
PLO in Tunis. The people and the Government of the
German Democratic Republic most strongly condemn this
serious act of aggression by Israel, directed not only
against the Palestinian people but also against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an Arab State, the Republic of Tunisia.

“With indignation and repugnance the German
Democratic Republic has received the news of the latest
brutal act of aggression committed by the Israeli rulers
against the Palestine Liberation Organization. That
assault, trampling underfoot all standards of intemational law, gives the lie to the pleasant-sounding averments of peace from Israel and the imperialist quarters
who support it in the pursuit of its aggressive policies.

20. My delegation would like to express its condolences
and sympathy to the Government of Tunisia and to the
PLO and, through them, to the families of the Tunisian
and Palestinian victims who were killed in the criminal
Israeli raid.

“Be assured, dear Comrade Arafat, that the German
Democratic Republic stands in solidarity at the side of
the Palestine Liberation Organization and of the entire
Palestinian people.

21. As the Chairman of our regional group, Mr. Oudovenko, rightly pointed out .yesterday, this new Israeli
attack is another link in the chain of numerous acts of
aggression and State terrorism and a flagrant disregard of
all norms of international law and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Just when the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the United Nations
has resolutely condemned the Israeli practices in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, which are illegal
under international law, the world is being confronted
with a new monstrous crime committed by the Israeli rulers. All that at a time when, on the occasion of the United
Nations fortieth anniversary, Member States are reafftrming the principles of the Charter and pointing out the
urgent need to do everything in order to preserve intemational peace and security and to settle international conflicts by peaceful means.

“Accept my best wishes for the successful continuation of the just struggle of the Palestinian people under
the leadership of its sole legitimate representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization.”
27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): The international community has decided to use the fortieth General Assembly
for a rededication to the principles and purposes of the
Charter and to the policy of dialogue and negotiations.
The wanton bombing of Tunis by Israeli armed power is a
heavy blow to these efforts and is an act of naked and
arrogant aggression against the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of non-aligned Tunisia and a flagrant violation of the Charter.

22. There can be no doubt as to who bears the responsibility for the tense situation in the Middle East and for the
denial to the Palestinian people of its legitimate rights. It is
the ruling Israeli circles and their imperialist backers who
oppose a comprehensive, just and durable solution to the
question of the Middle East and Palestine.

29. The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole are now faced with a new example of State terrorism
3

by Israel that is opening floodgates for the forces of lawlessness and disorder in international affairs and for the
forces of domination.

uous efforts in making the Mediterranean a region of
peace and co-operation. At their meeting here in New
York a couple of days ago, the Ministers and Heads of
Delegation of Non-Aligned Countries strongly condemned
Israel for its totally unjustified attack on Tunisia. They
stated that the target of the attack was the premises of the
PLO, in a vain attempt ,to destroy the heroic Palestinian
resistance. They expressed deep distress at the heavy loss of
life among Tunisian and Palestinian civilians and damage
to property and affirmed their sympathy, solidarity and
support to the Government and people of Tunisia and to
the PLO in the face of this aggression. The Ministers
renewed the call for the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against Israel under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

30. Now is the time to stop and think. Where is the
implicit or explicit nod of approval of this aggression by
Israel going to take us?
31. Interpretations
have been put forward that this
attack was performed in selfdefence. It should be stated,
we believe, that the Charter cannot be interpreted depending on the moment and the interests and whims of any
Power. Such logic would lead to anarchy, since it would
justify the use of force and inaugurate the return to the
policy of “might is right”, with all its consequences for the
independence of all.

38. The United Nations-and
m particular the Security
Council-is duty bound to meet its responsibility, to act to
bring about respect for the principles of the Charter and to
see to it that the acts of aggression are met with adequate
measures.

32. I should like to say again that any aggression is illegal
and that no allowance can be made in this regard for any
Power and no new set of rules can be introduced for any
region.

39. Only a week ago yesterday, the Security Council held
its commemorative meeting on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations. At that meeting the
members of the Council pledged that the Council would
become a more efficient body for the maintenance of international peace and security. We feel that against the background of that meeting, the Council will not fail to act in
order to prevent the repetition of an act such as the one we
are discussing here today.

33. The unprovoked bombing of Tunis, the capital of a
non-aligned and peace-loving State, a country dedicated
since the inception of its independence to the principles of
peaceful coexistence, is a’most glaring disclaimer that there
are any positive changes in the policy of Israel.
34. Those who have sent the Israeli bombers flying on
their death mission far away from the border of their country should remember that neither the Tunisian people nor
the Palestinian people can be bombed into submission or
forced to change their adherence to self-determination,
independence and sovereignty. And, as a matter of fact, no
people can be cowed into submission..

40. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

35. Under the Chairmanship of Yasser Arafat, the PLO,
the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, with their determination to win in their struggle for
self-determination, for national independence and for the
establishment of their own State, is indestructible. Their
struggle is just, and they enjoy our full support.

41. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
ffslamic Republic of
Iran): I begin my statement with verses from The Holy
Koran, which is the guideline for the Palestinians, and I
hope it will remain so, for them and for all Moslems vis-civis the Zionist enemies:
“Leave is given to those who fight &cause they were
wronged-surely God is ‘able to help them . . .

36. The spokesman of the Federal Secretariat for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia has pointed out that this ruthless attack reflects the continuity of the policy of
aggression, of occupation and of the notorious practice of
terrorism to which Israel persistently resorts against the
Arab countries and especially against the Palestinian
people, in spite of the sharpest opposition from and condemnation by the international community. The spokesman further said that the flagrant violation of the
sovereignty of Tunisia was aimed against the security of
countries in the region and world peace. At the same time
it was, he said, calculated to thwart the efforts of the Arab
countries and the wider international community in seeking a just and lasting solution to the Middle Fast crisis and
the Palestinian question.

“Who were expelled from their habitations without
right, except that they say ‘Our Lord is God.’ Had God
not driven back the people, some by the means of others, there had been destroyed cloisters and churches,
oratories and mosques wherein God’s name is much
mentioned. Assuredly God will help him who helps
Him; surely God is All-strong, All-mighty.“’
42. The present meeting of the Security Council has been
convened once again to examine a Zionist attack, this time
on Tunisia. This act of aggression has taken place precisely
at a time when the United Nations is celebrating its fortieth
anniversary. My sincere congratulations to the United
Nations. The present-debate gives evidence of how disgraceful the Zionist base’s occupation of Palestine is and
that it has made a mockery of the same international body
which, nearly 38 years ago, forged an identity card for that

37. In this context, the members of the Council may
want to recall that the nonaligned and other countries of
the Mediterranean region have of late been investing stren4

illegitimate artificial entity. Even if they had any sort of
claim, the Zionist aggressors could have presented it to the
international body instead of making a mockery of the
entire body of international law. This at least could have
been done, to show a minimum respect for the fortieth
anniversary of the Organization that forged the identity
card for that illegitimate entity.

friend of the Arab world. It is the same friend that is ready
to help Arab countries if the situation in the Persian Gulf
gets out of control-that
is how they express it. It is the
same friend that has openly, verbally and practically,
expressed and actually demonstrated its unreserved support for the Zionist base. It is really time to awaken to the
fact that the Zionist occupiers of Palestine can never and
must never be tolerated and that their American supporters must never be thought of as friends.

43. In the invasion of Lebanon, the Zionist base always
tried to find some silly justification in alleged sniper shots
coming from the Palestinian camps in South Lebanon. But
Tunisia is too far away to tit such an excuse. Someone
reasonable should ask the lawless occupiers of Palestine
why they bombard innocent civilians in Tunisia. The
answer, however, is quite clear.

50. It is sad indeed that our Arab brothers are so proud
of their Arab nationalism and almost forgetful of Islam,
which binds them to hundreds of millions of Muslims all
over the world. It is sad that they always rely on the
enemy. It is sad that they remain irresponsibly aloof to
their inevitable confrontation with the Zionist base. It is
sad indeed that they are always proudly in the bosom of
their enemies. We must call on them again and again to
remind them that: “Verily God Loves those who fight in his
cause in battle array as if they are a solid armoured
structure.“2

44. The Zionist base, thanks to the American strategic
alliance, has attacked residential areas in Tunisia in order
to destroy the lives of innocent Palestinian people and
Tunisian people and to demonstrate that the international
body which once offered an identity card for that illegitimate, lawless regime is still prepared to condone its crimes.

51. The road before the Muslims of the Middle East is
clear. It is clear that concessionary, submissive approaches
to the enemy are wrong and are merely a stab in the back
of the Muslim combatants.

45. It has attacked Tunisia to convince our Arab brothers that the United States is not a reliable friend, but only
an age-old enemy in fancy dress. It has attacked Tunisia
further to convince our Tunisian brothers that they should
never rely on United States friendship, any more than a
sheep can rely on the friendship of a wolf.

52. As for the Security Council we, too, believe that the
attempt made by some members of the Council, as embodied in the present draft resolution, is helpful. We support
it, but only we support it. We also know that in this case,
as in many other cases, it might be obstructed by a veto.
Furthermore,
the Council can never demonstrate more
sympathy with the victims of Zionist aggression than now.
But such sympathetic, honest attempts-no
matter how
many and how sincere-will
always remain abortive as a
result of United States support for the aggressor.

46. It has attacked Tunisia to show that the Palestinians
are never immune-never-from
the Zionist occupiers of
Palestine, no matter how far they keep their distance. It
has attacked Tunisia to give another lesson to those Palestinian leaders who have been deceiving themselves with
humiliating talks concerning direct negotiations with the
Zionist criminals occupying Palestine.

53. The only reasonable avenue left to the Muslim world
is to return to Islam and to abide by the Koranic dictum

47. It has attacked Tunisia in order to convince King
Hussein of Jordan-whom
the Camp David signatories
have been using as a means of gaining acceptability for
that treacherous accord and as an instrument for paving
the way to betraying the cause of Palestine and providing
recognition
and safety for the lawless occupier of
Palestine-that
his negotiations cannot alter the aggressive
policies of the Zionist base or, as the enemy spokesman
said, the attack on Tunisia has no effect on the
negotiations.

“Make ready for them whatever forces and strings of
horses you can, to terrify the enemy of God and your
enemy and others beside them that you know not; God
knows them and whatever you expend in the way of
Allah, shall be repaid you in full, you will not be
wronged.“3
Many members of the Security Council, and those among
the audience as well, have already learned these Koranic
verses because I have recited them on every occasion.

48. I wish our Arab brothers could learn a lesson from
this attack, and from so many attacks like it. I wish they
could learn a lesson from the occupation of Lebanon. I
wish that they had been awakened to what the Zionists
have been doing to them. I wish they could show a minimum of readiness for meeting the challenge of the liberation of Palestine. I wish they could make a distinction
between their friends and their foes.

54. The Muslim world needs to establish its united
Islamic front against global arrogance. Tunisia is a Muslim
land, and aggression against it is aggression against the
entire Muslim nation.
55. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
while supporting any draft resolution that supports the
Palestinians and the Tunisian victims of this attack, is of
the opinion that political action will remain impotent

49. The fleet that has provided fuel to the Zionist planes
has been running on Arab oil. The F-16s that have carried
out the operation are the products of the United States, the
5

unless we make ready for the enemy “all the forces and
strings of horses”, and calls upon all Muslim nations, particularly those in the Arab world, to join in a united
Islamic front. That is the only remedy. We also advise
those traitors who have been dreaming and murmuring
recently of direct negotiations with the Zionist enemy to
open their eyes and realize what they are doing before it is
too late.

question is, therefore, whether the international community is prepared to countenance a policy of aggression
against any State where Palestinians may reside.
62. Neither the circumstances nor the specificity of
events are in dispute. Nor are the norms of international
law and civilized behaviour, which have been blatantly
violated, in question. Clearly, Israel has again flouted at
will the most fundamental tenets of the Charter-namely,
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
States, the non-use of force, non-intervention and noninterference. We are therefore astonished to note that
some quarters appear to be reluctant to condemn what is
undeniably a clear case of lawless behaviour.

56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Mr. Mochtar Kusumaatmadja. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
57. Mr. KUSUMAATMADJA
(Indonesia): I should
like to extend my warm congratulations to you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I am confident that with your
rich experience and your diplomatic skills, you will be able
to guide the proceedings of the Council in a constructive
manner.

63. On its part, the Indonesian Government condemns
the Israeli attack and expresses total solidarity with the
Government of Tunisia in its demands for reparations and
for concrete guarantees that Israel will desist from the perpetration or the threat of such acts.
64. The Tunisian tragedy is but one more example of
Israel’s perverted sense of immunity from international
accountability. In this regard, my delegation cannot but
note that such an attitude is inherently related to the inability of the Security Council adequately to exercise its
authority in enforcing its decisions in the past. For.Israel
seems to be convinced that it will always be shielded from
any Council sanction by its friends and protectors. At this
critical stage it is the solemn duty of the Council to meet
adequately Israel’s challenge to the Charter by responding
with appropriate measures and actions.

58. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Sir John Thomson, the representative of the
United Kingdom, for his able leadership during his term as
President of the Council in September.
59. This urgent meeting of the Council has been convened to deal with yet another wanton act of aggression by
Israel against the territory of a Member State. Indonesia
views with utmost gravity the Israeli air attack directed at
Hamman-Plage on the outskirts of the capital city of Tunisia, resulting in the deaths of more than 60 innocent civilians, the wounding of nearly 100 and extensive destruction
of the area. My delegation expresses its sympathy and solidarity to the Government and people of Tunisia who have
been victimized by that cowardly act.

65. It appears clear that Israel’s resort to force is also
designed to thwart any efforts to reach a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. My delegation believes that that
was a basic consideration in its decision to commit aggression against Tunisia, because in every instance that the
United Nations has sought to embark on a fresh initiative
to establish a structure for comprehensive negotiations,
Israel has consistently frustrated those efforts through
stepped-up repression of the Palestinian Arabs and aggression against its neighbours.

60. Clearly, the bombing constitutes yet another futile
attempt in Israel’s unrelenting efforts to destroy the PLO,
the *sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people. This crime can only be characterized as Statesponsored terrorism, the barbarity of which cannot be justified under any circumstances. Indeed, even if we were to
entertain Israel’s lame justifications, the magnitude of its
action is wholly disproportionate
to any so-called
provocation.

66. Indeed, the search for a durable solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict has become locked into a most depressing
pattern of moving from one crisis to the next, without ever
budging significantly from the impasse that has persisted,
or has been allowed to persist, over this problem. In the
meantime, far from yielding new opportunities towards a
solution, continued delay has brought about added complications and even more dangerous dimensions to the
conflict, as evinced by the crisis of which the Council is
presently seized.

61. The fact of the matter is that in carrying out that
dastardly act and then immediately taking responsibility
for it, without any expression of remorse or regret over the
death of so many innocent people, Israel again demonstrated its utter disregard for the most basic rights of others, particularly the right to life. Moreover, the assault on
’ the PLO headquarters must be viewed in the context of
Israel’s avowed war of annihilation against the Palestinians, be it in Lebanon or in the territory of its other neighbours, in the occupied territories or, this time, in a country
that is 1,500 miles from its border. The potential ramifications of this unprecedented action must be clear to us all,
for Palestinians are.today dispersed throughout the world
in numerous Arab and non-Arab countries. The broader

67. MY Government. therefore. has always been acutely
aware of the need for all of us to persevere in the only
sensible path towards a peaceful and comprehensive settlement, which is through a process of negotiation involving
the international machinery which we have collectively
created and designed for that very purpose: the United
Nations.
6

68. The members of the Council having, barely a week
ago, at a special ministerial session, unanimously reaffirmed their resolve to enhance the efficacy and functioning of the Council, are now called upon to give concrete
expression to those commitments. The international community would like to see whether the Council is now able
to move beyond mere words to an effective exercise of its
authority under the Charter.

would have to turn into an expression of solidarity with
brothers in the Movement who were to become the victims
of barbarous and unjustified acts of aggression committed
by those who, flouting the law as usual, continue to
endanger international peace and security with impunity.
74. Although we had learned about the event that morning through international cables, we were particularly
moved by the statement made at our meeting by Mr. Beji
CaId Essebsi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia,
who reported to us this unjustifiable act of aggression committed in cold blood by Israel against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of his country and also against our
brothers in the Palestine Liberation Organization, with the
genocidal aim of destroying its heroic resistance.

69. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Nicaragua. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
70.

Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) (interpretaSpanish): You have assumed the presidency of
this important body, Sir, in the very month when we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Organization. It is
barely a week since the Security Council held a commemorative meeting to consider the item “United Nations for a
better world and the responsibility of the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security”. In addition to hearing the statements of the 15 members of the
Council, we listened very carefully to the statement made
on behalf of all the Council’s members by the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the
United Kingdom, who presided over that meeting, in
which he said:
tion from

75. That same day, we learned of official statements of
the United States Government which said that the attack
perpetrated by Israeli aircraft, 1,500 miles away from
Israeli territory and in which many Tunisian and Palestinian civilians lost their lives, was legitimate and justifiable. In trying to justify the attack, President Reagan said
that nations had the right to take retaliatory actions
against terrorist attacks. He thereby justified State terrorism, disregarding the right of peoples to determine their
own future and to oppose those who refuse to recognize
the changes demanded by history and reality.

“The members of the Council . .’ . acknowledge that
the high hopes placed in the Organization by the international Council had not been fully met and undertook
to fulfil their individual and collective responsibility for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace with
renewed dedication and determination.” [2608th meet-

76. In various regions of the world, thousands of kilometers apart, the United States has been making possible and
carrying out similar actions against the Arab peoples, the
front-line States and Nicaragua. That proves that this
major Power .is the centre for the co-ordination of the
terrorist actions of its henchmen. At the meeting of the
Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries held on 26 July in New York as well as at its
most recent Ministerial meeting, held at Luanda, my country vehemently denounced the threats by the United States
of new terrorist attacks and the socalled surgical operations or selective bombing operations. We said on both
occasions that such threats were not directed solely against
Nicaragua;but
in fact constituted a danger to other nonaligned and third-world countries. Thus, in order to justify
such criminal .acts which violate the international legal
order, President Reagan has for some time now been
speaking about the existence of a confederation of terrorist
States.

ing, para. 337.1

He went on to say in that important

statement,

“They agreed to employ appropriate measures available
under the Charter when considering international disputes, threats to the peace, breaches of the peace and
acts of aggression” [ibid.],
and that the members were also aware of “the special rights
and responsibilities of its permanent members” [ibid].
‘71. Today, Sir, as the representative of a permanent
member of the Council, you are presiding over our
debates, which are taking place as a result of acts of aggression that threaten and are a direct breach of international
peace and security. It is our firm hope that impartiality will
prevail here, and that we shall honour our commitment to
consider and to apply in this specific case the measures
provided for in the Charter.

77. The facts we are examining today make clear, once
again, who the terrorists are and who is defending them, who
the true members of that “country club of terrorism”the Washington/Tel Aviv/Pretoria terrorist axis-are.
78. Violations of airspace and territorial waters, military
manoeuvres, threats of takeovers and illegal occupation of
territory, selective bombing, the use of neighbouring tenitories as bases for aggression and for the training of mercenaries, acts of sabotage, air strikes and naval attacks, the
mining of ports: all these are forms of United States aggression against Nicaragua, and they are the same tactics used
by Israel and South Africa against the Arab nation and the
front-line States.

72. Here I wish to express my congratulations to Sir
John Thomson of the United Kingdom on his skilful presidency of the Council during the past month.
73. On 1 October this. year the Movement of NonAligned Countries met at the ministerial level at United
Nations Headquarters, as it has been our custom to do
every year. We had no idea whatever that that meeting
7

79. The concept of self-defence has been well defined for
a long time now in international case law and doctrine.
Unfortunately
for the world, today shyster lawyers resort
to sophistry and fanciful interpretations to support their
claim that there is legal and moral justification for barbarous actions such as those that have occurred in Tunisia, in
Angola and in Nicaragua.

Conference, of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and Member of the United Nations was so grave a matter
that I thought it was essential for me to travel immediately
to New York to participate in the debate on the issue.

1

86. It was only a few days ago, on 26 September, that the
Security Council held a high-level meeting at which its
members reaffirmed and renewed their commitment to
work for international peace and security, to make the
Organization
more effective and enhance its role and
authority. The violation by Israel of the norms of conduct
between States, of the Charter of the United Nations, of
international law and of morality, which has resulted in
the death of so many innocent civilians and which has
come so shortly after that solemn occasion, is a challenge
to the international community which must be given an
adequate and appropriate response.

80. Let us reflect. Let us heed the calls of the small
nations which, in order to defend their sovereignty and
territorial integrity, have recourse to this organ, which has
pledged itself to the prevention and elimination of threats
to the peace. Let us heed the call of the Secretary-General,
recently repeated in the Council, for the use of preventive
measures necessary for the strengthening of this body and
the maintenance of international peace and security, which
are constantly threatened by the existence of hotbeds of
tension which are becoming worse.

87. It is evident that the attack by Israel against Tunisia
and against the PLO offices in Tunis was motivated solely
by Israel’s determination that the peace process initiated
by the Arab States and the PLO in their search for a
comprehensive
and durable peace in the Middle East
should be frustrated. The flimsy pretext that the attack was
undertaken as a reprisal for the death in Cyprus of three
Israelis cannot bear objective scrutiny. It is sufficient to
note that the PLO has disclaimed responsibility for the
murders. Many news stories and commentaries which
appeared regarding the attack also agreed that it had not
been carried out by the PLO. The attackers themselves
have stated that they do not belong to the PLO. It is clear,
therefore, that the Cyprus incident has been used as a ploy
to attempt to justify a pre-planned and premeditated
attack against the sovereignty of a State Member of the
United Nations, in an effort to block any movement
towards peace in the Middle East.

81. We would like to take this opportunity to offer to the
delegation of Tunisia and to the people and Government
of Tunisia our heartfelt condolences on the loss of life of
innocent persons caused by the criminal attack, and our
firm and active solidarity. We offer our condolences also
to the PLO, the sole representative of the heroic Palestinian people, whose just struggle will not be tarnished or
deterred by dastardly and criminal actions such as the one
recently perpetrated.
82. The Security Council must show through deeds the
renewed commitment that was solemnly expressed in the
settlement by its President last month [ibid.] and, echoing
the declaration by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the calls of the international community, must
take the necessary measures which are none other than
those envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter. Otherwise,
the credibility of the Council will be undermined and this
fortieth anniversary celebration by our Organization will
be dishonoured.

88. This act of aggression by Israel is not an isolated
incident. The history of Israel is replete with similar
actions by the Zionists, which have been aimed at frustrating all efforts towards peace. Ever since its creation, Israel
has time and again committed aggression against neighbours, against other Arab States and against the people of
Palestine. Israel’s occupation of the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip and the Golan Heights, its attack against civilian
Iraqi nuclear installations and its aggression in Lebanon
are all examples of a deliberate policy. Israel does not
desire peace. It thrives on the continuation of conflict and
tension. Peace would foreclose its expansionist designs.
Peace appears to Israel to be a threat to its existence,
because it would not then be able to use the pretext of the
state of hostility with the Arab countries to obtain the
colossal economic and military assistance it receives at
present. It has, therefore, systematically
rejected and
defeated every effort to promote peace in the Middle East.
One recent example is its rejection of the United Nations
decision to hold an international conference on the Middle
East with the participation of all parties concerned and
some members of the Security Council.

83. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, Secretary-General of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, to whom the Council at its 2613th
meeting extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
84. Mr. PIRZADA:
I thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council for providing me the opportunity to participate in the deliberations of the Council in
my capacity as the Secretary-General of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, which comprises 45 members. I
should also like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the office of the presidency of the Council for the month of
October.
85. The present meeting of the Security Council has been
convened to consider the Tunisian complaint regarding the
@provoked
and savage air attack by Israel on a residential
area of Tunis-where
some offices of the PLO were also
located-in
violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Tunisia. The wanton Israeli aggression against
a peace-loving member of the Organization of the Islamic

89. Israel thus stands exposed as the root cause of the
conflict in the area. It has demonstrated by its actions that
8

heads of State their determination to utilize the machinery
of the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security, its failure will be seen as a major blow to the
prestige of the Organization.

it is an aggressive, expansionist and annexation& rkgime.
Its arrogance and intransigence have been fully and amply
manifested in its blatant disregard of the decisions of the
United Nations and otbcr international organizations.
That arrogance. stems from the encouragement and support Israel continues to receive from certain quarters, despite its total disregard of international law and morality
and its public threats of aggression against Arab and other
Muslim countries.

94. Before concluding. I should like to olace on record
the support and soli&ity
of the whole Islamic world
towards Tunisia and the people of Palestine. We offer our
deepest sympathy and condolences to the families of those
who have lost their lives, and we fully support the demand
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia for reparations from the Zionist entity for the death and damage it
has caused by committing this outrage against the sovereignty of a Member State.

90. It is a perverted, twisted and strange logic whereby
the oppressed people of Palestine, who are struggling
against heavy odds to regain their national rights, are
termed terrorists and their oppressors, who have forcibly
scattered them to various parts of the world and who continue relentlessly to hound them, are seeking to hoodwink
the world by using such lofty concepts’ as self-defence to
cloak their terrorism, aggression and naked and brutal use
of force.

95. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Malta. I invite him to take-a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
96. Mr. GAUCI
(Malta):. I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assuming the heavy responsibilities of President for
this month, and sincerely wish you every success.

91. The Organization of the Islamic Conference has consistently held that the root cause of the problem in the
Middle East lies in the denial of the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to return to their homes, to exercise
their right of self-determination and to establish a State of
their own in Palestine under the leadership of the PLO, the
sole authentii representative of the Palestinian people, as
recognized by the United Nations and other international
organizations. Until such time as the rights of the people of
Palestine are restored to them, peace will not return to this
war-torn
region. Furthermore,
no lasting and durable
peace can be established without the withdrawal of Israel
from all occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem.

97. I thank the members of the Council for allowing me
to speak, and apologize for intruding on their valuable
time.
98. I wish also to compliment the members on the successful meeting of the Council held at the ministerial level
on 26 September, and in particular to praise the dedication
of Sir John Thomson, the representative of the United
Kingdom, for having first initiated and then nurtured and
so ably put the finishing touches on that collegial enterprise.
My admiration also goes to the distinguished Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of his country for the excellent summing-up at the end. The success of
that meeting portends, I firmly believe, a good omen for the
future. I hope it will be pursued actively in the future.

92. Immediately upon receipt of the news of this savage
attack against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Tunisia, I issued a statement on behalf of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference expressing our deep sense of
indignation and outrage at this barbarous and criminal
act. I also called upon the Security Council to meet immediately in order to invoke and apply appropriate measures,
including censure, condemnation and sanctions, as provided for in the Charter, against the Israeli rigime. It is a
matter of gratification to the Islamic world that the Council responded to that demand immediately.

99. It is therefore all the more regrettable that the current
debates in the Council send us back almost to square one.
100. In truth, the events under discussion
more ways than one.

are tragic in

101. They are, of course, naturally tragic because of the
heavy loss of life inflicted and the value of property destroyed as was detailed in the opening statement of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia. To all the victims
of violence, Malta expresses its deepest sympathy.

93. This Zionist crime of unprovoked naked aggression
undermines the very basis of international law and morality. It provides proof of Zionist perfidy and exposes the
Zionist entity as a major threat to international peace and
security. We therefore expect that the Council will fulfil its
primary responsibility under the Charter and condemn the
Israeli raid against ,Tunisia. It must also consider the imposition of sanctions, as provided for in the Charter, to bring
the arrogant Israeli rt?gime to its senses. The whole world is
watching the debate in the Council, and the Council’s
stand against this act of terrorism will to a large extent
determine the respect the United Nations will enjoy among
its Member States in the future. If the Council cannot act
on the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, when
many. Governments have reaffirmed at the level of their

102. The events are tragic because they manifest once
again the easy, lavish availability of, and almost automatic
recourse to, military means in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
103. They are tragic because of the short-sightedly pemicious nature of the militaristic action-reaction phenomenon which predominates, with little or no regard for its
long-term repercussions and with even less regard for the
consequent erosion of the sacrosanct principles of international behaviour.
9

104. They are tragic because they manifest the ruthless
indifference of the Israeli authorities to the genuine pleas
of the dispossessed and dispersed Palestinians for realization of their just aspirations.

Israel. It is likely that assistance was also provided. Everyone should therefore help to apprehend the perpetrators of this offence against international law and basic
moral principles; those responsible should be apprehended.

105. They are tragic because as soon as a new spring of
hope has stirred in the Middle East, Israel has invariably
and repeatedly resorted to military means to blow those
hopes sky high.

“I would like to add that the Maltese Government
not only condemns what has happened but would also
point out the dangers of allowing the conflict in the
Middle East to spread to North Africa. We join other
non-aligned countries who wish to ensure that similar
acts of piracy do not spread and engulf others and that
such acts are not repeated.

106. All this, it must be said with regret, arises from the
inverted logic that Israeli leaders apply mainly to the
cause, but also to the symptoms, of the question of Palestine. It is as manifest in Israeli actions in the field as it is in
statements made by their representatives here, the latest
only confirming this unyielding attitude.

“In conclusion, we cannot accept any type of excep
tion or justification for any country to take the law into
its own hands in such a manner, or for any other courrtry to condone or excuse such aggression, The facts
available simply do not allow of such excuses.*’

107. Finally, it is also tragic because ot the indifference
or actual opposition of influential countries so far to the
crying need for concerted action to encourage, promote
and guarantee a comprehensive solution.

111. For all these reasons, and for almost a decade, we
have worked assiduously and objectively in helping to
forge an international consensus on the essential parameters for a comprehensive and peaceful solution. the details
are on record. They have already gained overwhelming
support. But they need the final touch that heals, that
overcomes stalemate, that endows legitimacy and provides
the assurances that encourage overdue concessions and
mutual recognition.

108. Once again, I cannot but recall that a prescription
for peace has lain before the Security Council for almost
10 years, being lethargically discussed at periodic intervals
under pressure from the General Assembly but, so far at
any rate, mostly ignored, and ‘consequently not offering
sufficient encouragement to peaceful progress, which is so
sorely absent in the Middle East.
109. My country feels exceptionally strongly on this
issue, mainly because fundamental principles of justice and
peace are at stake but also because of the adverse repercussions of the unresolved issue on our volatile region in the
Mediterranean. The latest incident only confirms our
worst fears.

112. This latest tragic incident throws us back, but only
reinforces our determination to work for peace.
113. One of your visits to my country, Mr. President,
coincided with a landmark in Malta’s history. It was then a
great period of trial. At that time, the island was a heap of
rubble, victim of seemingly endless aerial bombardment.
The civilian population was within .hours of mass starvation. The arbiters of our destiny at that time tinalized plans
for the military evacuation of the island. The civilian population was to be left to fend for itself. It was then our
darkest hour. But the people remained steadfast in their
determination to survive and to-secure peace. And their
fervent prayers were answered. Their finest hour also’had
come. As suddenly as it had started, the deafening crescendo of clash and clamour ceased. The rain of fire from
the skies was extinguished. The dust from the rubble
settled and was replaced by brilliant sunshine, which
extended over the starving population the warmth of peace
and serenity. An almost forgotten silence pervaded the
island, until church bells rang the joyous signal that the
strife was over, that relief was at hand.

110. A comprehensive statement by.the Minister for Foreign Affairs was made two days ago in the Parliament of
Malta, I shall now quote the most relevant extracts:
“This act not only gives rise to our concern but, on
the basis of contacts and reports reaching us, we join
others in strongly condemning this aggressive act
against a country far removed from the centre of conflict, a friendly country and a staunch ally of Malta and
of the people of Palestine, to whom we have given support in their quest for an independent homeland.
“This incident should also open the eyes of all Maltese to the consequential perils of this act of aggression
against Tunisian territory and against Tunisian and
Palestinian people.

114. On that’same day, therefore, dawned our contemporary history. Gradually, but determinedly, we have turned
away from war ever since. We have removed the scars, put
our past behind us and dedicated ourselves exclusively to
the cause of peace and economic progress, not only at
home but also in our region. As a result, the countries that
attacked us, as well as those that defended us in the past,
are among our best friends and our biggest trading
partners today, and many new friends have joined their

“In the face of this act, and taking into account the
geographic distance which separates Israel from Tunisia, we have to remain constantly alert and to cooperate with those who are searching not only for those
‘responsible for this horrible act but also for those who
may have assisted in its execution.
“It seems impossible that this act was carried out by a
single country from its own territory-that
is, from
10

ranks. As it was for Malta, *so I hope it will be with the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The vtston of peace, born in the Middle East, must be sustained. When the rightful indignation
over this latest incident expends itself, let us all together
pick up .the strands of hope and of peace through the
Security Council.
115. I am pleased to note that the draft resolution before
the Council meets all of Malta’s preoccupations. It only
remains, therefore, for me to appeal to all the members of
the Council, to the parties directly involved-and,
particularly, to the Israeli leaders-finally
to turn away from their
bitter past and present policies, to proceed to the conference table under United Nations auspices, to build
together the foundations of peace and security for all, to
render fundamental justice to the Palestinian people. Only
through this enlightened approach can the peace which we
all desire be attained. No country can afford to stand aloof
from this process. Malta undertakes to continue to exert its
best efforts until success is achieved.
116. The PRESIDENT:
The next sneaker is the representative of Mauritania. I invite him io take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
117. Mr. OULD BOYE (Mauritania)
(interpreration
from Arabic): I would have liked it to be possible for the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country to be present in
New York to speak before the Council.
118. Mauritania feels, Sir, that you are supremely well
qualified to preside over the deliberations of the Council
and we wish you the fullest success in the conduct of its
deliberations during this month. We feel that your extensive experience in international affairs, is a guarantee of
success in our work.
119. I should like to congratulate your predecessors, the
permanent representative and the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth.Affairs
of the United Kingdom, on the exemplary way in which they conducted the
work of the Council last month.
120. The Council is meeting today at the request of a
sister country, Tunisia, in order to discuss the treacherous
Israeli attack against its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Tunisia is an independent State Member of the United
Nations, well known for its wisdom, its love of peace and
its neutrality. Mauritania most vigorously condemns that
Israeli aggression and deems it to be contrary to interna-,
tional rules and customs. My country wishes to affnrn its
total solidarity with Tunisia, not only because it is a sister
Arab African Muslim country, but also because we maintain close relations with Tunisia and have concluded special agreements with it which require that we make
common cause with it in times of trouble.
121. The Israeli aggression against Tunisia was followed
very quickly by a surprise attack against our sister country
Angola by the racist South African forces. Those two
regimes have given the international community proof of

their collaboration in all spheres and of their repeated acts
of aggression against both neighbouring and other peoples
and States. Those two regimes undoubtedly pose a threat
to international peace and security.
122. Mauritania
urges the African ‘States, the nonAfrican Arab States and all peace-loving countries to unite
to form a common front against the racist Zionist aggression of Israel and South Africa.
123. Throughout its history, Israel has disregarded the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. By attacking Tunisia on Tuesday, 1 October, it
showed yet again that it has no serious thoughts of peace
and that it finds its true role in aggression and warfare.
While the entire international community was exploring
ways of achieving peace, Israel chose that precise moment
to violate the sovereignty of an independent African Arab
Member State, thus giving fresh proof of its arrogance and
its total disregard of the principles of the United Nations
and of international law.
124. That act’ of aggression was just one more in a long
list of such acts of aggression against Arab States and
peoples. Israel violated the sovereignty of Iraq by bombing
a nuclear reactor designed for peaceful purposes. It
invaded Lebanon, spreading destruction in that peaceful
country. It occupied and annexed the Syrian Golan
Heights. It attacked Uganda, and several times made
incursions into Egypt. All this it did to block all progress in
the Arab or African countries. Israel has continued to,
occupy Palestine and to press ahead with its expansion in
Palestine, to the detriment of the Palestinian people.
125. It now alleges as grounds for its attack against Tunisia the presence of Palestinians in that country, Palestinians who were in fact driven out of their homeland at
bayonet point by the Israelis and are now being relentlessly
tracked down, wherever they may be, to be eliminated
physically. Despite the odious nature of the crimes it has
committed for this purpose,, the Israelis will never succeed
in conquering the Palestinian people or burying their
cause.
126. We all recognize the rights of individuals to life,
dignity and independence. Our recognition of those rights
must be given more concrete form. We must therefore call
upon justice-loving and peace-loving countries-and
particularly those countries that bear special responsibilities
under the Charter-to show solidarity with Tunisia. Israel
is a dangerous military base equipped with nuclear weapons. The great Powers must do whatever is necessary to
put an end to Israel’s aggression and extremism. Israel
may well commit further acts of aggression that will jeopardize international peace and security-such an eventuality certainly cannot be ruled out. No one can say that the
next target will necessarily be one of the Arab States. Perhaps tomorrow Israel may try to take on other States,
States that have a long record of respect for human rights
and of providing asylum for refugees.

127. History is full of examples of individuals and peoples who have upheld human rights. The founding of the
United Nations itself was a firm endorsement of those
rights. The best position to be taken on the subject is one
in keeping with international law, for it is only on that
basis that respect for the eternal human values can be
upheld.

133. Bangladesh, along with the entire peace-loving
world, has received this news with deep shock and anguish.
My Government, through an official statement issued in
Dhaka on 2 October, has condemned the dastardly Israeli
attack against Tunisia in the strongest possible terms and
has demanded that international action should be taken to
prevent recurrence of such acts of international terrorism
by the Zionists. In a message addressed to President Habib
Bourguiba of Tunisia, the President of Bangladesh, Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad, stated:

128. Mauritania urges the Council vigorously to condemn the Israeli aggression against Tunisia and to compel
Israel to pay fair compensation and reparations for the
damage caused. We also urge the Council to adopt whatever measures are necessary to prevent a recurrence of
such acts in future.

“The Government and the people of Bangladesh are
deeply outraged by the barbaric and murderous assault
of Israel on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the brotherly Republic of Tunisia. The Zionist entity
must bear full international responsibility for this crime
against peace and against humanity. The Government
and people of Bangladesh are with you and the brave
people of Tunisia in this hour of trial.”

129. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
130. Mr. WASIUDDIN
(Bangladesh): Mr. President, I
wish to thank you and, through you, the other members of
the Council for their response to our delegation’s request
to participate in the present deliberations. Permit me to
extend to you, Sir, our warmest felicitations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of October. It is indeed a historic month, coinciding as it
does with the observance of the fortieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. The relationships between
our two countries are marked by close bonds of friendship
and co-operation. We are confident that under your able
and proven stewardship the Council will achieve fruitful
and constructive results.

134. The unprovoked
Israeli attack against a peaceloving sovereign Member State cannot be based on any
moral or legal justification. On the contrary, it testifies to
Israel’s intransigence and arrogance and to its utter lack of
respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter. We
cannot accept the Israeli argument that it has the right to
attack any State at any time on the basis of its selfconceived self-defence.
135. The international community must firmly oppose
the propagation of such a new doctrine of State terrorism.
The latest Israeli act of deliberate American aggression
must be condemned in clear and categorical terms, and
Israel should be asked to pay appropriate reparations. At
the same time, we should take all necessary measures to
prevent the recurrence of such acts of aggression.

131. May I also take this opportunity to convey our deep
appreciation to your predecessor, Sir John Thomson, the
representative of the United Kingdom, for the admirable
manner in which he guided the work of the Council during
the past month. We wish also to pay a special tribute to Sir
Geoffrey Howe, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, for the exemplary skill with which he presided over the special
commemorative
meeting of the Council last week.

136. The latest Israeli attack is yet another manifestation
of its relentless drive to eliminate the Palestinian people
and their sole and legitimate representative, the PLO. But
our heroic Palestinian brothers have demonstrated beyond
any shadow of a doubt during the past four decades that
the Israeli policies of repression, subjugation and forced
exile will not deter them from the restoration of their inalienable rights to freedom and national independence.

132. It is unfortunate that as the United Nations observes
the fortieth anniversary
of its founding, one of its
Members, Israel, in flagrant violation of all norms of international law and the principles and purposes of the Charter, has once again unleashed an act of aggression against
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
another Member State. This time the victim of the premeditated Israeli aggression is a friendly and peace-loving
country, Tunisia, which is more than 1,500 miles away
from the Israeli borders. The latest Israeli act of aggression
is by no means an isolated incident but constitutes yet
another link in the long chain of Israeli policies of relentless expansion, occupation and unabated aggression
against the Palestinian people and Israel’s Arab neighbours. Preceding speakers, particularly the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Tunisia and the head of the Political
Department of the PLO, have in their statements already
given a comprehensive account of this totally unjustified
and blatant Israeli attack.

137. The Government and the people of Bangladesh
have reiterated their firm support and solidarity with the
Palestinian people atid their sole and legitimate representative, the PLO. In a message addressed to Mr. Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the Executive Committee of the PLO,
President Ershad stated:
“I have learned with shock and dismay of the bombing attacks carried out by the Israeli enemy on the PLO
headquarters in Tunis. I strongly condemn this gross
violation of the territorial integrity of a brotherly Moslim country by the enemies of Islam and mankind. This
despicable act perpetrated on the peace-loving people of
Tunisia and the PLO, which has been waging a struggle
for achievement of its legitimate rights, militates against
all international
norms of civilized conduct and
12

amounts to a gross violation
United Nations.

144. I shall now focus on the core of the subject before
us. Tunisia, an independent sovereign State and a constructive Member of the United Nations, has had its air
space violated by Israeli war planes, which bombarded
civilian areas, killed innocent people and destroyed homes.

of the Charter of the

“Please accept my sincere condolences for the loss of
precious lives.”
138. A number of speakers have already pointed out that
the motive behind the latest Israeli act of aggression is to
jeopardize the recent initiatives for the restoration of peace
in the Middle East. Israel, in the face of a growing international consensus in favour of the Arab and Palestinian
cause, has once again resorted to the use of force to
heighten tension in the region with a view to frustrating the
current international effort to resolve peacefully the problems in the Middle East. We salute our Arab brothers who,
in the face of such unprovoked aggression and relentless
expansion, have demonstrated the utmost restraint and
statesmanship and have made every possible effort to
obtain a durable peace in the Middle East.

145. The reason cited is a false pretext and the justilications given jolt the conscience of humanity. A Member
State has attacked with war planes the land and the people
of another Member State under the pretext of avenging
acts that took place in a third country. Does there exist
even in the law of the jungle a rule more dangerous than
this for the security of the international community? I
should like to ask the international community whether,
while Israel commits these crimes, any country in the
world remains safe from aggression if we fail to adopt
actions to deter the recurrence of such an act and impose
penalties for its perpetration? Is there any country, large or
small, that can claim immunity from such aggression?
Does there exist a crime greater than this in the violation
of law and attacks upon others? Does there exist a crime
greater than this, for the prevention of which the Charter
was formulated?

139. It is now universally recognized that any meaningful
effort to bring peace to the region must be based on a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution of the problems in the
Middle East. It is also clearly evident now that the problems in the Middle East can only be solved through a
concerted international effort under the auspices of the
United Nations. My delegation therefore attaches particular importance to the early convening of the proposed
international peace conference on the Middle East, and we
fully appreciate the Secretary-General’s current initiative
to that end.

146. The problem today is the flagrant act of aggression
against Tunisia. I do not wish to dwell in detail now on the
problem of Palestine and on the whole series of Israeli
crimes pertaining to it. I should like to ask, however, what
option has henceforth been left for the Palestinians to
resort to while the Israeli authorities claim that they are
fighting the Palestinians everywhere-including
women
and children-and
while malicious forces are endeavouring to block all roads to peace available to them.

140. The latest Israeli act of aggression is clearly a breach
of all norms of international law and the principles and
objectives of the Charter. The Council must therefore act
tirmly and resolutely to prevent the recurrence of such acts
of international terrorism. The failure of the Council in the
past to implement its own decisions and resolutions has
only encouraged Israel to intensify its policies of aggression against the Palestinian people and its Arab neighbours, thereby threatening international peace and security
every now and then. The time has now come for the Council to reassert its authority through concrete and firm
action.

147. That the aggression against Tunisia is a crime punishable by law there is no doubt, except in the eyes of those
who do not wish peace to prevail, and that it is a dangerous act that threatens every State in the world community
is a fact known to all of us.
148. We have stressed in the past, and we reiterate once
again, that the most dangerous form of terrorism is State
terrorism. It is an arrow that rebounds to the heart of its
perpetrator. Israel perpetrates it freely and with impunity,
but for how long can it continue to do so?

141. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

149. If Israel is exposed to retaliatory acts by the Palestinians, whose country it has occupied and who are fighting
to liberate their homeland, it is Israel that has been the
original and continuous aggressor against them and their
country. But when Tunisia, or any other country in which
the Palestinians seek refuge, becomes a target for Zionist
aggression, that constitutes an escalation of aggression and
terrorism that threatens many countries in the world where
Palestinians, or any other people seeking their freedom,
are living.

142. Mr. SHIHABI
(Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from
Arabic): I should like at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Our knowledge of your qualities
and experience assures us that under your presidency the
Council will achieve the aspirations of a world striving for
righteousness, freedom and the implementation of international law.

150. That is the other ugly face of racism which the
United Nations is fighting in South Africa and elsewhere,
and it matches the terrorist acts committed by South
Africa and by those who practise international terrorist
piracy. It is the real face of Zionism, as a theory and prac-

143. I should also like to express my appreciation to your
predecessor in the presidency, Sir John Thomson, for the
competence and wisdom with which he directed the proceedings of the Council.
13

tice, from the days it began its onslaught on the Arab and
Islamic nation in the land of Palestine, its first victim. Then
it began to expand into the neighbouring areas, and now it
has reached North Africa, by virtue of the advanced weapons it receives, in order to practise the most heinous forms
of aggression.

160. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of October. We wish you success in the discharge of your responsible duties. I should also like to pay
tribute to Sir John Thomson for the manner in which he
conducted the business of the Council in September.

151. If Tunisia, a peaceful State which adheres to international norms and which is thousands of kilometers
away, cannot be safe from Zionist terrorism, what country
can be safe?

161. The Security Council is called upon once again to
consider yet another serious breach of international law by
an entity which has been -found ,guilty on umpteen other
occasions of violating the fundamental norms of intemational law. This time it is the territorial integrity and sovereignty of a peaceful Arab country, Tunisia, which has been
subjected to a flagrant violation by that arrogant entity.
The international community is offered yet more irrefutable evidence of the criminal policy of State terrorism perpetrated by the Zionist entity against the Palestinians in
particular and the Arab world at large. That evidence
proves beyond any shadow of doubt the aggressive and
warmongering nature of Israeli ruling circles, which recognize no legal or moral boundary in the pursuit of their
expansionist goals.

152. What is the responsibility of the international community which is represented here today? The maintenance
of peace and security is a basic duty of the United Nations
as well as a primary responsibility of the Security Council,
and upon it rest the other objectives of co-operation that
we are all trying to achieve. The Council should assume
the responsibility for upholding the law and protecting
mankind from this dangerous form of aggression so that it
can be saved from this cancerous disease.
153. The opportunities for peace in the Middle East that
are presented now are the main cause of this crime and the
target of its perpetrators. While we condemn the Israeli
entity and its acts, designs and crimes, as well as the Zionist way of thinking and its explanations and justifications,
we hope that the Member States represented on the Council will not hesitate to take a firm and proper stand that
complies with the Charter, so that the Council will not
have to answer to history for the responsibility of encouraging these crimes and retreating from its commitments.
154. Two hundred million Arabs constitute a large
nation, and it would be a mistake for Israel, having made
war its choice, to believe that it can win in the end.
155. We call upon the Council to make peace its choice
today, and to express the civilized world’s opinion by
implementing international law and putting an end to such
crimes.
156. We stand with the people, the Government and the
State of brotherly Tunisia; we support it fully, and we call
upon the international community to rise to its responsibilities in maintaining peace.
157. We in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia share with our
brothers in Tunisia, with the Palestinian people everywhere and with all States and peoples striving for peace
and justice their indignation over these crimes. We hope
that the Council’s stand today will open the doors to a just
peace.
158. A State based on injustice lasts but an hour, whereas a State founded on righteousness lasts for. ever.
159. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

162. It was with horror’and deep indignation that the
international community learned of the barbaric air raid
by the Israeli Air Force on the premises of the, Palestine
Liberation Organization in Borj-Cedria on the outskirts of
Tunis, murdering 67 Palestinians and Tunisians, including
women and children, injuring scores of others and inflicting severe material losses, That horrendous act of aggression and terror is undoubtedly part and parcel of the
overall Israeli strategy physically to annihilate the sole and
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, the
PLO, and to make a reality of Zionist hallucination of the
so-called greater Israel.
163. The chronology of events in the recent history of the
region clearly testifies to the fact that Israel, by virtue of its
deeds and actions, is ‘an outlaw, an aggressive and nonpeaceful entity. It is more than clear, however, that Israel’s
blatant defiance of United Nations resolutions could not
have resisted the pressure of world public opinion had it
not been for the unlimited political, economic and military
support rendered to it by United States imperialism.
164. Because it is pouring billions of dollars’ worth of
sophisticated weapons into the Israeli war machine, it is in
fact the United States itself that has been engaged in a
protracted war against the Palestinian and other Arab
nations. It is precisely such unconditional assistance by the
United States that has enabled Israel to invade first one
Arab country and then another, to continue its illegal hold
on the Palestinian and Arab territories it has occupied
since 1967 and to escalate its repressive actions in the occupied territories against defenceless populations.
165. The United States once again demonstrated its culpability in the Israeli actions by making an effort-albeit
futile-to
legitimize the recent Israeli aggression.
166. It is indeed the support for Israel by the United
States that constitutes the stumbling block on the way to

of the aggression perpetrated by Israel against the headquarters of the PLO at Tunis.

the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East problem. Not only has Israel’s
intransigence rendered fruitless the efforts by the intemational community to bring peace to that war-tom region of
the world, but Israel has put up additional barriers which
have made the achievement of such a peace much more
complicated.

175. The whole world is shocked and outraged by the
bombing attack perpetrated by Israel in cold blood and
without any provocation against a densely populated area
of Tunis, the capital of the Republic of Tunisia, an independent and sovereign country and a Member of the
United Nations. Nothing could possibly justify, such an
act, committed in flagrant violation of the rules of intemational law and the principles of the Charter. Despite one
isolated and pitifully discordant opinion characterizing
this act as legitimate and an act of self-defence, enlightened
international opinion has unanimously characterized it as
a criminal act of aggression and international terrorism.
The exceptional seriousness of this outrageous raid has,
indeed, been clearly brought out by previous speakers in
this Council. I therefore need not dwell on it now.

167. While vehementlv condemning Israel’s wanton act
of aggression against Tunisia and &-Palestinians
residing
in Tunis, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan believes
that this totally unjustified action should serve as a sad
reminder of the grave tragedy that has befallen the valiant
people of Palestine. Driven away in an-inhuman fashion
from their land and property, Palestinians in the diaspora
have been denied security even hundreds of miles away
from their occupied land.
168. It is our strong belief that unless a solution is found
to the question of Palestine, there cannot be any possibility
of bringing peace to the Middle East. The question of
Palestine lies at the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and it
can be resolved only if the Palestinians effectively exercise
their inalienable rights, including the right to establish
their own national State in Palestine. The repeated failures
of the attempts to find a solution through partial or separate deals dictate, forcefully and convincingly, the need to
seek a comprehensive settlement.

176. I shall limit myself to informing the Council that on
2 October the spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam made a statement on this subject, which I now have the honour to read
out to the Council:
“On 1 October 1985, a large number of Israeli aircraft brazenly violated the airspace of the Republic of
Tunisia, frenziedly bombing the PLO headquarters in a
suburb of Tunis, causing heavy losses of life and property to the Tunisian and Palestinian people. This is a
criminal act of aggression against the independence and
sovereignty of the Republic of Tunisia and against the
Palestinian patriotic forces, in gross contravention Of
international law, and insolently challenging the Arab,
African and non-aligned countries and the peace- and
justice-loving forces throughout the world.

169. We must not allow the present state of affairs to
continue any longer. The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, must exert every effort to pave the
way to the convening of an international peace conference
on the Middle East, as called for in General Assembly
resolution 38158 C. In the meantime, the Council should
adopt effective mandatory sanctions against Israel under
Chapter VII of the Charter, with a view to restraining the
Zionist perpetrators of the recent savage air bombing of
Palestinian and Tunisian premises in Tunis.

“With the connivance of the United States and other
reactionary forces, Tel Aviv is further intensifying its
policy of aggression and barbarous terrorism against
the Palestinian Liberation Movement, as well as its policy of threats and pressures designed to prevent support
from the Arab countries for the just struggle of the
Palestinian people for their fundamental national
rights.

170. I should like to express our sympathy for and solidarity with our Palestinian brothers and the people and
Government of Tunisia.
171. In conclusion, I wish to thank the Council, through
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity afforded my delegation briefly to present its views on the item under
discussion.

“The people and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam most vehemently condemn the
above brazen act of aggression committed by the Israeli
authorities against the Republic of Tunisia and the barbarous act of terrorism against the PLO, and firmly
demand that Israel immediately end all its acts of
aggression and expansion in the Middle East and
strictly respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Tunisia and of other Arab countries
as well as the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.

172. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
173. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam) (interpretation
from J+e&): At the outset., I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, and &tend to you my best wishes on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
October.

“The people and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam once again reaffirm their resolute
support for the struggle of Tunisia and other Arab

174. I thank all the members of the Council for giving
me the opportunity today to participate in the discussion
15

countries against Israeli Zionist aggression and expansion. We give our equally firm support to the just struggle of the Palestinian people under the leadership of the
PLO for their sacred inalienable national rights and for
genuine, lasting peace in the Middle East.“*
177. Given the exceptional gravity of the act of aggression perpetrated by Israel against the Republic of Tunisia,
my delegation calls upon the Council to condemn it vigorously and to adopt the effective measures which are at its
disposal to prevent similar crimes from being committed in
the future.
178. The PRESIDENT:
I propose now, with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend this
meeting.

l?ze meeting was suspended at 6.25 p.m. and resumed at

183. First, it was not the military staff headquarters of
the PLO that was attacked by Israeli aircraft
at
Hamman-Plage,
near Tunis, but a clearly defined urban
area where many Tunisian families live and where a
small number of Palestinian civilians had found refuge
after their terrible ordeal during the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon. Today we know that 68 civilians were
killed and more than 100 were wounded. For once, the
well-known
Israeli intelligence services have proved not
to be so clever. As for the so-called Force 17, which has
been blamed for the attack at Larnace, it was located
elsewhere, as has been admitted by Israeli officials themselves, and I am grateful to the representative of Egypt
for having given the Council the reference to the written
texts submitted by the Israeli delegation itself, which
makes it perfectly clear that the headquarters
were
located elsewhere-in
any case, not on the territory 01
my country.

7.20 p.m.
179. The PRESIDENT:
The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Tunisia, Mr. Beji CaId Essebsi, has asked to speak, and I
now call upon him.
180. Mr. CAID ESSEBSI (Tunisia) (interpretation from
French): At the end of the fourth meeting in this highly
encouraging debate, during which many representatives, in
addition to those who are members of the Council, have
spoken, I wish to express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to your colleagues for having once again allowed
me to speak.
18 1. My first concern is to convey to all speakers the
heartfelt gratitude of my country as well as its warm congratulations. Tunisia is proud to have encountered here
such great solidarity on the part of brotherly and friendly
countries, a solidarity resulting from the policy of peace,
friendship and co-operation which it has followed ceaselessly since its independence and which it continues to
pursue with the majority of nations. Tunisia is also proud
of having in a way given the whole international community an opportunity to make the voice of legality and morality heard, the voice of the higher principles of law and
justice with which the Charter has entrusted to the Security
Council the noble and formidable task of being the vigilant
guardian.

184. Secondly, it is true that the Palestinian leadership
has been given Tunisian hospitality. Everyone knows that.
I would even say that no one has objected to it-quite the
contrary, and I hope that I have made myself perfectly
clear. But I would add that we are speaking here of
political leadership, of the legitimate representation of the
Palestinian people, of that genuine interlocutor with which
discussions must be held if there is a real will to achieve a
viable settlement in the Middle East. None the less, Tunisia
has not become a military base, and, a fortiori, has not
become a terrorist base. No act of terrorism has been
perpetrated from Tunisian territory. No Tunisian has been
implicated in any such act.
185. Thirdly, it is at the very least wrong to attach to an
Article of the Charter a meaning that is diametrically
opposed to that which it undoubtedly has, In fact, Article
51 gives a Member State the inherent right of self-defence
in the precise case where an “armed attack” occurs against
it. What kind of armed attack is involved here? Is it a
Tunisian armed attack against Israel? It is clear that, given
the present balance of power, that can only be ruled out.
But we are indeed talking of an armed attack-an
Israeli
armed attack, officially claimed by the Israeli Govemment, against which Tunisia unfortunately
has no other
means of retaliation than within the framework
of the
right of self-defence given it by the Charter.

182. Is there any need for me, as the representative of
Tunisia, to review those obvious facts which characterized
the aggression of which my country has been the innocent
victim and, above all, the false allegations which clearly are
aimed at distorting those facts, both within and outside the
Council-with
the aim, albeit unstated, of misleading
international opinion and legitimizing a criminal act that
nothing could ever justify? I believe that the international
community as a whole has already passed judgement on
these allegations through the statements made by its representatives over these past days. However, to those who still
have some doubts or who want to take a hopelessly partisan position, I wish to say the following.
*Quoted

in English

186. In those conditions, it is incumbent upon the United
Nations to ensure for Tunisia that right of selfdefenceand not by the method of cowardly attacks for which the
Israeli army has gained an unfortunate reputation, sowing
death among innocent persons and destroying homes, but
by vigorous action dictated by international legality and in
keeping with international morality, by a firm condemnation of the illegitimate and unwarranted use of force, by a
clear and unambiguous affirmation of the firm will of the
international community to prevent and avert the repetition of terrorist acts by a Member State against another
Member State in violation of its territorial integrity and
sovereignty and finally, by obtaining just reparations for
the damage caused by the crime.

by the speaker.

16

187. What is at stake is the authority of the Security
Council, the guardian of peace and security in the world.
Above all, what is at stake is the credibility of its members,
in particular those who have shouldered the very heavy
burden imposed on them by their power and their global
responsibilities.

ning that took place there, the missions that were launched
from it, and the purposes of those missions: repeated
armed attacks against my country and against innocent
civilians around the world. Tunisia, then, actually provided a base for murderous activity against another State
and, in fact, the nationals of many States who are the
objects and victims of this terrorist organization. The protection of sovereignty cannot be claimed by any Government when it makes available such facilities, especially
against the State that must protect itself. To claim otherwise is to make a travesty of the simplest logic. Everyone
here knows that any different conclusion would be absurd,
and I think-I
am convinced-that
they would never
agree to live with it if it were to apply to themselves.

188. The Tunisian people, wounded both physically and
morally, has been unanimous in condemning this criminal
act and in expressing its revulsion at the impunity enjoyed
by its perpetrators. This outstanding unanimity has been
particularly evident in the unequivocal position taken by
the Jewish community, which is an integal part of the
national community. The Tunisian people will not understand it if the criminal act of which dozens of its sons and
daughters were the innocent victims remains unpunished
and if its perpetrators are not subjected to the sanctions
that should legally be imposed because of their crime.
They will not understand it if, at the cost of many human
lives and extensive material damage, they are made to pay
for the failure of a blind policy which, to distract the attention of the world from the flagrant violations of international law and the right of peoples to self-determination,
strikes at random wherever it sees fit. They will understand
it even less if they find themselves seriously and unfairly
punished for an action taken to further the cause of peace,
at a crucial stage, and with the encouragement of their
friends.

194. The second claim relates to proportionality.
What
are we discussing here: a vendetta, a calculus of a life for a
life? If that were the case we should tally the thousands of
innocent people who have fallen victim to the attacks of
these ruthless killers. But that is not the issue. We are not
dealing here merely with punishing the offenders; we are
concerned with the prevention of future crimes, and we
aim to weaken and to destroy the nerve-centre of world
terror. If that centre continues to operate without suffering
any hindrance or encountering any opposition, it will
spread its tentacles further and further. No one inside or
outside this Chamber should be deluded: no place on earth
will be immune from its attacks. So if the question of
proportionality
is raised, we must take into account not
only the thousands who have already fallen victim, but
also the many thousands more who will fall if this nervecentre of terror is allowed to operate undisturbed.

189. My country had always believed that, lacking military strength, its strength derived from the principles of
law and justice which the mighty of this world are supposed to buttress. We venture to believe it still, and would
like to be able to believe it forever.

195. Let me now pose a simple question: whom are we
trying to defend here? Whom are you representatives trying to defend here? Cold-blooded killers of little children,
of women, of old men, of innocent travelers, tourists, bystanders, nationals of other countries, who have nothing to
do with the issue that these terrorists profess to fight for?
These creatures, who are divested of any morality, of any
law, of any sense of justice and mercy? These you are
defending? For these you are making such a furor-and
a
furor against those who suffered from their atrocities?

190. At this late stage of the Council’s discussion, I
believe that the issue before it has been well defined. The
opinions of all sides have been stated, and we calmly await
your decision. We hope that it will be commensurate with
the Council’s responsibilities under the Charter.
191. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I call
on him.

196. Perhaps you representatives think it is an accident
that one of the killers in Larnaca was a British neo-Nazi,
that the most fervent foreign recruits in the PLO camps in
Lebanon were German neo-Nazis, that Yasser Arafat’s
model, as he put it, is Haj Amin Al-Husseini, who was
Hitler’s ally in the Middle East and later in Europe. Do
you think it is an accident that they worked hand in hand
with Idi Amin, whose idol was Adolf Hitler? Do you representatives not see that all these people are inspired by the
same philosophy that throws morality into the gutter? It is
these people whom you are defending. Members of the
Council, do not allow civilized people everywhere to cry
out, “Shame, shame on such perversion”. Do not allow
them to feel that the noble trust once placed in this body
has been yet again betrayed.

192. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): I want to say a few
words about the two basic arguments that have been
raised against Israel’s action taken against the PLO headquarters in Tunisia. The first concerns the violation of
territorial sovereignty and the second the disproportionality of the response.
193. As for the violation of sovereignty, we have said
before, and it cannot be overlooked or overstated, that the
PLO had in Tunisia an extraterritorial
base from which
they conducted their terrorist operations. We have struck
only at this base and at no other facility, buildings or area.
But apart from this, a country cannot claim the protection
of sovereignty when it knowingly offers a piece of its territory for terrorist activity against other nations, and that is
precisely what happened here. Tunisia knew very well
what was going on in this extraterritorial
base, the plan-

197. The adoption of this draft resolution would not
only be a victory for terrorism, but it would be a new,
17

pernicious gain for terrorism, because it would enable terrorism and political initimidation to command the deliberations of the Council. That indeed would be a
turning-point-1
would say, more than a turning-point: a
profound setback-in the war against terrorism: the propagation of the crippling notion that the victim cannot
defend himself and that the terrorist deserves sanctuary.
198. Many countries which have supported this draft
resolution for short-sighted expediency-will suffer-and, I
am afraid will suffer soon-its unavoidable consequences.
But I can aSsure members of the Council that we in Israel
shall never accept it.
199. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
200.

Mr. EL-FATTAL

204. In spite of all this, the representative of the Zionist
entity is levelling accusations before the Council, although
it is Israel that stands accused, and in spite of all the statements we have heard from countries of the East, the West,
the North and the South condemning Israel’s act of aggression. The representative of Israel is trying to level accusations against Syria on the subject of Lebanon. Israel’s
hatred for Syria is due to Syria’s opposition to Israel’s
designs and its ambitions in the occupied Arab territories.
What Syria has given and will give to fraternal Lebanon is
no secret, and that intensifies Israel’s hatred. Israel feels
that hatred because of Lebanon’s heroic resistance and
because, through Arab Syria’s support for it, the heroic
Lebanese people was able to reject the surrender agreement that Israel and its protectors in Washington tried to
impose upon it. Israel suffered the biggest defeat it has ever
known in Lebanon, and Lebanon was just the beginning.
It was defeated thanks to the heroic resistance of the Lebanese people to the Israeli occupation and the agents of that
occupation.

(Syrian Arab Republic) (inteqre-

tation from Arabic): It was my preference earlier on not to

exercise the right of reply, because the exercise of the right
of reply would actually constitute a dialogue with lies.
Quite apart from that, the statement made yesterday afternoon by the Zionist representative does not deserve a
reply. There was nothing new in that statement; it was
nothing but a boring repetition of the lies we heard a
minute ago from the Zionist representative. He twists
international law to his liking; he distorts the provisions of
the Charter to his liking. Indeed, every time the Security
Council considers an Arab complaint against Israel, we
hear that boring repetition of the Zionist lies we have
heard ever since that strange entity was implanted in the
body of our nation, in our Arab homeland.

205. What Syria has done is support liberation. What
Israel has done is try to drag Lebanon into slavery and
humiliation
and subjugate the Lebanese people in the
south, in the north, everywhere.
206. We should like to assert to all that, whatever the
objectives of Zionism and its agents, Syria is determined to
persist in supporting the struggle of the Lebanese people to
liberate its territory completely and to reconstruct what
Israel has destroyed. The glass from which Sharon sipped
on the Beirut hills overlooking the bodies of the victims of
Beirut, Sabra and Shatila seemed to contain sweet wine,
but it turned out to be bitter wine and poison.

201. The objective that the Zionist representative tried to
achieve could not be achieved originally by his masters in
Washington. They failed to achieve it when in one way or
another they gave their blessing to all the acts of Israeli
aggression, the latest of which is that against our sister
country Tunisia.

207. At this late hour, some Powers are trying to weaken
or block a draft resolution that includes a condemnation
of Israel. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic does
not agree that Israel should go without clear-cut condemnation by name. The Syrian Arab Republic calls upon the
Security Council to live up to its responsibilities and
impose upon Israel sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter, because the Israeli act against Tunisia was an act
of aggression, and it was not the first such aggression. The
aggression started with the creation of Israel in 1948.

202. In spite of all this, I feel it my duty to remind the
Council, for the record and for history, that from all the
statements we have heard we see the accused very clearly.
It is very well known. It is Israel, of course. We see its acts
of aggression as defined in article 3 of the Definition of
Aggression contained in a resolution of the General
Assembly [resolution 33Z4 (XXX)], which was adopted by
a consensus that included your country, Mr. President.
The act perpetrated by Israel is a well-defined act, an act of
aggression.

208. The PRESIDENT:
Liberation Organ&ion
reply. I call upon him.

The observer for the Palestine
wishes to make a statement in

209. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
We have noted with great appreciation the strong condemnation of Israel for its barbaric act of aggression against
Tunisia. This unanimous condemnation of Israel should
bring a message to the people of Israel that the intemational community will no longer tolerate such acts of
aggression and such crimes against humanity. I have said
“unanimous condemnation**, and we hope that that unanimous condemnation will be reflected in whatever decision
the Council takes.

203. We would also remind the Council of the Israeli
barbarism of which we Arabs have always been the victims
and of the criminal hands of the rulers of the Zionist entity
in the past and in the present. No matter what their allegiance or their qualities, their hands are stained with Arab
blood-Tunisian
blood, Lebanese blood, Palestinian
blood, Syrian blood, Jordanian blood and Eyptian blood.
18

210. We wish to reiterate here our satisfaction with the
expression of sympathy and the reafftrmation of principled
support for the just struggle of our people under the leadership of our sole and legitimate representative, the PLO.

“The people of Herut had no part in the constructive
achievements in Palestine. They . . . only detracted from
the Jewish defence activity. . . .
“The discrepancies between the bold claims now
being made by Begin and his party and their record of
past performance in Palestine bear the imprint of no
ordinary political party. This is the unmistakable stamp
of a Fascist party for whom terrorism (against Jews,
Arabs, and British alike) and misrepresentation are
means and a ‘leader State’ is their goal.”

211. We take this opportunity to place on record our
thanks and gratitude to Tunisia, to its people, to its
Government
and, first and foremost, to President
Bourguiba.
212. The General Assembly had on its agenda at its
thirty-fourth session an item concerning international terrorism. It condemned the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regimes in denying peoples their legitimate right to self-determination and
independence and other human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It also recognized that, in order to contribute to
the elimination of the causes and the problem of intemational terrorism, both the General Assembly and the Security Council should pay special attention to all situations,
including, inter alia, colonialism, racism and situations
involving alien occupation, with a view to the application,
where feasible and necessary, of the relevant provisions of
the Charter, including Chapter VII thereof.

215. I think I cannot make any better statement to describe who are the terrorists, where the nucleus and the
birthplace of terrorism is in the country of peace, in my
country, in Palestine. It was the Herut party that wrought
terrorism, and this is exactly what we are reaping and what
they are reaping as well.
216. But terrorism was not only carried out by the party
when it was a party. Terrorism was also pursued as a State
policy. Moshe Dayan considered terrorism and terrorist
acts as such. He said:
“These actions are our vital lymph. They . . . help us
maintain a high tension among our population and in
the army . . . In order to have young men go to the
Negev we have to cry out that it is in danger.”

213. I should simply like to ask the Council what action
it has taken against alien occupation. People under alien
occupation have a right and a duty, and that right and
duty are to tight and resort to armed struggle against the
forces of occupation. In the case of the Palestinian people
under occupation, that legitimacy of armed struggle has
been very clearly spelled out in the resolutions of the General Assembly. What the Palestinian people are doing is
exercising a right and carrying out a duty to combat the ’
alien occupation, namely, to combat the Israeli presence
on Palestinian territory.

217. So terrorism has another aim, and that aim is the
transformation of Israel into a regional Power, which inevitably presupposes the use of large-scale open violence and
could not even mythically pretend to be achieved on the
basis of the earlier moral superiority doctrine, which,
therefore, had to be replaced with a new one. Terrorism
and,revenge were now to be glorified as the new moral and
even sacred values of Israeli society. Terrorism and reprisal
are the State policy, and that is what we are dealing withanother manifestation of State terrorism against a country
that has been kind enough to be host to the Palestinians
after 30 or 35 years of mishaps.

214. With respect to what was referred to as terrorism,
let me quote from a statement made by the late Albert
Einstein. I am sure everyone here knows who Albert Einstein was. He was referring to the Herut party, which is the
nucleus of the Likud, the Nazi party in Israel now. Albert
Einstein stated the following:

218. I would assure the Council that the struggle of our
people will continue until we eliminate the occupation of
our country. We are exercising a right against foreign occupation, and we can exercise that right in all forms, including armed struggle.

“Within the Jewish community [the Herut party]
have preached an admixture of ultranationalism,
religious mysticism and racial superiority. Like other Fascist parties, they have been used to break strikes, and
have themselves pressed for the destruction of trade
unions. In their stead they have proposed corporate
unions on the Italian Fascist model.

219. Israel cannot claim to be the gendarmerie of the
international community. I think it is the duty of the Security Council to carry out the recommendations of the General Assembly and take action to remove the causes of
those disputes and struggles. Those are acts of violence,
but armed resistance in no way can be considered as an act
of terrorism. The heroes of Europe who sacrificed millions
of lives in the tight against the Nazis are heroes, and we
raise our hats to them. The heroes who really helped and
contributed with their blood to bring about the downfall
of nazism and fascism are our heroes, and we cannot consider them as terrorists.

“During the last years of sporadic anti-British violence, the Irgun Zvai Leumi and Stern groups inaugurated a reign of terror in the Palestine Jewish
community. Teachers were beaten up for speaking
against them; adults were shot for not letting their children join them. By gangster methods, beatings, window
smashing and widespread robberies, the terrorists intimidated the population and exacted a heavy tribute.
19

itarily speaking, there should be an equal number of
other planes for covering.

220. The representative of Israel said: “In the past year,
more than 600 such attacks have killed or severely
wounded more than 75 Israeli civilians” [2611th meeting,
para. 6Oj. He mentioned 600 attacks. That is the reason.
Israel is getting mad at the rising armed resistance by the
Palestinians under occupation. I repeat, our brothers
under occupation are exercising a right and a duty. I would
appreciate it if, 40 years after the destruction of nazism, the
world would understand the role of resistance against fascism and nazism.

“The planes were refueled twice en route to the target
and once on the way back. This requires a large number
of feeder planes which are unavailable to Israel in this
quantity. In addition, of the feeder planes which Israel
possesses, half are not suitable to refuel F-15 and F-16
planes.
“We have information that during the seven hours
which the operation required, the United States Sixth
Fleet had full knowledge of it and supplied radar coordination. In addition the United States Sixth Fleet
jammed the Egyptian radars to,prevent monitoring of
the operation.

221. I should now like to recall the role of the Govemment of the United States in all of this. In June 1982, in
this chamber [238Zst meeting], the representative of the
United States took a negative attitude towards a draft resolution [S/I5255/Rev.2]
and vetoed it. Why did he do that?
That draft resolution called for the cessation of fighting in
Beirut and the deployment of some observers there to see
that the cease-fire would hold-and
the representative of
the Government of the United States vetoed it. Why? He
made it very clear. He said it was because it did not include
the element of the elimination of Palestinian armed elements. That meant the elimination of human beings, and
that is exactly the aim of the Israelis. They are supported
by the United States not only through the supply of arms
and armaments
and warplanes,
as Mr. Qaddoumi
mentioned-those
were American planes and they were
donated to Israel. Israel did not buy them. The bombs
were donated by the United States to Israel in order to
strike the area. That is the joint aim of the American
Administration
and Israel, namely, to eliminate the Palestinian armed elements.

“We have information that the feeder planes took off
from some United States basesin the Mediterranean.
“We have information that the photos of the location
and its exact details were handed over from United
States satellites to Israel, and then a large model of the
location was made on which the planesexercisedbefore
the operation.”
We also know that the movements of Chairman Arafat are
always monitored, so it was no surprise that the attack
came at a moment when he was supposedto have arrived
in Tunis from Morocco.
225. The collusion between the United States and Israel
is therefore very clear. I am no army officer; I do not
understand these things. But anyone who has done army
service and got to a high rank knows exactly what the
implications are. I wonder whether this should be taken
into consideration.

222. Now in the United States there is a place called
Woodridge. The press reported that for six weeks a Jewish
Defence League (JDL) paramilitary training camp was in
operation in that area. I sometimes wonder whether the
United States has ever heard about that place. The information appeared in the press. In August 1981, they trained
for six weeks, and no one complained. They had gone
unnoticed in that Woodridge camp, despite frequent target
practice with high-powered
weapons. And let me go
further. In that report, a certain Jolovitz said that the JDL
owned the camp, which is the former Pleasure Hill House
resort. It became a centre to train those criminals. He said
the JDL also owned another 62-acre property nearby, but
would not reveal its location. It is there, he said, that
moonlighting members of the United States Army’s Special Forces and an Israeli commando instruct the youths in
military tactics.

226. The PRESIDENT: Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at its
2610th meeting, wishesto make a statement. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
227. Mr. MAKSOUD: I wish to extend to you, Sir, our
congratulations on assuming the presidency of the
Council.

223. Now, this is the collusion and training of those criminals who go to my home town, deprive my people of the
right to live in peace and then follow them all the waymore than 2000 miles away-and
kill them, using
American-supplied planes and American-supplied
bombs.

228. I did not intend to make another statement today,
becausethe deliberations of the Council and the statement
by the Under-Secretary-General of the Arab League
would have been satisfaction enough. However, in the last
two days, and particularly today, a certain dangerous
development-in terms of the justification of the raid and
the violation of the sovereignty of Tunisia made by the
Israeli representative-I think warrants a contribution on
our part, becausewe feel that if it is allowed to unravel
unchecked by the authority of the Council, there would be
established not only a dangerous precedent but also a

224. Let us now think of this most recent of the Israeli
acts of aggression. We have information
received this
noon, from which I shall quote:
“According
to Israeli reports the number of Israeli
planes that participated in the air raid was eight. Mil-

20

cover for subsequent activities which are similar, if not
identical, to what has taken place through the aggression
by Israel against the sovereignty of Tunisia.

Palestinian nationhood. It represents a state of mind for
Palestinians everywhere in the absence of their State.
235. We must therefore come to grips with the central
thesis that Israel is trying to promulgate and that it is
seeking to have ratified-namely,
that by insulting everybody and by determining what constitutes civilized behaviour and by developing its own machismo, in saying that
this was a “surgical operation*‘, Israel is attempting to
bring about a paralysis of the international will in order to
impose its own will on the international community and to
render itself totally unaccountable to all norms of intemational law and of international reiaiions.

229. What we have heard is in a way the developing
jurisprudence of a new imperialism, namely, the notion
that violation of sovereignty of States can be legitimized if
the violator of the sovereignty of another State considers,
ex carhedra, on his own, without any consensus whatsoever, that he can arrogate to himself the total and absolute right to violate the sovereignty of another State.
230. The pretext can be anything-and
in this case, it is
the assessment by the aggressor that the Palestinians have
established extra-territorial rights or privileges in a sovereign State. This was the excuse that Israel gave when it
invaded Lebanon in 1978, when it illegally annexed the
Golan Heights, ,when it puts forward a proliferation of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories of the
West Bank. Israel’s definition of extra-territoriality is the
very presence of Palestinians, The fact that Palestinians are
present in any part of the world constitutes by definition,
in Israeli terminology, extra-territoriality.

236. Israel is undoubtedly trying to establish a counterlegitimacy and to extricate itself from any responsibility or
accountability to the United Nations or to anyone else,
including some of its major supporters. For that reason,
the Israeli representative clearly and without any hesitation stated that irrespective of what the Security Council
does, Israel is not bound by it. What Israel is signalling to
the world community is that under no circumstances will
Israel comply with any resolution that this body adopts. It
is in this spirit that many of us feel that perhaps Israel does
not belong to this body.

23 1. And this is not over-blown rhetoric, as might at first
give the impression. The mere presence of Palestinians constitutes a challenge to Israel’s concept of its own legitimacy
and hegemony. Therefore, Israel arrogates to itself the
right to violate the sovereignty of States, in this case Tunisia; under the pretext that there are Palestinians who have
taken extra-territoriality
upon themselves.

237. The PRESIDENT:
As the representative of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
I shall now make a
statement in exercise of the right of reply.
238. I have listened here to a series of allegations to the
effect that the United States played some part in the operation which is the subject of this discussion. This is false,
and those who make this accusation know that it is false.
The United States had no knowledge of that operation,
nor did it participate in it in any way.

232 Let me be very frank in response: if we accept or
acquiesce in’ any form in. this Israeli definition, are the
Palestinians entitled to a territory of their own? Why
should they have extra-territorial
presence? Precisely
because they are denied their own national territory. Does
that, therefore, put us in a position where, if we follow the
Israeli thesis to its logical conclusion, if the Palestinian
presence anywhere is extra-territorial, it thus vindicates the
right of Israel to violate sovereignty wherever it is. The fact
is that the Palestinians should not have an extra-territorial
presence. What should they have? Either they should have
a national territory; so they can be present there, or they
should be eliminated, in order that the sovereignty of various. States’ where Palestinians are present becomes
immune from violations by Israel.

239. I have listened to a cascade of anti-American rhetoric accusing us of everything under the sun, except the
recent tragic earthquake in Mexico. And I am surprised
that I have not heard my country blamed for that, or for
the one that occurred today in Tokyo.
240. Sometimes, when I hear some of the things that my
country is supposed to have done, I think we-might say
that on the seventh day we rested.

233. The world community has declared that this is not
allowed and therefore, in order to respond to the Israeli
challenge to international law, has recognized the Palestinians as a people with a right to self-determination and to a
State in their homeland. It is that right which Israel is
trying to curtail. It is that right which Israel is trying to
deny.

241. The idea that the United States is interested in the
continuation of warfare and bloodshed in the Middle East
is preposterous nonsense. Terrorists have trained in other
places to attack Americans, but the press did not report
that, because in many of those places the press was not
free, as it is in this country. In this country, it is illegal to
do that sort of thing and, when it comes to the attention of
the United States Government, it is closed down.

234. Thus, when the Israelis argue about proportionality
and about their rights to arrogate to themselves the decision as to what constitutes terrorism, the international
community responds by recognizing the PLO-not
only as
an organization of liberation but as the framework for

242. Many Americans have died at the hands of terrorists.
More than half a dozen American ambassadors have been
assassinated, and throughout recorded history, the person
of an ambassador is supposed to have been sacred. A
hijacked American aircraft was taken, and a, young sailor
21

was brutally and slowly beaten to death. One must not
underestimate the fact that we, too, have been wounded by
terrorism, and it would be surprising if we did not reject
terrorism in all its forms.
243. I resume my function
Council.

as PRESIDENT

events has roots deep in what is now an all too familiar
pattern of escalating force and counter-force. We deplore
such acts of violence from whatever quarter they come. We
have extended to the Government of Tunisia our sincere
condolences over the loss of life of its citizens. Our sympathies lie with the people of Tunisia for their grievous loss, as
indeed with all the innocent victims of acts of terror and the
response they inevitably provoke.

of the

244. Members of the Council have before them a draft
resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago [S/17535$ It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection; I shall put the draft resolution to a vote now.
A vote was taken by show of ham&

250. Despite our deep and abiding friendship for the
Tunisian Government and people, my Government could
not support the draft resolution, disproportionately placing all blame for this latest round of the rising spiral of
violence in the Middle East onto only one set of shoulders,
while not also holding at fault those responsible for the
terrorist acts which provoked it.

In favour: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

25 1. We must be absolutely explicit in identifying the real
threat all civilized peoples are facing. That threat is terrorism, and the failure adequately to address the subject prevented my Government
from supporting the draft
resolution. In large measure because of this failure to recognize that terrorism is at the heart of much of the violence
we face, we have seen a steady increase in terrorist attacks
directed against innocent people everywhere. The most
recent examples are an illustration of terrorism at its most
senseless and vicious: the murder of three Israelis at Larnaca, and the kidnapping and murder of a Soviet diplomat
in Beirut. We reject absolutely the assertion that there can
be any justification for such acts, which can only be categorized as the basest of crimes.

Againsr. None.
Abstainins: United States of America.
l%e draft resolution wasadopted by I4 votes to none, with 1
abstention [resolution 573 (1985)J.
245. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who have asked to be allowed to make statements
following the voting.
246. Mr. KASEMSARN
(Thailand): My delegation
would like to explain its vote with regard to paragraph 4 of
the resolution. No matter how deplorable and regrettable
the situation in Tunisia, we understand that there has not
been, nor does there now exist, a state of war between the
two countries involved. Therefore, the word *‘reparations”
is not appropriate. We would prefer to see the word “compensation” used. However, the sense of that Paragraph is
clear-namely,
the loss suffered by the Tunisian Govemment and people must be made good by those who attacked
them. That is why we were able to support the resolution.

252. We speak of a pattern of violence, but we must be
clear: it is terrorism that is the cause of this pattern, not
responses to terrorist attacks. We do not yet have all the
relevant facts concerning this particular response. However, we recognize and strongly support the principle that
a State subjected to continuing terrorist attacks may
respond with appropriate use of force to defend itself
against further attacks. Thii is an aspect of the inherent
right of self-defence recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations. We support this principle regardless of
attacker, and regardless of victim. It is the collective
responsibility of sovereign States to see that terrorism
enjoys no sanctuary, no safe haven, and that those who
practise it have no immunity from the responses their acts
warrant. Moreover, it is the responsibility of each State to
take appropriate steps to prevent persons or groups within
its sovereign territory from perpetrating such acts. In view
of the number of States Members that have suffered from
the scourge of terrorism, we find it surprising that the
Council has not forthrightly censured other acts of terrorism that have resulted in violent responses. Until the world
community is prepared resolutely to face and eliminate the
problem
of terrorism, the pattern of violence will continue.
”/

247. Mr. de K&MOULARIA
(France) (interpretation
from French): In voting for the resolution which has just
been adopted, France has once again condemned the raid
by Israeli aircraft and the resulting violation of Tunisia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, despite the legal reservations that we feel stem from the concept of acts of aggression in the text; We have taken that position not only
because of our traditional friendly relations with Tunisia,
but also because we condemn, whatever their origin, all acts
of violence that would compromise the search for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
248. The PRESIDENT:
As the representative of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
I shall now make a
statement in connection with the vote.

253. Looking to the future, we believe that we must not
address this incident as an obstacle to peace, but rather as
an impetus for the peace process and renewed efforts
towards its successful completion. If this unhappy event
demonstrates anything, it is that we must concentrate our
efforts to bring about peace in the region and thereby

249. The occasion for this meeting is a particularly sad
one for the United States, stemming from a raid by one close
friend into the territory of another. This tragic sequence of
22

obviate the need for ever again considering such incidents
in the United Nations context.

258. Tunisia believes that it has fully exercised its right to
selfdefence against the aggressor that violated our sovereignty and territorial integrity. Those who died, who will
very soon be taken to their last resting place, will be able to
rest there in peace.

254. The United States for its part is resolved to do everything in its power to support the peace process. President
Reagan reaffirmed this objective following his 30 September meeting with King Hussein, when he said

259. I reiterate my heartfelt gratitude to all members of
the Council and all those who came here to express their
countries* active solidarity with, and unreserved support
for, our just cause-that of law and justice.

“The United States is dedicated to achieving a just
and durable peace between Israel and all its Arab neighbours. We will do all that we can to maintain the
momentum achieved.”
255. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Council.

260. Tunisia, for its part, promises the Council once
again that it will spare no effort to ensure the triumph of
peace, and that we will continue along the path of friendship and understanding.
..

of the

256. The Minister for Foreign AfTairs of Tunisia has
asked to speak, and I call upon him.

261. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has thus
conclused the present stage of its consideration of the item
on the agenda.

257. Mr. CAfD ESSEBSI (Tunisia) (interpre?ution from
French): I said earlier that my country would like to continue to believe in the triumph of the principles of law and
justice over the illegitimate and unwarranted use of force. I
am happy that by their vote members of the Council have
given us cause for hope. Tunisia expresses its heartfelt
thanks. It congratulates the Council on rising to its noble
task, in the accomplishment of which all peace-loving
peoples-that is, I am sure, all the peoples of the worldstand by it.

llie meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.

NOTES
1 Koran,
XXII:
39-40.
z Ibid.. LXI: 4.
3 Ibid., VIII: 60.

23

HOW TO OBTAIN UNlTED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS TJNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences d&xAaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous h : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genhe.
KAK

n0JIYYHTb

H3w
oPrAHH3m
OEbELIczHEHHblx
HArJIfR
06WmiHeHHbIX H~IMMOIHO
K)'lIATbB
KHHXCA~IXM~~U~~HKX
Hasomrrecnpaagu06
H~A~HUKXBB~~~ICMKHS~XROM
HAH muttme tto a~pecy:. Opra~si3a~tna 06aenmxexitib~ Ha&I, Ce~uwr uo

~3JGlIUiK
0praAuSaIUiH
KarCHTcrBaxBOBCeXpatlOHaxMupa.

mmmte

upoA~eE13AaHSf%

HbIO-fiOpKEJIK

)KeRCBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICAUONES
DE LAS NACIONES UNIDA!S
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Con&e a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

@I400

90-61439~March

1995-1,925
