United Nations

asdf

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6935th meeting
Tuesday, 19 March 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Pankin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Rutilo
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Huseynli
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Mr. Pecassou
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Flies
Mr. Benmoussa
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Kayinamura
Mr. Bocco
Mr. Meek
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2013/133)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26402 (E)

*1326402*

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): This
year, we commemorate the twelfth anniversary
of the international community’s commitment to
Afghanistan. I believe that this is an excellent moment
to thank the Secretary-General for introducing his
report (S/2013/133) to the Council today, and to say that
I greatly value the contribution made to this debate by
Ambassador Tanin.
Spain, which has been part of this process from
the beginning, has been making a military and civilian
contribution to the stabilization and reconstruction of
the country. The human toll of Spain’s military effort
in Afghanistan has been high; 100 Spaniards have died
since the arrival of our troops. Spain is currently the
eighth largest contributor to the NATO International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan,
under the Security Council’s mandate. We are now
engaged in the withdrawal of the 1,300 Spanish soldiers
who are still in Afghanistan, distributed throughout
the provinces of Herat, whose airport is managed by
Spain; Badghis, which is one of the most inaccessible
and disadvantaged provinces of the country and where
the Spanish provincial reconstruction team is located
in Qala-i-Naw; and Kabul. Spain has supported in the
past and continues today to strongly support the efforts
of the Afghan Government in the complex transition
process, both in their security and civilian aspects. We
are currently entering a difficult stage in the process.
We are in the final stretch, as we all know. We all
have to do our utmost to ensure that the transition is
irreversible and sustainable. We must therefore redouble
our efforts in the coming months, particularly in the
areas of governance, institution-building and economic
development.
The transfer of responsibilities in the security sector
to Afghan authorities has already been completed in
the six districts of Badghis province. We are satisfied
with the way in which the transition is progressing.
Spain will continue cooperating and will remain firmly
committed to the activities of consulting, training
and supporting the Afghan security forces during the
completion of the transition process.
With regard to the civil aspects of the transition,
we are now in a position to complete the transfer of

2

the cooperation projects that we have developed in our
area of responsibility. We are considering doing that
in parallel with the transfer of responsibility in the
crucial area of security. Currently, most of the projects
are already being managed by Afghan personnel. The
transfer will be formalized with the signing of the
appropriate agreements with the representatives of the
Afghan ministries that will take over those projects.
In 2013, Cooperación Española en Afganistán will
conclude after seven years of positive collaboration.
It should be emphasized, however, that Cooperación
Española will continue to participate in multilateral
projects through its contributions to international
organizations.
Despite the difficulties inherent in the complex
peace process, recent progress permits us to hope for
a possible relaunch of dialogue towards sustainable
and inclusive reconciliation. For that to be successful,
it should involve the armed groups and all sectors of
Afghan society in a context of respect for the Afghan
Constitution, especially when it comes to human rights,
in particular those of women and girls.
The year 2012 was a year of major international
events related to Afghanistan. Now it is time to note the
year’s many achievements.
Afghanistan will continue to need international
assistance after 2014. That is why the bases for the new
allied mission for the post-2014 period are being outlined,
focusing exclusively on educational and training tasks.
In that way it will seek to assist the Afghan National
Security Forces in the best possible way so that they
can successfully deal with the important work that they
have to do and that is expected of them.
On the regional level, we welcome the fact that the
Istanbul Process, whose principal goal is to promote
regional cooperation and security in order to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan, is decisively moving
forward. Spain is currently examining its contributions
to the confidence-building measures that are associated
with the Process.
In addition to everything I have just set out, we
are also working to secure the political and financial
sustainability essential for the consolidation of the
Afghan political system. We trust that the Government
of Afghanistan will continue to fulfil its basic
commitments in the fields of governance, development,
the rule of law, human rights and the fight against
corruption.
13-26402

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

In that context, the presidential elections announced
for 5 April 2014 will be a significant challenge from
a logistical perspective. The international community
will continue to support Afghanistan, which in turn will
have to ensure an inclusive, transparent and democratic
election, with results that the Afghan people can fully
identify with.
The work and the support of the United Nations will
be of great importance in those elections. That is why
Spain supports the decision to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
by one year, and greatly appreciates the central and
impartial role that the United Nations is playing in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Finally, allow me also to emphasize the enormous
importance that Spain attaches to the role that the
European Union can play in assisting the Afghan
authorities on issues related to capacity-building,
including governance, transparency and the rule of
law, as well as in the training of civil servants and
members of the police and judicial sectors, and in the
socioeconomic development of the country in general.
In the light of what I have said here, Spain firmly
supports the ongoing negotiations for an ambitious
cooperation agreement for partnership and development
between the European Union and Afghanistan, which
will certainly set the tone for and guide the relations
between both partners in the coming years. The coming
months will be decisive for the consolidation of the
international community’s legacy in Afghanistan. It
is essential that the progress and successes of the past
decade not be reversed.
The Special Representative of the European Union
for Afghanistan has already made a statement, which
we of course share. Nevertheless, I am also grateful,
Mr. President, for the fact that you have given me the
opportunity to make an additional set of comments in
my national capacity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me, at the outset,
extend my thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his great
leadership at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for all his
efforts in support of the Afghan people, and to his team.

13-26402

Germany will continue to support Afghanistan in
close partnership throughout the transformation decade.
At the Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, Afghanistan and
the international community set the framework for
cooperation and reaffirmed their mutual commitments.
We are therefore pleased to see that the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework has gained considerable
momentum, and we commit ourselves to further work
towards implementing it. Today, I would like to focus
on two issues that are key in that regard.
The first issue is elections. We welcome the
progress achieved by the Government of Afghanistan
in preparing for the presidential elections to be held in
April 2014. Yet challenges remain. We look forward to
the swift adoption of a legal framework for the elections,
as well as to the timely appointment of a new chairman
and commissioners for the Independent Election
Commission. We emphasize the need to establish a
credible complaints mechanism and to put in place
effective measures to prevent widespread electoral
fraud. Finally, and most important, we encourage
all Afghan stakeholders to engage in a constructive
dialogue on these issues so as to find the broadest
possible consensus.
UNAMA can assume a beneficial role in supporting
the Afghan-led and -owned process. We therefore
welcome the decision taken by the Afghan authorities to
request UNAMA’s support for the 2014-2015 elections
and the subsequent United Nations electoral needs
assessment mission that was undertaken in December
and January. Germany stands ready to further support
that process alongside UNAMA and its international
partners. Our shared objective is to hold inclusive,
transparent and credible elections in Afghanistan that
will contribute to the sustainable development of the
country’s political system and be firmly founded in the
Afghan Constitution.
Secondly, a stable security environment is of
paramount importance in achieving Afghanistan’s
goal of further developing into a democratic and
economically thriving country. We therefore welcome
recent developments in the Afghan-led reconciliation
process. That includes efforts by Afghanistan and
the international community to establish conditions
conducive to substantive dialogue, such as preparations
for the opening of a Taliban office in Doha. In that
regard, we also appreciate the contribution of regional
actors. Their support is critical to fostering the peace

3

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

and reconciliation process. We encourage all sides to
strengthen their efforts.
I would like to conclude by underlining that the
United Nations will continue to play a crucial role,
both in the year to come and during the transformation
decade. We therefore welcome the Council’s adoption
of resolution 2096 (2013), which renews UNAMA’s
mandate for another 12 months. Germany will
continue to support UNAMA in fulfilling its mandate,
particularly in its support for the Afghan Government
and in preparing for the presidential elections, in
protecting and promoting human rights, particularly
women’s rights, and in ensuring effective coordination
among donors and the Government of Afghanistan. In
order for UNAMA to live up to those expectations, we
strongly support providing adequate resources for the
Mission and its appropriate presence throughout the
country.
Finally, we look forward to engaging in constructive
dialogue during the next month on UNAMA’s role after
2014.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Let me begin by greeting
all nations and peoples here, including many from
Afghanistan, with best wishes for the new year. The
Nowruz holiday is always an awakening and a new
start, and a moment that brings us into harmony with
nature. It is about forgetting the harshness of winter
and appreciating the warmth of the sun. And we are
very hopeful that its warmth will sprinkle some positive
energy on our deliberations today.
I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by Special Representative Ušackas on behalf
of the European Union (EU). While we fully support the
shared EU priorities in Afghanistan, let me emphasize
some points that we see as important.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/133). His briefing
and the report presented a comprehensive picture of
Afghanistan today. We are pleased with the steady
progress in the transfer of security responsibility and
the growing size of the Afghan National Police and the
Afghan National Army. In many areas where Afghan
forces have taken the lead, the security transition has
been going in the right direction. We welcome the efforts
of the Ministry of the Interior aimed at transforming

4

the police from a security force to a service focused on
law enforcement and protection. The role of local police
is vital, especially in remote parts of the country. But
the process of building functional and credible Afghan
national security forces must go on. In our view, the
main challenge is insider attacks, which negatively
affect the overall situation in multiple ways. The
Afghan National Security Forces have almost reached
the anticipated numbers. Therefore, the focus should
now shift to quality, loyalty and professionalism.
While the security sector is on track, it is equally
important to focus efforts on the political and economic
elements of the transition and to synchronize them with
the current plan to hand over full security responsibility
to Kabul in 2014. Further progress in reconciliation
is crucial to future success. The willingness of some
elements of the Taliban to leave the insurgency, join
in the dialogue and enter the political process can set a
positive example and deserves our support. The peace
and reconciliation process must have strong Afghan
ownership.
We see the political transition as a possible game
changer in Afghanistan’s internal dynamics. We
believe that Afghans will take all necessary steps
towards achieving inclusive, free, fair and transparent
elections. Only a legitimate Government will be strong
enough to make progress in the areas of security, good
governance and development. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) can
play an important role in advising on how to proceed
efficiently with electoral reforms and broader political
outreach to Afghan society. Some fear that, after the
international forces have departed, Afghanistan may
slip back into insurgency, return to civil war or once
again become a hub for terrorism. We should unite
our efforts to ensure that we stand firmly side by side
with Afghanistan and the Afghan people on that issue.
The Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, the NATO, Chicago
and Lisbon Summits and other international forums
have ensured a strong commitment on the part of the
international community that the Afghans will not be
abandoned.
We must keep in mind the seriousness of the threat
posed by opium production in Afghanistan to the
stability of the region and the overall security situation.
We welcome the Afghan Government’s commitment to
combating that problem. However, it cannot succeed
alone without regional cooperation and international
engagement. We therefore support the initiatives led by

13-26402

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
are aimed not only at eradicating poppy production but
also at dealing with related aspects, such as development
and law enforcement. It is crucial that neighbouring
countries cooperate and play an active role in that area.
In border control, for example, such cooperation is an
important factor in eliminating illegal trans-boundary
activities, including drug and weapons trafficking, as
well as terrorism.
Afghanistan today remains a proud Muslim
society with more women now serving in the Afghan
National Assembly than in many democracies. Access
to education is getting closer to being universal. Under
the Taliban, fewer than 1 million children, almost all
of them boys, were in school. Now more than 8 million
children go to school, and more than a third of them
are girls.
In 2001, Afghanistan’s gross domestic product
was around $2 billion. In one decade, that number has
reached $20 billion, until now largely thanks to foreign
aid. But Afghanistan has the potential to build on
that investment. Among the most visible results is the
dramatic increase in the use of new technologies and
the growth of small and medium-sized businesses.
Under the Taliban, only one tenth of the population
had access to basic health care. Now that better
health care is generally available, life expectancy has
increased from 45 to 62 years for men and to 64 years
for women. Improved education, health care and an
atmosphere that is encouraging to small and mediumsized business are the cornerstones of sustainable and
irreversible development after the military presence
has been reduced.
In conclusion, UNAMA is a crucial and
irreplaceable actor in Afghanistan, and its role should
be extended. In that regard, we appreciate the words of
support voiced for Mr. Ján Kubiš for his professional
leadership of that challenging Mission. We know that
the United Nations and UNAMA will be important
players in Afghanistan, particularly after 2014. As time
is passing very quickly and there are many challenges,
we should start to think and discuss how to adjust
UNAMA’s post-2014 mandate, which will have to be
provided with the proper resources. The United Nations
should act and deliver as one. Slovakia will support
Afghanistan until 2014 and beyond. While any military
support after 2014 will depend on the requirements of
the new NATO-led mission after the departure of the

13-26402

International Security Assistance Force, we have made
a decision to provide financial support for sustaining
the Afghan national security forces at a level of
$1.5 million from 2015 to 2017. Afghanistan remains
the top priority of our official development aid.
One of most famous Nowruz traditions among
Afghans is to forget and forgive one another’s mistakes
and to start the new year with new hope and new goals.
Only those who do nothing do not make mistakes.
Victory gives us joy; defeat gives us experience and
strength. They are wise who act and learn how to
achieve the new hope that all people in Afghanistan
deserve.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. By the same token, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the presentation
of his report (S/2013/133). I would also like to thank
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for the hard work
that he and his Mission have delivered on the ground
in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his comprehensive remarks today. My
delegation also aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Afghanistan has made great progress in recent
years, and it is important that that momentum not be
lost as it goes through one of the most pivotal periods
in the country’s history. It is vital that the international
community remain strongly engaged in endorsing
Afghanistan’s efforts during the transition phase, as
well as after 2014. I can assure the Council that Estonia
will stay committed to supporting Afghanistan after
the completion of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) mission.
Estonia has been a long-term partner of Afghanistan.
There is no other country in the world where our
engagement is as strong as in Afghanistan. Estonia is
one of the highest per capita contributors to the ISAF
mission. Our troops are in Helmand province together
with British troops. The contingent is expected to be
withdrawn in mid-2014. By keeping our company in
Afghanistan until the end of the election period, we
aim to make a contribution to safeguarding the future
of Afghanistan. We are also looking at financially
supporting the post-2014 mission and the sustainability
of the Afghan National Security Forces. Estonia is also

5

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

contributing to the European Union Police Mission and
the NATO training mission.

set to take over responsibility for the security of nearly
90 per cent of the country’s population.

We do not believe that there can be a sustainable
solution in Afghanistan that involves only a military
contribution. In order to target the causes of the
problems that Afghanistan is facing, we must continue
our efforts with development cooperation after 2014.

The implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework is fundamental for longterm stability and future successes in Afghanistan,
and we recognize the significant progress made in the
process.

Estonia’s development assistance is focused on
four sectors, namely, security, education, health care
and the rule of law. In addition to supporting the
central Government through our annual contributions
to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, we
are carrying out bilateral projects to help Afghanistan
with our knowledge and experience. For instance,
Kabul University is currently establishing a master’s
programme in information technology with the support
of Tallinn University, and we continue to invite Afghan
civil servants to training courses in Tallinn.

Free, transparent and fair elections in 2014 and
2015 are paramount in improving the legitimacy of the
political transition and in consolidating democracy in
Afghanistan. We underline the urgency of adopting
a legal and institutional framework with an adequate
system of checks and balances for the proper conduct
of elections. With the help of coalition forces, a secure
environment for the elections should be provided.
We emphasize the importance of establishing an
effective electoral administration and fraud-prevention
mechanisms. The United Nations role remains essential
in preparations for the elections through technical and
financial assistance.

I would also like to draw attention to the human
rights situation. There have been gains in the protection
of human rights in Afghanistan, although action is
needed to improve the situation.
In our development projects, Estonia pays extra
attention to promoting women’s rights and the well-being
of children, as they are the most vulnerable groups. We
believe that traditions or beliefs should never be used as
a pretext for gender inequality and non-recognition of
women’s rights. At the recent session of the Commission
on the Status of Women, the Estonian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Urmas Paet, strongly condemned all kinds of
violence against women and girls. We hope that the
adoption of the agreed conclusions of the Commission
will give further impetus to combating violence against
women and girls in Afghanistan. Estonia calls for the
effective and swift implementation of the action plan
for the prevention of underage recruitment and its
annexes on killing and maiming and sexual violence
against children.
There are still many challenges ahead on
Afghanistan’s path to becoming a stable, secure,
democratic and prosperous country, namely, the
transition of security and civilian responsibility, the
reconciliation process, the elections next year and last
but not least, the economic transition.
We are pleased to note that the transition of security
to Afghan forces is on track and that the Afghan
Government has announced that the Afghan forces are

6

The reconciliation process in the country should of
course be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. However, in
our view, the strong support from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to the
High Peace Council in building confidence and trust
has been indispensable.
With regard to Afghan economic development and
transition, we encourage the Government to implement
necessary reforms, give all the necessary support to
the private sector, ensure a secure and stable business
environment and improve measures for fighting
corruption. Investing in people’s education and skills is
also important to further economic growth.
Strengthening
regional
cooperation
with
neighbouring South and Central Asian countries is
key for achieving a durable security environment in
Afghanistan. In addition, close regional cooperation
creates opportunities for economic development.
Therefore, Estonia supports the Istanbul Process and
the implementation of confidence-building measures.
The United Nations and UNAMA have been
taking an important lead in civil-military coordination,
international development aid cooperation, the
protection of human rights, the monitoring of the
humanitarian situation, counter-narcotics efforts, and,
as mentioned, in facilitating the reconciliation process
and assistance for elections. For that reason, it is hard

13-26402

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

to underestimate the role that the United Nations and its
bodies have played in Afghanistan. After the departure
of the foreign military forces, that role is only likely to
increase.
As the United Nations commitment and assistance
are substantial in the transition period in Afghanistan,
we fully support the extension of UNAMA’s mandate
for another year.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.
We welcome recent positive signals coming from
Afghanistan. As the transition approaches completion,
we see promising signs that Afghans are ready to
assume responsibility for their future.
We are moving towards the fifth tranche of
transition, with 87 per cent of the Afghan population
already under Afghan-led security. The decline in
security-related incidents is a positive signal. The
capabilities of Afghan security forces are developing.
Boosting their capacities and competence further, under
the rule of law framework, remains a key priority.
The preparations for the 2014 elections are well
under way. We support all efforts towards achieving
a democratic and inclusive political process through
independent, free and fair elections, with the
participation of political parties and civil society. In
that regard, we commend the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United
Nations Development Programme.
Transition and reconciliation processes are mutually
reinforcing. The successful continuation of Afghan-led
peace and reconciliation efforts will constitute another
important step towards security, stability and political
transition. We welcome progress in that area under the
successful guidance of Mr. Rabbani, head of the High
Peace Council, as well as the political facilitation efforts
of UNAMA. The concrete support by the Government
of Pakistan for Afghan peace and reconciliation efforts
is noteworthy. Turkey will continue to support the
process, keeping the best interests of the Afghan people
in mind.

13-26402

Despite those positive signs, major political,
economic and security challenges remain. The
security situation continues to be a matter of grave
concern, leading to unacceptable human costs. Natural
disasters, chronic poverty and development challenges
pose grave threats. The most vulnerable segments of
society, especially children, women and girls, are
under heightened risk. The potential humanitarian and
economic consequences of transition are worrisome.
As Afghanistan moves forward towards political and
security transitions, we must remain in touch with those
realities on the ground. We commend the constructive
steps taken by the Afghan people and Government to
overcome those problems. The continued display of
will from the international community will strengthen
the hopes of the Afghan people for the future and help
to ensure that a smooth transition is under way.
In that regard, we are glad to see increased efforts
to move to substantive issues in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, both from the Afghan
Government and the international community, to ensure
the concrete implementation of mutual commitments.
We commend the endorsement of the new national
priority programmes and the aid management policy.
As the international presence is being reduced,
regional cooperation is gaining momentum. The
Istanbul Process has surpassed all expectations with
its speedy progress. The spirit of regional ownership,
the engagement and technical support of the United
Nations and its agencies and the interest and support of
the international community have made that possible.
We were pleased to see the endorsement, at the meeting
of senior officials held in Baku on 6 February, of the
implementation plans for the six confidence-building
measures. The next meeting of senior officials, which
is to be held on 25 March in Kabul, will smooth out
the final details of the implementation plans, which
have been endorsed in principle. The momentum will
be strengthened even further at the next ministerial
meeting to be held in Almaty on 26 April — the only
meeting on Afghanistan thus far scheduled at the
Foreign Ministers’ level for 2013.
Trilateral and quadrilateral initiatives are
important tools for fostering regional ownership in
the Heart of Asia process. In that spirit, the trilateral
summit process among Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Turkey has contributed to regional dialogue and
cooperation through the seven meetings held since

7

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

2007. The most recent trilateral meeting, convened in
Ankara last December under the theme “Connectivity”,
focused on political dialogue, military and security
issues, peace and reconciliation efforts, and economic
development and partnership. Further connectivity will
facilitate economic development, stability and selfsustainability. We attach particular importance to the
completion and maintenance of local railroad and land
routes, the development of regional economic projects
and the enhancement of civil aviation capabilities.
We welcome all projects and cooperation efforts
to foster further regional connectivity and economic
growth. The constructive engagement of Afghanistan’s
regional partners will remain key to addressing
common challenges, such as terrorism, barriers to trade
and investment, drug-trafficking and refugees.
As Afghanistan’s regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort to contribute to
the vision of a secure, peaceful and self-sufficient
Afghanistan. That is in all of our mutual interests.
Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the Afghan
people and will continue to contribute to a safe, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done for many
decades.
In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
belief that the United Nations will continue to play its
crucial role after the transition. I would like to take this
opportunity to especialy commend the valuable efforts
of the United Nations, and of UNAMA in particular, in
taking the Istanbul Process further, as well as to express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative Ján
Kubiš and his hard-working team.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I join others in
thanking you, Sir, for scheduling today’s debate on the
situation in Afghanistan in the context of the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to
congratulate you on your assumptio of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.
Looking ahead at the timelines for the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
and the elections in Afghanistan, it is important that

8

the commitments flowing from the major international
conferences in Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo, and at the
regional level in Istanbul and Kabul, for peace, security
and development in Afghanistan be implemented in
word and deed. They are also essential for creating
an enabling environment for Afghanistan’s fiscal
sustainability and self-reliance.
It is particularly worrying that the overall security
situation remains volatile in the country amidst the
ongoing simultaneous security, political and economic
transitions. Even after over a decade of ISAF’s
presence and the concerted efforts of the international
community, Afghanistan continues to face an
existential threat from terrorism. We have yet to isolate
and root out the syndicate of terrorism, which includes
elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba
and other terrorist and extremist groups that operate
with impunity from safe havens across Afghanistan’s
borders. As NATO draws down from Afghanistan,
claiming “mission nearly accomplished”, there is no
sign, judging by the latest acts of terrorism and violence,
of a similar drawdown on the part of the terrorist outfits
across the border. Whatever happens in Afghanistan, it
has affected and will continue to affect security in our
region and the world. We have not forgotten the terrorist
havens that wreaked havoc as Afghanistan descended
into chaos in the 1990s. Obviously, we do not want that
to happen again.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/133) rightly
notes that Afghanistan will be able to achieve the
stability, growth and prosperity that its people aspire
to and deserve only if there is peace. As Afghanistan
looks forward to holding presidential and provincial
elections in April 2014, we need to bear in mind that
short-sighted approaches and quick-fixes guided by
political expediency could be a recipe for unmitigated
disaster. It is therefore imperative that any political
settlement be driven by Afghans in order to be accepted
by all sections of Afghan society without jeopardizing
the hard-won gains of the past 10 years.
A steady focus on the elections and constitutionalism
would vindicate the 2004 Constitution — which has
been most widely debated, yet enjoys the maximum
consensus to date — consolidate democracy,
institutionalize the elections and provide the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan with the legitimacy and
political and moral strength to negotiate with the
Taliban, the advocates of an Islamic emirate and the
international community from a position of strength

13-26402

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

and guarantee the post-2001 gains for younger
and older generations of Afghans. For that reason,
internationally accepted red lines must be respected
in any reconciliation model to be considered. So, too,
actions in support of the political transition should not
undermine Afghan institutions of governance. We will
need a credible Government after 2014 as well.
Most of all, we have yet to see any evidence
to support the notion of a dividing line separating
Al-Qaida from other terrorist and extremist groups,
nor is it clear, indeed, that those groups and those who
support them have either had an epiphany or made a
strategic reassessment of their objectives. To us, it
makes little sense to draw lines of distinction that most
of those groups and their sponsors are not prepared to
accept themselves, either in word or deed.

Conscious of that imperative need, India has taken the
lead in the commercial confidence-building measures
under the Istanbul Process. Within South Asia, the
South Asian Regional Cooperation programme remains
an important vehicle for strengthening regional
cooperation.
Afghanistan is strategically located as a land bridge
linking South Asia with Central Asia and the Middle
East, and is an important conduit for tapping into the
vast energy resources of Central Asia. Projects such as
the TAPI gas pipeline would benefit all of us and have
the potential to usher in a rapid transformation of our
region.

India remains engaged with like-minded countries
in sharing the goal of peace, security and development
in Afghanistan. In pursuit of that, India has held
dialogues with the United States and Afghanistan in
New Delhi, and with China and Russia in Moscow in
February.

Afghanistan and India are natural strategic partners
by virtue of geography and a common vision of peace
and cooperation in the region. India remains committed
to supporting Afghanistan during the crucial period
of transition until the end of 2014 and thereafter. The
implementation of the strategic partnership agreement
of October 2011 between our two countries has already
been set in motion, with the convening of the first
meeting of the Partnership Council last year.

We firmly belief that Afghan ownership and
leadership is critical for cementing the foundations
of lasting peace and stability in the country. The
Afghan people should be able to choose their destiny
in an environment free from coercion and outside
interference. Security is the key ingredient for
accelerated socioeconomic development, which could
also be a catalyst for strengthening the voices of
moderation and tolerance in Afghan society. India has
taken a number of initiatives in that regard.

India is assisting as best as it can in Afghanistan’s
reconstruction and development. India has pledged
up to $2 billion in development and humanitarian
assistance. The projects under consideration are in line
with the projects suggested under the national priority
programmes of the Government of Afghanistan. The
pace and nature of the utilization of the present and
future Indian assistance is being determined by the
preference, comfort level and absorptive capacity of the
Afghan Government.

The Delhi Investment Summit on Afghanistan, held
in June 2012, was an important endeavour in focusing
regional and international attention on investing in
Afghanistan and on the potential to promote economic
development and stability in Afghanistan during the
transition period.

Afghanistan needs assistance and support to build
its capacity to help it overcome the toll that three
decades of externally inflicted conflict have imposed
on it. India has been assisting Afghanistan in rebuilding
the foundations of its society through scholarships for
its young and training programmes that seek to help
its democratic institutions brace for the multiplicity of
challenges that it faces.

India has also launched initiatives to promote
bilateral trade and investment in Afghanistan, including
measures such as the elimination of baseline customs
duties on virtually all imports from Afghanistan and
investment in the Hajigak iron ore reserves.
Enhanced regional cooperation and regional
integration are imperative for bringing in much
needed foreign investments to Afghanistan, ensuring
its economic viability and spurring economic growth.

13-26402

India remains unwavering in its commitment to
assisting the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour
to build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation. As we approach critical timelines for transition
in the near future, the international community must
continue to work with renewed vigour and unity of
purpose towards strengthening the efforts of the Afghan

9

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

Government in seeking solutions that are inclusive and
led by the Afghan people themselves.
We believe that the United Nations has a central role
to play in the coordination of international assistance.
There is no substitute for the coordinating role of the
United Nations in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
We appreciate the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš and the good work
done by UNAMA; it must continue to work in close
consultation with the Afghan Government.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Allow me at the
start to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by Mr. Vygaudas Ušackas, European Union Special
Representative for Afghanistan. In addition, allow me
to make the following points.
My first point is on the electoral processes. We
welcome the active engagement of the political parties
and civil society in election-related developments. It is
essential that those elections be inclusive, transparent,
free and fair. Critical preparations for the elections
must be accelerated, including tangible progress in
voter identification and registration.
The adoption of a robust electoral framework with
credible mechanisms for electoral fraud prevention
and dispute resolution is required. The formation of
electoral management bodies must be duly completed
and qualified officials appointed to the Independent
Election Commission. International observation of the
elections should be guaranteed.
We encourage the Electoral Assistance Division
of the Department of Political Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to continue to provide all necessary assistance in
preparing for the Afghan-led elections.
I would like to recall that in the past the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) deployed elections support teams
to Afghanistan, one of the OSCE’s Asian Partners
for Cooperation. A solid set of recommendations on
improving the electoral framework was presented by the

10

OSCE in Kabul in 2012. We encourage Afghan officials
to make use of the experience and recommendations
offered by the OSCE.
My second point is on the situation of women and
girls. We appreciate the commitment of the Afghan
Government to empowering women and ensuring
gender equality. Post-Taliban Afghanistan has seen
the appointment of the first female district governor,
Saira Shakeeb Sadat. Women are asserting themselves
as ministers and members of Parliament and of the
High Peace Council. We welcome these developments
and reiterate that women’s full participation in the
reconciliation and transformation processes is essential
for the construction of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.
Much more needs to be done, however. Every
two hours, a woman dies from pregnancy-related
causes. Domestic violence against women and the
imprisonment of women for alleged moral crimes are a
cause of concern, as is the number of women and girls
killed or injured during the past year, which increased
considerably.
We urge the United Nations to continue its support
for systematic monitoring and reporting on the gender
commitments contained in the Tokyo Declaration and
Mutual Accountability Framework.
Thirdly, my delegation remains concerned about
the level of casualties among civilians and the increased
targeting of civilian locations by anti-Government
forces and illegal armed groups. In particular, the
continuing deaths and injuries of children is a cause of
concern. We hope that the action plan for the prevention
of underage recruitment and its annexes on killing and
maiming as well as sexual violence against children will
be fully implemented and that all necessary measures
will be taken to prevent violations of the rights of the
child.
Over 1 million Afghans live within 500 metres
of mine-contaminated areas. As a Mine Action
Programme for Afghanistan donor, Lithuania has
itself engaged in demining and supports the Afghan
mine-clearing efforts. We welcome the progress
achieved and encourage the Afghan Government
to work on mine-action legislation with all relevant
stakeholders and to clear all anti-personnel landmines
by 2013 as part of its obligations under the Ottawa
Convention.

13-26402

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

Finally, turning to regional cooperation, the
success of Afghanistan’s transition process requires the
active involvement of all regional stakeholders. For the
United Nations and regional organizations to achieve
greater synergies, it is important to better coordinate
their efforts in Afghanistan and the region, including
with countries of Central Asia.
We are heartened by the determination of the
States in the region, through the Istanbul Process,
the bilateral Afghan-Pakistan dialogue and other
initiatives, to address the manifold challenges facing
the Afghan nation. The opening of an office in Doha
for the purpose of negotiations could be a step forward
towards a peaceful, Afghan-led solution to the Taliban
insurgency. Reconciliation has to be an inclusive and
Afghan-owned process. We welcome the Security
Council’s readiness to adjust the Taliban sanctions
regime in support of those efforts.
To conclude, we welcome the adoption by the
Council of resolution 2096 (2013), which extends the
mandate of UNAMA for 12 months. UNAMA, with a
strong political role, will be an essential partner to the
Afghan Government during the transformation period.
Let me note that further cuts in the budget of UNAMA
may have a negative impact on its ability to fulfil its core
mandate. Given the magnitude of the challenges facing
Afghanistan and the wider region, a properly staffed
and resourced UNAMA remains key to ensuring the
success of the transition period.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, I should like to express our gratitude
to the Russian presidency of the Security Council
for having convened today’s debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
briefing on the situation on Afghanistan, and his
Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, for his effective
management of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We take this opportunity to
express our full support for the activities of UNAMA
and to welcome the adoption of resolution 2096 (2013),
which extends its mandate.
Today, Afghanistan is at a critical juncture in
its historical development. We are witnessing the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and the transfer of responsibilities to the
Afghan National Security Forces. We are also witnessing

13-26402

the implementation of the reconciliation process and of
international agreements on the economic development
of Afghanistan.
However, the situation in a number of provinces
remains unstable. Clearly, NATO must, with the
withdrawal of the military contingent, bring to a logical
conclusion its mission to establish the conditions
necessary for stability, development and security.
The transfer of security responsibilities must
be implemented gradually and systematically, while
maintaining an atmosphere of calm and trust. The
withdrawal of the ISAF force cannot be allowed to open
the way to destructive forces or to enable extremist or
terrorist groups to penetrate neighbouring countries;
that is of particular concern to us.
Afghanistan’s peaceful development will not be
possible if the problem of opium production in the
country is not eradicated. The spread of that deadly
poison also affects the countries of Central Asia, which
are on the transit route towards the north to countries
of Europe and Asia. We believe that this calls for robust
action in the fight against illicit trafficking in drugs in
Afghanistan.
Efforts to achieve national reconciliation are
among the core conditions for ensuring lasting peace in
Afghanistan. Kyrgyzstan welcomes the activities of the
High Peace Council, chaired by Salahuddin Rabbani,
and believes that the process of reconciliation must be
implemented by Afghans themselves in the interests
of all Afghans. The comprehensive peace process
must be open to all stakeholders in Afghanistan who
are prepared to reject violence, break all ties with
international terrorism and respect the Constitution of
the nation.
An equally important component of political reform
in Afghanistan will be the April 2014 presidential and
legislative elections. The timely finalization of the
electoral law, the resolution of problems related to voter
registration and the establishment of safe conditions
for the holding the elections are critical. Kyrgyzstan
welcomes the resolve of the Afghan authorities to hold
free, fair and transparent elections, in accordance with
national legislation, which can serve as the basis for the
continued stable development of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s involvement in regional cooperation
and the broadening of trade and economic ties with
neighbouring States is a key condition for the peaceful

11

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

development of the country. Kyrgyzstan, as a member
of a number of regional organizations and the current
chair of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, is prepared
to contribute to that process. We believe that it is
important to actively utilize the capacities of regional
organizations in addressing Afghanistan’s problems.
I would like to inform the Council that Kyrgyzstan
is planning to hold a round table on Afghanistan in
Bishkek in the near future. In August, we will also
hold a scientific and practical conference on the topic
“Afghanistan 2014: prospects for development in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and challenges and
threats to the security of Central Asia in the context
of the withdrawal of the core contingents of the
International Security Assistance Force”. We invite
interested parties to take part in those events.
We support the Istanbul Process and participate
in all the working groups on confidence-building
measures. We are prepared to actively advance issues
relating to the implementation of regional projects
on Afghanistan in the areas of energy, transportation
and agriculture. Kyrgyzstan will play an active role in
the upcoming meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
parties to the Istanbul Process, which is to be held on
26 April in Almaty.
At the same time, stable development in Afghanistan
requires continued long-term international financial
support for the Government within the framework of
the pledges made at the Tokyo Conference last year.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm the constant support
of Kyrgyzstan for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity of Afghanistan, as well as our genuine interest
in establishing peace and stability in that brotherly
country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.

provided with ample resources needed to fulfill its role,
particularly throughout the transition year of 2014. We
therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/133) and the Council’s unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2096 (2013). Let me say that the
greater the stability and security on the ground, the
more effective the activities of UNAMA will be. A
stable and secure environment is a necessary condition
for the Mission to appropriately fulfil its mandate.
Moreover, we believe that, without a stable and
secure Afghanistan, it is difficult to imagine achieving
sustainable stability and security at the regional level
and beyond. I think we, the international community,
bear our share of responsibility to assist the people of
Afghanistan on the difficult path towards peace and
development. For that particular reason, Georgia has,
for its part, committed itself to stand by its friends
from the neighbouring region. We are firmly convinced
that supporting Afghanistan, especially during this
challenging phase of its history, will benefit the longterm security of Georgia and of the broader region.
Georgia has proved that it is willing and able to
contribute to international security. For several years, the
Georgian military contingent has performed its mission
in Afghanistan. At the moment, in the framework of
the International Security Assistance Force, 1,600
Georgian military personnel are performing their duty,
including in the most volatile province, Helmand.
Georgia has decided to continue its contribution
beyond 2014. Moreover, fully recognizing the
importance of continued support to the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan throughout the
“Transformation Decade” and the role of the Afghan
National Security Forces in preserving and consolidating
the gains on the ground, the Government of Georgia
has committed to making financial contributions to the
Afghan National Security Forces sustainability fund.

Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): Georgia expresses
its full support for the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
shares the view that the Mission will play a fundamental
role in allowing Afghanistan and the international
community to work effectively together to fulfil the
Tokyo commitments and in monitoring the human
rights and humanitarian situation on the ground.

We fully support the fi rm position of the international
community and of the Security Council that assistance
to Afghanistan should be as comprehensive as possible
and should not be limited to the military component
alone. Aid in the humanitarian field is crucial for
long-term security and further development. We are
convinced that Georgia’s commitment to providing
assistance in the field of health care complements our
military contribution.

We believe that it is essential that UNAMA
be equipped with an appropriate mandate and be

Undoubtedly, lasting peace and security in
Afghanistan can be achieved primarily through an

12

13-26402

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

all-inclusive reconciliation process, generated by the
people of Afghanistan. Nonetheless, we reaffirm our
readiness to provide support to a peaceful post-2014
transition in the country.

capacities of our country in the interests of the United
Nations, including to provide Afghanistan with support
in terms of recovery and humanitarian assistance in the
post-2014 period.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.

We support the national reconciliation process
in Afghanistan. Our position is that intra-Afghan
dialogue can have a positive impact only if the Afghan
Government plays the leading role and if the militia
respect without conditions three basic principles,
namely, putting aside their weapons, recognizing
the Constitution and completely severing ties with
Al-Qaida and other extremist organizations.

Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, let me congratulate the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his informative report
(S/2012/133) and recognize the great importance of the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš.
Kazakhstan supports the rapid development of
Afghanistan as a peaceful, independent and stable
developing State with a cohesive society. At the regional
and national levels, Kazakhstan is contributing to the
stable and lasting development of Afghanistan and to
efforts to reduce the security threats emanating from
that country, including terrorism, drug-trafficking and
religious extremism. As such, on 26 April in Almaty, we
will hold a ministerial meeting on Afghanistan as part of
the Istanbul Process. We are confident that that meeting
will contribute to actively involving Afghanistan in
regional integration processes, to strengthening mutual
trade, economic and humanitarian cooperation, and
to accelerating the implementation of infrastructure
projects linking Afghanistan and the region. All of
that will ensure that there is genuine substance to the
ongoing international efforts under the auspices of the
United Nations, and thereby contribute to restoring
peace and stability in the country. In that regard, we call
on all participants in the upcoming meeting in Almaty
to adopt a responsible and results-driven approach to
the issues that will be discussed there.
We believe that the United Nations is playing a key
role in ensuring the coordination of the international
community’s efforts aimed at achieving a political
settlement and recovery in Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and with
the support of the world community, above all the
countries of the region. In that context, Kazakhstan
has submitted proposals for the consideration of
the Secretary-General with regard to establishing
in Almaty a United Nations centre for multilateral
diplomacy, with the aim of making more active use of
the geographic, communications and infrastructure

13-26402

Kazakhstan expects the Afghan Government and
the International Security Assistance Force to continue
their ongoing efforts to address drug production and
trafficking. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), the Central Asian Regional Information and
Coordination Centre for combating the illicit trafficking
of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and their
precursors (CARICC) and the anti-drug operation
Channel, conducted under the aegis of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, must play an important
role in that regard. We welcome Afghanistan obtaining
observer-State status at the SCO and CARICC.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this important debate.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union, I find it pertinent to make a few
brief points in my national capacity.
Security in Afghanistan and the Central Asian
region is one of the important issues that attract the
attention of the international community. Ukraine
believes that without providing adequate security
conditions in Afghanistan, it is difficult to talk of
reviving the Afghan economy, better living standards
and implementing social programmes and other projects
to rebuild the country.
The presence of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan for more than
10 years has made an important contribution to the
process of stabilizing the political and security situation
in the country. Currently, Ukrainian peacekeeping
personnel in the country comprise 28 representatives.
Since 2009, Ukraine has permitted the transit of cargo
for ISAF needs in Afghanistan over its territory.

13

S/PV.6935 (Resumption 1)

Ukraine supports the gradual transfer of responsibility
for maintaining security from the international forces
to the Afghan National Army and Police.
The withdrawal of ISAF from Afghanistan
requires the development and implementation of a
possible response by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to new challenges and
threats that have a direct impact on OSCE States that
border Afghanistan, as well as on the whole OSCE area.
In order to make a detailed analysis of potential
risks to the security of OSCE participating States, the
Ukrainian chairmanship of the Organization sees merit
in conducting in-depth discussions on that important
issue within the OSCE framework. With regard to such
activities, the Ukrainian chairmanship proposes to
devote a specific session of the 2013 Annual Security
Review Conference to border-related issues. Such work
may lay the basis for developing an update to the OSCE
Border Security and Management Concept, which

14

defines the framework for cooperation among OSCE
participating States.
Ukraine supports the decisions of the international
conferences on Afghanistan of 2010 to 2012 aimed
at strengthening peace and security in the country,
promoting its social and economic recovery, supporting
integration processes and developing regional
cooperation. We fully share the common view that
the regional approach plays a key role in ensuring
durable stability in Afghanistan and in the wider
region. Afghanistan’s neighbours play a very important
role, and their commitment to our joint efforts is
indispensable.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

13-26402
