IX
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE
398 (V).

Libya or when considering requests for technical assistance for Libya.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.

Technical assistance for Libya after
achievement of independence

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November
1949,
H avinr/ considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 322 B ( XI) of 15 August 1950, and the
proposal of the Secretary-General 1 as to the procedure
which would enable Libya to continue to receive technical assistance after its independence has been achieved
and before it has become a Member of the United
Nations or of a specialized agency participating in the
expanded programme of technical assistance,
Considering the special responsibliity of the United
Nations for the future of Libya,
Recognizing the need for continuing technical assistance to Libya without interruption, even after the
attainment of its independence, for the development of
its economy, for its social progress and for the improvement of its public administration,
Recogni::ing further the need for immediate study of
a complete plan for the economic, social and cultural
development of Libya,
l. Req.uests the Economic and Social Council and
the specialized agencies concerned to consider Libya, as
soon as it shall be constituted an independent State in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A
(IV), as eligible to continue to receive technical assistance, in such foriv. as the Government of Libya may
request, from the expanded programme of the United
Nations and in accordance with the fundamental principles and other provisions of Economic and Social
Council resolution 222 A (IX) ;

2. Instructs the Technical Assistance Board, when
giving technical assistance to Libya, to be mindful of the
economic unity and independence of Libya in accordance with the aforesaid fundamental principles laid
down in resolution 222 A (IX) of the Economic and
Social Council and in resolution 304 (IV) of the
General Assembly;
3. Recommends that the need for preparing a complete plan for the economic, social and cultural development of Libya shall be borne in mind by the appropriate
authorities when requesting technical assistance for
1 See

document A/1404.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 5, section 28.
8 See documents E/CN.1/80 and E/CN.1/80/Add.1.
• See document E/1584.
6 See document E/1356, part VIII.

399 (V). Technical assistance activities under
General Assembly resolution 200 (III)
The General Assembly,
Having decided at its fourth session ( resolution _305
(IV)) that the regular budget of the United Nations
should continue to provide for the activities authorized
by General Assembly resolution 200 (III),
1. Notes with approval that the Secretary-General
has included in the budget of the United Nations for
the year 1951 the same amount as was appropriated by
the General Assembly in 1950 ;2
2. Recommends that the requests for technical assistance for economic development received by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 200 ( III)
which cannot be financed with funds provided on the
regular budget of the United Nations, should be eligible
for financing from the special account for technical
assistance for economic development established in accordance with General Assembly resolution 304 (IV)
and with the actions of the Technical Assistance Conference convened by the Secretary-General under the
terms of Economic and Social Council resolution 222 A
(IX).
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.
400 (V).

Financing of economic development
of under-developed countries

The General Assembly
Taking note of the report 8 of the fourth session of
the Sub-Commission on Economic Development, the
experts' report 4 entitled "National and International
Measures for Full Employment", the report 6 of the
fourth session of the Economic and Employment Commission to the Economic and Social Council, and the
report 0 of the Economic and Social Council to the fifth
session of the General Assembly,
Taking note further of the studies prepared by the
Secretary-General in pursuance of Economic and Social
Council resolutions 179 (VIII) 7 and 222 D (IX),8
0 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplement No. 3.
7 See Met hods of financing economic development in underdeveloped countries, United Nations Publications, Sales No.
1949. II. B. 4.
8 See documents E/1562 and E/1614/Rev.1.

2

26

Rt·solutions adopted on reports of the Second Committt'e

Recognizing that a more rapid economic development of under-developed countries. in particular an
increase of their production, is essential for raising the
level of productive employment and the living standards of their populations, for the growth of the world
economy as a whole and for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Recognizing further that, although the economic
development of under-developed countries depends
primarily upon the efforts of the people of those countries, the necessary acceleration of that development,
on the basis of their own plans and programmes, requires not only technical but also financial assistance
from abroad, and particularly from the more developed
countries,
Considering that the domestic financial resources of
the under-developed countries, together with the international flow of capital for investment, have not been
sufficient to assure the desired rate of economic development, and that the accelerated economic development of under-developed countries requires a more
effective and sustained mobilization of domestic savings
and an expanded and more stable flow of foreign capital
investment,
Being convinced that the volume of private capital
which is currently flowing into under-developed countries cannot meet the financial needs of the economic
development of the under-developed countries and that
those needs cannot be met without an increased flow
of international public funds,
Taking account of the fact that some basic development projects are not capable of being adequately
serviced through existing sources of foreign finance
although they contribute directly or indirectly to the
increase of national productivity and national income,
1. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council, in giving further study to the problem of the financing of economic development, consider practical methods, conditions and policies for achieving the adequate
expansion and steadier flow of foreign capital, both
private and public, and pay special attention to the
financing of non-self-liquidating projects which are
basic to economic development ;
2. CaUs upon the governments of all Member States
and the specialized agencies concerned to submit to the
Economic and Social Council any proposals bearing
upon the present resolution ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to submit its recommendations to the sixth session of the
General Assembly.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

27

c·ouncil concerning the economic development of under-

the General Assembly and by the Economic and Social

developed countries in which industrialization as well as
the development o[ agriculture must play an essential
part,
Considcrin.lJ, however, that agrarian conditions which
persi~t in many under-developed countries and territories con~titute a harrier to their economic development
becaw,e :;uch conditions are a major cause of low agricultural productivity and of low standards of living for
the populations of those countries and territories,
( ·om•inrrd that immediate steps should be taken to
study thl' extent to which existing agrarian conditions
hamper the economic development of under-developed
countries as well as to assist Covernments, at their re<]Uest, in the utilization of the facilities available in the
LT niterl '.\I at ions and the specialized agencies for the
improvement of such conditions,
1. Recommrnds that the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization
and in consultation with other appropriate specialized
agencies, prepare and submit to the thirteenth session of
the Economic and Social Council an analysis of the
degree to which unsatisfactory forms of agrarian structure and, in particular, systems of land tenure, in the
under-developed countries and territories impede economic development and thus depress the standards of
living especially of agricultural workers and tenants and
of small and medium-sized farmers;
2. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
consider the analysis referred to above and to prepare
recommendations to the General Assembly with a view
to the improvement of the conditions of agricultural
populations. paying special attention to such measures
as the following :
(a) Institution of appropriate land reform;
( b) , \ ppropriate action on the part of the governments concerned to render financial aid to agricultural
workers and tenants and to small and medium-sized
farmers through cheap agricultural credit facilities, comprehensive technical assistance and the promotion of
rural co-operatives;
( c) Construction or development, either by direct
government action or suitably financed co-operative
groups, of
( i) Small factories and workshops for the manufacture,
maintenance, repair and servicing of the most essential agricultural machinery and for the storage
of spare parts ;
(ii) Locally-based enterprises for the processing of
agricultural products;
( d) Taxation policies designed to lighten, to the
greatest possible extent, the tax burden on tenants and
small and medium-sized farmers;
( e) Promotion of family owned and operated farms
and of co-operative farms, as well as of other measures
to promote the security of tenure and the welfare of
agricultural workers and tenants and of small and medium-sized farmers;

9 For example, General Assembly resolutions 45 (I) and 52
(I), 198 (III), 200 (III), 202 (III), 209 (III), 304 (IV), 305
(IV), 306 (IV), 307 (IV) and 331 (IV), and Economic and
Social Council resolutions adopted at the first and second
sessions on the terms of reference of the Economic and Em-

pJoyment Commission and resolutions 1 (III), 6 (III), 26
(IV), 27 (IV), 29 (IV), 32 (IV), 36 (IV), 37 (IV), 51 (IV),
103 (VI), 106 (VI), 109 (VI), 139 (VII), 140 (VII), 179
(VIII), 180 (VIII), 184 (VIII), 222 (IX), 223 (IX), 225
(IX), 268 (X), 294 (XI), 297 (XI) and 321 (XI).

401 (V). Land reform
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the many resolutions 9 adopted by
