General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Selllon

192

and member Governments within their bilateral and
multilateral development assistance programmes to consider providing, when requested by a recipient State
and if possible, appropriate assistance for the implementation of drug abuse prevention and control measures,
particularly activities which promote new income
sources that can substitute for illicit production of narcotic raw materials and which promote the reduction
in demand for dangerous drugs;
8. Further requests the organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies with programmes having an impact on narcotics, as a means of expediting a
concerted international effort substantially to reduce
illicit drug activities, to report annually to the General
Assembly on their activities and proposed projects in
this field;
9. Appeals to Member States, in accordance with
their individual development goals, to consider within
their national development programmes the inclusion of
appropriate drug abuse control measures;
10. Reiterates its continued support for the initiatives of the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control
in helping countries reduce the demand for, production
of and traffic in illicit narcotics;
11. Expresses its disappointment at the low levels
of financial support being provided to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control and appeals to Member
States to make new, sustained or increased cash contributions to the Fund as well as further financial or in-kind
contributions in support of its projects and activities;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General Assembly on the progress being
made in the implementation of the present resolution and
Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 8 (XXVIII)
and to transmit the present resolution to Governments
and concerned international agencies.

106th plenary meeting
17 December I 979

union activities, and 33/173 of 20 December 1978 on
disappeared persons,
Noting that the year 1979 marks the three hundredth
anniversary of the act which in 1679 gave statutory force
to the remedy of habeas corpus,
Recalling that, from 15 to 28 August 1961, a seminar
on amparo, habeas corpus and other similar remedies
was organized by the United Nations at Mexico City, 188
under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights,
1. Expresses its conviction that the application
within the legal system of States of amparo, habeas
corpus or other legal remedies to the same effect is of
fundamental importance for:
(a) Protecting persons against arbitrary arrest and
unlawful detention;
(b) Effecting the release of persons who are detained
by reason of their political opinions or convictions, including in pursuance of trade union activities;
(c) Clarifying the whereabouts and fate of missing
and disappeared persons;
2. Considers that the use of those remedies may also
forestall opportunities for persons exercising power over
detainees to engage in torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
3. Calls upon all Governments to guarantee to persons within their jurisdiction the full enjoyment of the
right of amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies
to the same effect, as may be applicable in their legal
system;
4. Decides that, in order to extend the global understanding and larger applications of institutions such as
amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies to the
same effect, an international seminar on the matter
would be timely and useful;
5. Decides further to consider this question again
at its thirty-fifth session.

I 06th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/178.

The right of amparo, habeas corpus or other
legal remedies to the same effect
34/179.

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 130 of the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment181 and of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 132
Mindful, in particular, of article 9, paragraph 4, of the
said Covenant, which stipulates that anyone who is
deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be
entitled to take proceedings before a court, in order that
that court may decide without delay on the lawfulness of
his detention and order his release if the detention is not
lawful,
Recalling its resolution 32/121 of 16 December 1977,
concerning the protection of the human rights of persons
who are detained in respect of offences which they have
committed, or are suspected of having committed, by
reason of their political opinions or convictions,
,Recalling also its resolutions 33/169 of 20 December
1978, concerning persons arrested or detained for trade
1ao Resolution 217 A (III).
1s1 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.
1a2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

Human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 31/124 of 16 December
1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977 and 33/ 175 of
20 December 1978 on the protection of human rights
in Chile,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 11 (XXXV) of 6 March 1979134 on reported violations of human rights in Chile, in which the Commission,
inter alia, decided to appoint a Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Chile and experts to
study the question of missing and disappeared persons
in Chile,
Expressing its regret that the Chilean authorities refused to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur and the
experts appointed by the Commission on Human Rights,
1 3 3 The report of the seminar was issued as document
ST/TAO/HR/12.
134 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supp[ement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
