A/71/160–S/2016/621

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
15 July 2016
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 127 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j),
(k), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), (s), (t), (u), (v), (w), (x)
and (y) of the provisional agenda*
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations:
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
__________________

* A/71/150.

16-11778 (E)

030816

*1611778*

Security Council
Seventy-first year

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Community
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central European Initiative
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States

2/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
In a number of resolutions, the General Assembly has noted with satisfaction
the active participation of regional and other organizations in the work of the United
Nations. The present report is prepared pursuant to the most recent requests of the
Assembly that the Secretary-General submit a report on the implementation of those
resolutions at its seventy-first session. As requested by the Assembly in paragraph 4 (l) of
the annex to its resolution 58/316, this is a consolidated report on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other organizations.
The present report covers the period since the issuance of the most recent
consolidated report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations, issued on 4 August 2014 (A/69/228S/2014/560).
In its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security Council requested the Secretary General to include, in his regular reporting to the Council, assessments of progress
on the cooperation between the United Nations and relevant regional organi zations.
In its presidential statement of 6 August 2013, the Council also requested the
Secretary-General to include, in his next biannual report to the Council and the
General Assembly on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations, recommendations on ways to enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and relevant regional and subregional organizations and arrangements.

16-11778

3/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

I. Introduction
1.
Section II of the present report has been prepared pursuant to the most recent
resolutions in which the General Assembly requested the Secretary -General to
report on the cooperation between the United Nations and a number of regional and
other organizations.
2.
In its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to include, in his regular reporting to the Council, assessments of progress on
the cooperation between the United Nations and relevant regional organizations. In its
presidential statement of 6 August 2013, the Council also requested the SecretaryGeneral to include, in his next biannual report to the Council and the General
Assembly on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations, recommendations on ways to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and relevant regional and subregional organizations and
arrangements.
3.
The activities and achievements described in the present report speak to the
depth and range of cooperation achieved between the United Nations and its
regional partners across international peace and security, humanitarian assistance,
development, and human rights.

II. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations
African Union
4.
The Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council held
their ninth and tenth annual consultative meetings in 2015 and 2016. The United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security continues to meet
regularly in order to advance a common understanding of the causes of conflict in
Africa and to promote joint approaches to resolving those conflicts.
5.
The United Nations Office to the African Union has continue d to strengthen
the partnership with the African Union in the area of peace and security.
Specifically, the Office has enhanced political engagement with the decision -making
organs of the African Union and with the Commission. The Office has promoted
shared analysis and common understanding between the United Nations and the
African Union of the root causes and drivers of conflict and jointly developed
options for intervention. Through sustained engagement of the African Union
Commission, troop-contributing countries/police-contributing countries, Member
States and donors, it has contributed to enhanced political coherence and alignment
in decision-making by the two organizations, and promoted better coordinated joint
initiatives in conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping. The United
Nations Office to the African Union has been instrumental in facilitating better
synchronized planning and management of African-led peace operations, as well as
transitions to United Nations operations.
6.
The Office continued to work with the African Union on the operationalization
of the African Standby Force, as one of the key pillars of the African Peace and
Security Architecture. Among the deliverables of this cooperation is the

4/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

implementation of the African Standby Force Road Map II, which culminated in the
conduct of a continental-level peace support operations exercise, Amani Africa II, in
October 2015 in South Africa, and its after-action review in March 2016 in
Mozambique. The exercise aimed at assessing the operational readiness of the
African Standby Force and involved the deployment of over 5,000 military, police
and civilian personnel from the five regional standby forces. Following this exercise,
four of the five regional standby forces declared their oper ational readiness.
7.
During the past two years, the African Union-led International Support
missions in Mali and the Central African Republic transitioned to fully fledged
United Nations missions. Joint planning and management of these transitions have
contributed to more effective communication between the African Union and the
United Nations. The momentum created by the 2015 High -Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations report (S/2015/446) and my subsequent report on the future of
United Nations peace operations (S/2015/682) has generated willingness among key
actors to move forward on institutionalizing and expanding the United Nations African Union partnership through consultations and coordination while also
looking for ways to ensure sustained, predictable and flexible funding mechanisms
for African Union peace operations.
8.
In Somalia, the strategic partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union remains a key component of the international community’s support to
peacebuilding. Cooperation between the African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia on the ground
has remained strong, at both the strategic and operational level. The United Nations
delivers the logistic support package to AMISOM through the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia, and its successor
operation, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia. I n addition, the United
Nations Office to the African Union continued to provide technical management and
expert advice to the African Union in the planning and deployment of AMISOM.
The African Union and the United Nations conducted a second joint Mission in
April 2015 which led to the AMISOM Concept of Operations review in August 2015.
9.
In Burundi, cooperation on political and human rights efforts has intensified
since the beginning of the crisis in April 2015. Since July 2015, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has provided logistical and
capacity-building support to the African Union human rights observers and military
experts deployed in Burundi and cooperated with the observers in joint monitoring
missions and advocacy. In April 2016, the African Union and the Peacebuilding
Support Office approved a project of $2.26 million to enable the continued
deployment of 32 African Union human rights observers in Burundi for six months
starting in April.
10. The Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region has continued to work closely with the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to advance the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, signed in February 2013. The
United Nations has also cooperated with the African Union, the International
Conference and SADC in their efforts to eradicate illegal armed groups operating in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably the Mouvement du 23 mars
and the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. The United Nations,

16-11778

5/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

together with the African Union, the International Conference and other partners,
organized the first Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference in Kinshasa in
February 2016.
11. Since December 2014, the United Nations and the African Union have
co-chaired the International Contact Group on Libya, which has convened five
times. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Libya regularly
coordinated with the African Union Special Envoy for Libya, as well as with the
Commissioner for Peace and Security, including through several visits to Addis
Ababa.
12. In Guinea-Bissau, the Peacebuilding Commission has continued to support the
region’s efforts, including those of the African Union, to resolve the political crisis
since August 2015.
13. The Department of Political Affairs continued to support the African Union
Commission in its efforts aimed at establishing mediation support structures within
the Commission. In 2015, the Department supported the United Nations Office to
the African Union, the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, and the
African Union in mediation processes and implementation of agreements for Sudan
and South Sudan.
14. The Department of Political Affairs, in consultation with the United Nations
Office to the African Union, engaged both at the strategic and operational levels
with the African Union and its African Centre for the Study and Research of
Terrorism to develop a “Cooperation Framework on Counter -Terrorism and
Preventing Violent Extremism”.
15. The United Nations and the African Union continued to coordinate on country specific electoral projects as necessary. The United Nations recruited and deployed
a senior electoral expert to the United Nations Office to the African Union in early
2015. The senior electoral expert has contributed to the United Nations electoral
support in the region and provided technical advice to the Democracy and Electoral
Assistance Unit of the African Union as necessary.
16. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs provided support to
the formulation of the African Humanitarian Policy Framework, policies related to
the use and operationalization of the African Stand -By Force and allied resources
under the African Union’s Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Support initiative.
The Office also cooperated with the African Union on the Ebola outbreak in West
Africa as well as in the run-up to the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul.
17. The Office of the Special Adviser for Africa has supported the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women,
Peace and Security. Following the adoption by the African Union of Agenda 2063
and its First Ten-Year Implementation Plan, respectively in January and June 2015,
the office of the Special Adviser supported efforts by the African Union and its
regional economic communities to mobilize international support for Agenda 2063
flagship projects.
18. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continues to provide support
to the implementation of the Plan of Action on Drug Control and Crime Prevention
2013-2017. The Office is also supporting the African Union -Horn of Africa

6/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Initiative against Trafficking in Persons and Smuggling of Migrants, as well as the
implementation of the Khartoum Process.
19. The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict continued to engage with and support the African Union, in line
with the Partnership Agreement signed with the African Union Peace and Securi ty
Commissioner in 2013. The Office has seconded a Senior Child Protection Adviser
to the Peace and Security Department for the last two years, which is set to continue.
20. The Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) collaborated with the African
Union Commission and the African Development Bank on a number of common
initiatives, such as the development and ongoing roll-out of Africa’s new long-term
vision and development framework, Agenda 2063; the Climate for Development in
Africa Initiative; and the Joint Youth Employment Initiative for Africa. ECA, as the
secretariat of the Regional Coordination Mechanism, together with the African
Union Commission and the African Development Bank and in collaboration with
the Department for Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
convened the Africa Regional Forum on Sustainable Development in June 2015.
21. UNDP, as one of the three strategic partners of the African Union ’s New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), has provided technical, capacity,
and advisory support to the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency. The
Department of Public Information worked with NEPAD to draw global attention to
issues critical to Africa’s development. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) supports NEPAD capacity development work for nutrition sensitive agriculture investment plans and the establishment of a knowledge -sharing
platform for food security and nutrition as well as the implementation of the
NEPAD Youth Programme. The International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD) has worked with NEPAD to combat rural poverty across the continent.
22. UNEP works with the African Ministries of the Environment and the African
Union to assess ways to increase the contribution of natural capital to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063. UNEP is engaging the African Union Commission and
Governments in the organization of a high-level panel on wildlife illegal trade.
23. Later in 2016, the first annual report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations-African Union partnership will be issued, as requested in the Security
Council presidential statement dated 16 December 2014.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
24. In 2015, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the United
Nations conducted the second formal review of the implementation of the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between the two Organizations, adopted
in November 2011. At the seventh ASEAN-United Nations Summit in November
2015, the Secretary-General and ASEAN Leaders agreed to hold consultations at the
regional level and to produce an ASEAN-United Nations Plan of Action for 20162020.
25. As a follow-up to the Summit, a United Nations senior-level delegation held
the first full-fledged secretariat-to-secretariat dialogue with the ASEAN secretariat,

16-11778

7/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

and also a full consultation with the ASEAN Committee of Permanent Representatives
in March 2016 in Jakarta.
26. In February 2015, the second ASEAN-United Nations Regional Dialogue on
Political-Security Cooperation, entitled “ASEAN-United Nations Collaboration in
Support of the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation”, was co-organized by
the Department of Political Affairs, the Government of Myanmar, and the Myanmar
Institute of Strategic and International Studies. The Department continues to
convene secretariat-to-secretariat meetings, ASEAN-United Nations Senior
Officials’ meetings, the ASEAN-United Nations Ministerial Meetings and ASEAN United Nations Summits. The eighth ASEAN-United Nations Summit is scheduled
to take place in September 2016 in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
27. The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP)
convenes the Asia-Pacific Regional Coordination Mechanism, which coordinates the
United Nations system’s collaboration with ASEAN on a number of issues. ESCAP
has focused on coordinating United Nations inputs on economic and sociocultural
cooperation for the 2015 interim Work Plan and the plan of action. ESCAP also
provided capacity development assistance to ASEAN countries in several areas and
supported tracking progress of the 12 Asia-Pacific least-developed countries
towards meeting their graduation threshold.
28. In August 2015, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific organized the twenty-fifth United Nations
Conference on Disarmament, with the participation of ASEAN.
29. The Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate continued to assist ASEAN
member States to strengthen their capacity on counter -terrorism. It also worked
closely with the ASEAN Police Chiefs secretariat.
30. UNODC cooperates with ASEAN through its Offices in Jakarta and Bangkok.
The Kuala Lumpur Declaration of the tenth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Transnational Crime in October 2015 endorsed illicit trafficking of wildlife and
timber and people smuggling as new areas of transnational crimes as well as the
formulation of a new ASEAN Plan of Action to Combat Transnational Crime. With
the launch of the ASEAN Economic Community in 2015, UNODC has worked on
promoting the inclusion of security considerations when enhancing illicit cross border trade.
31. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs engaged with ASEAN
in a number of areas under the 2010-2015 ASEAN-United Nations Joint Strategic
Plan on Disaster Management. It has also been an active partner in the development
of the ASEAN Standby Arrangements and Standard Operating Procedures, the
development of the ASEAN Regional Forum’s Humanitarian Assistance to Disaster
Relief Operations Strategic Guidance, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and others.
32. The role of the International Labour Organization (ILO) is defined in the
ASEAN Labour Ministers Work Programme 2010-2015 and it is responsive to
ASEAN priorities on mainstreaming the Decent Work Agenda. In 2015, ILO
furthered its cooperation with ASEAN in a number of areas, including international
labour standards, social protection, occupational safety and health, and promotion of
workers’ rights (including migrants’ rights). ILO has a number of ASEAN-wide
projects and contributes technical assistance to ASEAN.

8/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

33. FAO and ASEAN collaborated on several initiatives, including the development
of a food security strategy, building the resilience of small -scale farmers and fishers,
and climate change adaptation, mitigation, preparedness and response.
34. IFAD, in partnership with ASEAN and the European Union, launched a
programme to improve the income and food security of small -scale farmers and
rural producers in Asia in September 2015.
35. UNEP has facilitated preparation of the ASEAN-UN Work Plan on
Environment and Climate Change 2016-2020 and continued to support capacity
development and knowledge sharing.
36. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) strengthened its cooperation with
ASEAN through closer engagement in macroeconomic surveillance and capacitybuilding. High-level engagement between the IMF Managing Director and ASEAN
Ministers of finance and central bank governors has been institutionalized. The IMF
also participates in the ASEAN ministerial meetings where it provides h igh level,
confidential assessments of risks, resilience and vulnerabilities in the region. The
IMF provides training and technical assistance to ASEAN country officials and
conducts regular outreach to civil society organizations and academics from
ASEAN countries.
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
37. The Secretary-General met with the Secretary-General of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation Organization (BSEC) in December 2014. They discussed
political stability, peace and conflict resolution in the region, as well as regional
cooperation on economic and development issues, in particular climate change and
the post-2015 Agenda.
38. The Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) continued its cooperation with
BSEC in a number of transportation-related areas. BSEC was instrumental in
launching the use of the International Vehicle Weight Certificate as established by
the 1982 International Convention on the Harmonization of Frontier Controls of
Goods administered by the ECE Working Party on Customs Questions Affecting
Transport. ECE supported BSEC with developing a regional trade facilitation strategy.
39. UNEP works closely with BSEC to enhance the current structure of
environmental governance in the Black Sea region and to integrate environ mental
considerations into national and regional policy dialogue. UNEP facilitates
environmental discussions between Member States and offers expertise regarding
transboundary issues of concern.
Caribbean Community
40. The eighth General Meeting between the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and the United Nations system was held at the CARICOM secretariat in
Georgetown in July 2015, with the participation of the CARICOM Secretary General. The participants reviewed the progress made in implementing the
coordination mechanism led by the United Nations Development Group for Latin
America and the Caribbean and exchanged views on priority areas as identified by
the CARICOM secretariat. Among the topics discussed were Small Island
Developing States, climate change, renewable energy, the post-2015 Development

16-11778

9/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Agenda and financing for development, as well as citizen security and
non-communicable diseases.
41. Following a United Nations needs assessment mission in March 2015, the
Department of Political Affairs, in cooperation with UNDP, organized a Building
Resources in Democracy, Governance and Elections (BRIDGE) training and a
round-table discussion on electoral matters for participants from the CARICOM
secretariat and member States, which was held in March 2016. The workshop was
an opportunity for the CARICOM secretariat, electoral officials from 12 CARICOM
member States, the United Nations and representatives from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation an d
the Organization of American States, to share experiences and good practices on key
electoral issues.
42. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) supported and worked with the CARICOM secretariat and
national mechanisms for gender equality in the 20-year review of the implementation
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and in the lead -up to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. UN-Women continues to support genderresponsive follow-up to the Third International Conference on Small-Island
Developing States (2014) in the region. UN-Women and CARICOM partnered in
the development of the CARICOM Gender Equality Indicators Model, adopted in
October 2015 by the CARICOM Standing Committee of Cari bbean Statisticians, to
monitor gender equality commitments in the Sustainable Development Goals.
43. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs and CARICOM organized a
workshop on “Evidence-Informed Policies on Youth Development in the Caribbean”
aimed at strengthening capacity to formulate, monitor and evaluate evidence -based
policies on youth using internationally agreed indicators. The Department also
supported the preparation of a regional e-Government strategy for the Caribbean at
the request of CARICOM, together with the Caribbean Centre for Development
Administration. The Department is currently finalizing a conceptual framework on
e-Government for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in the Caribbean small island developing States, co-sponsored by the
Centre for Innovation on e-Government and funded by the Government of Colombia.
44. The Department of Public Information worked with representatives from
member States of CARICOM and the African Union for the 2015 and 2 016
commemorations of the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade.
45. FAO works closely with the CARICOM secretariat on the implementation of
the Regional Food and Nutrition Strategy of CARICOM. Among other things, FAO
leads two working groups — food security and natural resource management — of
the Regional Agricultural Cluster that is chaired by CARICOM. It also supports the
development of value chains identified by the CARICOM Council of Trade and
Economic Development through two technical cooperation programmes.
46. UNEP participated in the meeting of the Council on Trade and Economic
Development of CARICOM responsible for the promotion and development of
policies for the protection of the environment and for sustainable development. It
also cooperates with CARICOM on policy issues and project implementation.

10/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

47. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) coordinates and collaborates
with CARICOM on gender equality, youth empowerment, reduction of a dolescent
pregnancy and maternal mortality, HIV prevention, gender-based and sexual violence
prevention, data for development, humanitarian assistance, and population censuses.
48. The World Food Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction (UNISDR) have continued their partnership with the Caribbean
Disaster Emergency Management Agency of CARICOM. In 2015, the Agency and
WFP co-chaired the regional consultations for the World Humanitarian Summit in
the Latin America and Caribbean region.
49. UNODC supported the CARICOM Crime and Security Strategy wi th training
on addressing money-laundering and transnational organized crime. It also
re-established its programme presence in Bridgetown.
Central European Initiative
50. The World Health Organization (WHO) participated in the meeting of the
national coordinators of the Central European Initiative with other regional and
international organizations, held in Vienna, Austria in May 2015.
51. The World Meteorological Organization promoted a new capacity-building
project aimed at making South-East Europe a more climate resilient region.
52. ECE works with the Central European Initiative on advanced biofuels in the
context of a bio-based economy.
Collective Security Treaty Organization
53. The United Nations continued to engage the secretariat of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) in regular consultations on regional and global
peace and security issues of mutual interest, as well as potential areas for greater
cooperation on conflict prevention, early warning and peacekeeping -related issues.
54. In September 2014, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate Executive
Director held consultations in Moscow with the Deputy Secretary -General of CSTO.
Among other things, the consultations focused on the Executive Directorate ’s
cooperation with CSTO, the situation in Central Asia, and regional activities
organized by implementing partners with the expert support of the Executive
Directorate. In follow-up to that meeting, a draft protocol on cooperation between
the two organizations is currently under consideration.
55. In 2015, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Regional
Office for Caucasus, Central Asia and Ukraine engaged CSTO in order to enhance
interoperability during emergency response.
Commonwealth of Independent States
56. In September 2014, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate’s
Executive Director held consultations in Moscow with the Head of the
Anti-Terrorist Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States on its
cooperation with the Commonwealth, among other topics. In 2015, the Executive
Directorate and the Anti-Terrorist Centre exchanged information on the foreign
terrorist fighter threat in the regions, as well as on measures taken by the
Anti-Terrorist Centre to counter violent extremism, incitement and radicalization.

16-11778

11/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

The CIS Anti-Terrorist Centre also participated in the assessment visits of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in 2015 and 2016.
57. FAO supported the development of the Interstate Statistical Committee of the
CIS action plan for the implementation of the Global Strategy to Improve
Agricultural and Rural Statistics in the CIS region.
58. ECE cooperates closely with the Statistical Committee of CIS through sharing
of programmes of work and organizing joint activities. The ECE Convention on the
Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents engages in regular exchange of
information with the Inter-State Council on Industrial Safety under CIS on
industrial accident prevention and preparedness.
59. WHO participated in the forty-third plenary session of the Inter-Parliamentary
Assembly of CIS, held in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, on 27 November 2015.
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
60. The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) is a key partner of
ILO for the International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour in
Portuguese-speaking African countries and Timor-Leste. 2016 was declared “CPLP
Year Against Child Labour” for which ILO has organized workshops to draft a plan
of joint activities to secure adoption of national plans. A joint ILO/CPLP letter asks
Member States to raise awareness of child labour and ratify Convention 138.
61. UNODC continued to cooperate with the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries in the implementation of their action plan on trafficking in persons.
62. FAO is implementing a technical cooperation programme in support of the
CPLP Regional Strategy for food security and nutrition.
Council of Europe
63. The United Nations and the Council of Europe continued their cooperation on
the protection and strengthening of human rights, democracy and the rule of law, as
well as regional issues. In June 2015, the Secretary-General visited the Council of
Europe, where he also addressed its Parliamentary Assembly. The Secretary -General
of the Council of Europe participated in the high -level segment of the General
Assembly and addressed the sessions of the Human Rights Council in Geneva. The
Council contributed to the discussions leading to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
64. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2178 (2014), the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and the Council of Europe worked closely
on the development, negotiations and conclusions of the Council of Europe
additional Protocol to the Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism. The Protocol
was signed in Riga on 21 October 2015. The Council of Euro pe participates
routinely in Counter-Terrorism Committee visits.
65. ECE cooperates with the Council in the area of demographic statistics and
population issues.
66. UNHCR continued its advocacy and provision of legal expertise on refugee
law to the Council of Europe.

12/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

67. UNODC cooperates with the Pompidou Group of the Council of Europe in
drug policy development, jointly promoting the right to health for people in pr isons
and increasing availability, accessibility and quality of HIV services in prison
settings for people who use drugs.
Economic Community of Central African States
68. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) are revising their framework -ofcooperation agreement in line with the new mandate of the Regional Office for the
period 2015-2018. The Regional Office continues to hold regular consultations with
ECCAS on issues of common interest. In October 2014, the Regional Office and
ECCAS jointly organized a workshop on gender issues in Central Africa. In April
2016, the Regional Office and ECCAS held a joint strategic retreat in Libreville,
Gabon, to discuss cooperation between the two entities in light of the challenges
facing the subregion.
69. In his capacity as the United Nations representative to the international
mediation initiative on the crisis in the Central African Republic, Special
Representative Abdoulaye Bathily worked closely with the ECCAS-appointed
mediator, President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo, the
ECCAS Secretary-General and the African Union Special Envoy for the Central
African Republic.
70. The Regional Office for Central Africa and the Department of Political Affairs
continued to support ECCAS in strengthening its mediation capacity. In November
2014, the Department and the Regional Office organized a mediation training course
for staff members of the ECCAS secretariat in Libreville. In February 2015, the
Department provided further technical support on mediation at a workshop in
N’Djamena.
71. In May and October 2015, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
organized working luncheons with representatives of ECCAS, the African Union
Commission, and the Economic Community of West African States, among others.
In the course of these, several participants called for an institutional partnership
between the Commission, the African Union and the African subregional
organizations, and underscored the need for enhanced conflict prevention and
predictable investments in efforts to sustain peace.
72. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the ECCAS secretariat collaborated on strengthening disaster
management and preparedness in Central Africa. In 2015, the secretariats of the
Office and ECCAS proposed a rapid response roster mechanism, which was
launched in June 2016. UNISDR continued to provide technical support for
mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction in ECCAS activities and programmes.
73. ECCAS continued to take part in regional workshops of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, which culminated in the comprehensive regional
counter-terrorism strategy adopted in December 2015. UNODC contributed to the
development of this strategy and was given a mandate to support the establishment
of a regional judicial cooperation platform for Central Africa in cooperation with
ECCAS.

16-11778

13/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

74. UNEP has supported ECCAS to strengthen its capacity to assist countries in
their transition towards a Green Economy development model. UNEP and ECCAS
also collaborate in addressing the illegal wildlife trade in the region in partnership
with the African Union, the African Ministerial Conference on the Environmen t and
other relevant bodies.
Economic Cooperation Organization
75. The Statistics Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
cooperated with the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) in organizing a
capacity-building workshop on the Compilation of Quarterly National Accounts for
ECO member States in Tehran, in March 2015. FAO has an ongoing collaboration
with ECO to enhance the technical capacity of national statisticians in ECO countries.
76. The Forum on Forests collaborated closely with ECO in capacity-building
efforts aimed at sustainable management of forests.
77. ECO participates regularly in the work of ECE and undertakes to align its
activities with the objectives of the main border-crossing facilitation conventions
administered under ECE auspices.
78. UNEP continues to support subregional initiatives in the ECO region in order
to enhance environmentally sound and renewable energy services and resources, and
to engage in capacity-building services in the areas of environmental law and
education for sustainable development and sustainable tourism.
79. UNISDR provides strategic and technical guidance to ECO for incorporating
disaster risk reduction and resilience-building programmes. The ECO secretariat, in
consultation with UNISDR, is spearheading the preparation of a regional strategy
and a plan of action for disaster risk reduction aligning with the Sendai Framework.
Eurasian Economic Community
80. FAO and the Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEC) are together
implementing the 2015-2018 Plan of Action. In June 2015, the FAO Director
General visited the EurAsEC headquarters and invited the organization to consider
membership in FAO. In September 2015, FAO organized a seminar on
“Cooperatives in CIS countries” at the EurAsEC headquarters.
International Organization of la Francophonie
81. The United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF) continued coordinating their mediation efforts. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, regularly met with OIF
Secretary-General to discuss cooperation in the subregion.
82. In October 2014, the Office of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect and OIF jointly provided technical
assistance to the Government of the Central African Republic to establish a National
Committee for the Prevention and Punishment of Genocide, War Crimes, Crimes
against Humanity and all forms of Discrimination.
83. The United Nations Police Division enhanced its cooperation with OIF in order
to increase the participation of francophone countries in peacekeeping operations.

14/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

84. UN-Women and OIF renewed their framework partnership agreement in 2014
for a further two years to advocate for gender equality and women ’s empowerment.
UN-Women participated in the OIF high-level consultation of francophone ministers
on the occasion of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on the Status of
Women, in March 2015.
85. In 2015-2016, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and OIF cooperated
in the implementation of a project aimed at supporting Supreme Court Justices in
leading a criminal justice response to terrorism in the Sahel region.
86. In the margins of the twenty-first Conference of the Parties, UNDP and OIF
renewed their partnership in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In the run-up to the twenty-second Conference of the Parties to be
held in Morocco, the cooperation continues around post-Paris activities.
87. The Department of Public Information worked with OIF to organize and
promote the March 2016 screening and panel discussion at United Nations
Headquarters of the film Demain, which highlights issues related to climate change
and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
88. ECE has a long-standing collaboration in the field of trade facilitation with the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System.
League of Arab States
89. The United Nations and the League of Arab States (LAS) continued to enhance
cooperation, including through considering the establishment of a United Nations
Liaison Office to LAS in Cairo. The two organizations held their thirteenth biennial
General Cooperation meeting from 17 to 19 May 2016 in Geneva, Switzerland,
where they discussed collaboration in a number of areas, including peace and
security, among others.
90. The Department of Public Information has worked with LAS to strengthen its
capacities in conflict prevention and mediation. In 2014 and 2015, the Department
hosted LAS staff in order to familiarize them with the Department’s work, including
its Mediation Support Unit. The Department also conducted an assessment mission
to LAS headquarters to determine mediation training needs.
91. The United Nations continued its electoral partnership with LAS, inc luding
through BRIDGE (Building Resources in Democracy, Governance and Elections)
trainings on electoral matters and technical advice on the establishment of the LAS
electoral database. The United Nations and LAS collaborated in organizing the first
Forum of Electoral Management Bodies in the Arab States, which was held in Cairo
in May 2016.
92. The Department of Political Affairs Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force-United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre also engaged in consultations with
LAS to explore support for the LAS project on “Promoting Dialogue, Tolerance and
Openness through the Media to Counter Terrorism in the Arab Region”.
93. UN-Women supported the development of a regional action plan o n the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which was endorsed by
the Ministerial Council of LAS in September 2015 and will be launched in 2016.

16-11778

15/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

94. In November 2015, the Office of Legal Affairs organized an International Law
Seminar for Arab States in cooperation with LAS and the Government of Egypt in
Cairo.
95. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
LAS continued to strengthen their efforts aimed at developing a regional Arab
strategy for human rights. They held their twelfth sectoral thematic meeting in Cairo
in October 2015.
96. The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict entered into a cooperation agreement with LAS aimed at
mainstreaming “Children and Armed Conflict” in programmes and policies of LAS
members and the organization’s broader protection and human rights work.
97. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs signed a new joint
action plan with LAS in June 2015 which sets out a framework for closer
collaboration on emergency preparedness and response, huma nitarian coordination,
capacity-building, resource mobilization and advocacy. LAS played an active role in
the lead-up to the World Humanitarian Summit through its financial contribution as
well as hosting of regional consultations. It also co -chaired the Regional Steering
Group for the Middle East and North Africa along with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
98. UNHCR and LAS organized a regional training on “Refugees and Irregular
Migration” in November 2015. Related to the possible adoption of an Arab Refugee
Convention, the Arab Interior Ministers’ Council adopted the “Draft Arab
Convention” text in March 2016 for which UNHCR provided technical assistanc e.
99. The Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) continued
its cooperation with LAS to influence regional policy priorities, build consensus and
identify regional approaches to challenges, through the organization of
consultations, high-level meetings and preparation of knowledge products. ESCWA,
together with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNEP, cooperated
with LAS in organizing two Arab High-level Forums on Sustainable Development
in Amman, Jordan (April 2014) and Manama (May 2015). ESCWA and LAS worked
on a regional initiative for the assessment of climate change impac ts on water
resources and socioeconomic vulnerability in the Arab Region with workshops in
Cairo (December 2014) and Beirut (June 2015).
100. In coordination with the LAS, the United Nations information centre in Cairo
organized several online dialogues to promote key issues, including the Sustainable
Development Goals and countering violent extremism.
101. UNFPA maintains strategic partnerships with, and provides ongoing technical
assistance to, the LAS and OIC, including for the conduct of national family health
surveys.
102. UNODC continues to support LAS for the adoption of measures aimed at
enhancing the prevention and prosecution of human trafficking cases, protecting
victims, and strengthening regional cooperation for the implementation of the “Arab
Initiative” and the “Comprehensive Arab Strategy for Combating Trafficking in
Human Beings” (2014-2017).
103. IMF works with the Arab Monetary Fund on regional policy coordination,
training, Arab statistics and Arab debt markets.

16/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Organization for Democracy and Economic Development-GUAM
104. ECE has contributed to the organization’s agreement on data exchange
concerning Customs.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
105. The United Nations has strengthened its cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in several areas, including in
mediation, electoral matters, and country-specific issues.
106. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force-United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, together with the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, worked with OSCE on the development of the Joint
Plan of Action for the Implementation of the United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force-United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre has also engaged with OSCE in the
development of a number of counter-terrorism capacity-building projects and
outreach activities, including the OSCE Annual Counter-Terrorism Conference. The
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate has worked closely with OSCE on efforts
aimed at countering the financing of terrorism, bringing terrori sts to justice, and
border control. The OSCE participated in several assessment visits conducted by the
Executive Directorate on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
cooperated in implementing the recommendations of those visits. UNODC and
OSCE closely coordinate in planning their counter-terrorism activities and have
organized several joint workshops in the OSCE region.
107. The Office of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect presented its atrocity crime risk assessment methodology
to the annual OSCE early warning focal points meeting in Vienna in July 2015.
108. The United Nations Police Division has coordinated closely with the OSCE
Strategic Police Matters Unit. The Police Division and OSCE also hold regular
staff-to-staff discussions on guidance coherence between the two organizations.
109. ECE continues its long-standing cooperation with OSCE in advancing the
implementation of the Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in
Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters and its Protocol
on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers. The two organizations have conducted
a number of joint capacity-building events and projects over the last few years in
Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia.
110. UNEP, ECE and UNDP cooperate with OSCE within the framework of the
Environment and Security Initiative to provide an integrated response to
environment and security challenges.
Organization of American States
111. The Department of Political Affairs and the Secretariat for Strengthening
Democracy of the Organization of American States (OAS) hold yearly desk -to-desk
dialogues, the most recent of which took place in December 2015. Within the Joi nt
Mediation Partnership between the United Nations and OAS, the organizations have
identified areas for collaboration, including mediation -related training and sharing

16-11778

17/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

of tools, guidelines and expertise. The two also work together on a number of
electoral initiatives.
112. The Department of Political Affairs, together with the UNODC Regional
Programme Office in Panama, provided technical guidance to OAS in 2015 and
2016 in connection with the OAS Mission to Support the Fight against Corruption
and Impunity in Honduras.
113. UNODC and OAS, through the Executive Secretariat of the Inter-American
Drug Abuse Control Commission, cooperated on a set of joi nt recommendations on
asset recovery and management to the Government of Brazil. They also conducted a
training to national authorities in Paraguay on the invest igation of corruption and
money-laundering.
114. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force-United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre participated in the Inter-regional Specialized Workshop on Illicit
Finance and Criminal and Terrorist Networks, held by the OAS Inter -American
Committee against Terrorism in August 2015.
115. UNDP and OAS launched an early-warning guide for policymakers to prevent
and resolve social conflicts in Latin America and the Caribbean, entitled “Early
Warning and Response Systems Design for Social Conflicts” in March 2016. The
two organizations collaborated closely, along with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other international partners, in the context of the 2015 Haiti
elections.
116. WFP and OAS signed an agreement in September 2015 to intensify their joint
efforts to improve food security and nutrition in the Americas.
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
117. The United Nations has continued to strengthen its cooperation with the OIC
on peace and security matters, including by holding desk -to-desk exchanges and
deepening mediation and electoral partnerships. Representatives of the two
organizations meet biannually to discuss their cooperation and agree on joint
projects. Their latest biennial General Cooperation meeting was held from 11 to
13 May 2016 in Geneva. In addition, the United Nations is working with OIC on a
joint initiative to facilitate peace talks between the Taliban and the Government of
Afghanistan.
118. The Department of Political Affairs and UNDP supported OIC in organizing a
workshop on the role of civil society in enhancing the i ntegrity of electoral processes
in July 2015. The Department’s Division for Palestinian Rights collaborated with
OIC in organizing three international conferences on the Question of Jerusalem.
119. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force-United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate continued to
strengthen their cooperation with OIC and regularly engaged with OIC on efforts of
OIC member States in implementing, respectively, the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and provisions of Security Council resolutions 1624
(2005) and 2178 (2014).
120. FAO supports a series of studies by OIC on food loss and waste and is also
collaborating with the Islamic Development Bank and with the Statistical,

18/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Economic and Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries to
implement the Global Strategy to Improve Agriculture and Rural Statistics.
121. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs cooperates with the
humanitarian department of OIC to build their capacity and to jointly advocate for a
better and more effective humanitarian response. In November 2014, OIC co-led a
partnership mission to Chad with the African Union and the Office to raise awareness
of the prevailing situation. In June 2015, OIC and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs brought together OIC-affiliated non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) from the Global South and international NGOs to discuss ways to enhance
inclusive coordination in humanitarian affairs.
122. UNHCR continued enhancing its cooperation with OIC. A high-level OIC
delegation participated in the UNHCR High-level meeting on global responsibility
sharing through pathways for admission of Syrian refugees held in March 2016 in
Geneva.
123. WHO is a member of the OIC Steering Committee on Health, and is active
with several OIC bodies, including the Islamic Development Bank, the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and the Statistical, Economic and
Social Research and Training Centre for Islamic Countries. WHO works closely
with the Islamic Advisory Group on Polio Eradication.
Pacific Islands Forum
124. In August 2014, the Secretary-General participated in the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States in Samoa, where the small island
developing States Accelerated Modalities Of Action (“Samoa Pathway”) was
adopted. United Nations entities provided support to the Pacific small island
developing States in the lead-up to the Conference and have taken steps to support
the implementation of the Samoa Pathway outcome document, in close
collaboration with the Pacific Island Forum and the Council of Regional
Organizations in the Pacific.
125. On 26 September 2014, the Secretary-General met with the leaders of the
Pacific Island Forum on the margins of the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly to discuss the importance of the implementation of the Samoa Pathway,
climate change and gender issues. On 1 October 2015, the Secretary-General met
the leaders on the margins of the seventieth session of the General Assembly, where
they affirmed the need to urgently and decisively address the unique vulnerabilities
of small island developing States, including through the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and on climate change.
126. ESCAP and the Pacific Islands Forum cooperated on promoting the
sustainable development of small island developing States through a range of
initiatives and activities aimed at enhancing national capacities and institutions,
enhancing the Pacific voice and representation.
127. UNDP has continued its dialogue with the Pacific Island Forum and the
Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific entities on how best to align
United Nations Development Frameworks and related country programming with
the priorities identified by Pacific leaders in the context of the Framework for
Pacific Regionalism and the Samoa Pathway.

16-11778

19/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

128. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has engaged with the
Pacific Island Forum on advocacy for internal displacement issues, launching
together with OHCHR a campaign to raise awareness and build commitment by
Member States on issues related to displacement. The Office for the Coor dination of
Humanitarian Affairs has also engaged the Pacific Island Forum around the World
Humanitarian Summit regional consultations.
129. UNODC works in close cooperation with the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat,
including in response to its request for assistance in updating model legal provisions
to harmonize them with current international legal standards related to terrorism.
130. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs, together with the United
Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, chairs the
Inter-Agency Consultative Group on small island developing States, an informal
mechanism for collaboration on issues advancing the sustainable de velopment of
small island developing States.
131. FAO continued its cooperation with the Pacific Island Forum, including on
land management, integrated pest management, agricultural statistics, atoll
agriculture and oceanic fisheries management.
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
132. In October 2014, the Director of the Executive Committee of the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization briefed the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee on its regional efforts to counter
terrorism and violent extremism. The Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure also
participated in a Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate assessment visit to
Uzbekistan and hosted a meeting between the Director of its Executive Directorate
and delegation in Tashkent in April 2015. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization
attended and substantively contributed to a regional workshop on preventive
obligations and criminalization of offences regarding foreign terrorist fighters
jointly held by UNODC and OSCE in Almaty in August 2015.
133. ESCAP has strengthened its cooperation with the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO). In May 2015, the Secretary-General of SCO attended the
seventy-first session of ESCAP, where the Executive Secretary and the Secr etaryGeneral agreed to renew the memorandum of understanding between the two
organizations for an additional five years, with a greater emphasis on economic
development and regional cooperation.
134. WHO collaborated with SCO on the organization of the second meeting of
Ministers of Health of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, held in Moscow in
July 2015.
Southern African Development Community
135. The Department of Political Affairs continued to support SADC with technical
assistance on mediation. In 2015, the Department supported the efforts of the SADC
Mediation Support Unit by providing experts to the meetings of the SADC
Mediation Reference Group and contributing to the development of SADC
mediation training.

20/22

16-11778

A/71/160
S/2016/621

136. Since the start of 2015, the Department has engaged in consultations with
SADC Member States and the SADC secretariat on the establishment of a United
Nations regional office for Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean region.
137. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force-United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre assisted SADC with the development of a regional counter terrorism strategy, which was approved by the Summit of the SADC Heads of State
and Government in August 2015.
138. UNODC and SADC developed a Joint Regional Programme to make the
SADC region safer from crime and drugs (2013-2016). The Office supported SADC
member States in strengthening their capacity to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
UNODC and the SADC secretariat carried out a number of joint activities aimed at
bringing national legislations into compliance with international standards and
raising the capacity of SADC member States to address drug trafficking, trafficking
in persons, smuggling of migrants, gender-based violence and corruption.
139. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and SADC
collaborated on early warning, information management, emergency preparedness
and regional coordination during emergency response, among other things. The
Office supports the roll-out of standardized vulnerability assessment tools to allow a
comprehensive and comparable analysis of risk across the region. T he Office’s
Regional Office for Southern Africa is supporting SADC in the development of its
humanitarian framework.
140. UNISDR supported the establishment of a disaster risk reduction unit in the
SADC secretariat. In December 2015, SADC and UNISDR jointly conducted the
first ever peer review on disaster risk reduction in Africa.
141. UNEP joins the SADC Technical Committee on Environment in an advisory
capacity and has provided technical advice to the finalization of the SADC
Environment Protocol Development of the SADC Climate Change Action Plan,
SADC Biodiversity Conservation Action Plan and the SADC Green Growth
Strategy.

III. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons;
and Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization
142. The Office for Disarmament Affairs is working with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Preparatory C ommission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization to promote disarmament and
non-proliferation education, with a particular emphasis on empowering women.
143. OPCW is a member of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
co-chairs its Inter-Agency Working Group on Preventing and Responding to
Weapons of Mass Destruction Terrorist Attacks. Within this Working Group, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force-United Nations Counter-Terrorism

16-11778

21/22

A/71/160
S/2016/621

Centre and OPCW have developed a global project on ensuring effective
inter-agency interoperability and coordinated communication in the case of
chemical and/or biological attacks.
144. ECE worked with OPCW on chemical safety and industrial accident
prevention, notably through a joint workshop on industrial accident prevention for
Central Asia in Astana in May 2015. OPCW has also joined an inter -agency
coordination group on industrial accidents, established by ECE in the context of the
Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents.

IV. Observations and recommendations
145. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has significantly deepened and diversified in recent years. Such
cooperation has proven critical to ensuring effective international peace and security
engagements, as highlighted in the report of the High -level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (A/70/95-S/2015/446). The Secretary-General remains committed
to strengthening further this cooperation through deepened partnerships, especially
through developing context-specific approaches to cooperation, taking full account
of the specificities and demands of each region, as well as the mandate of the
institution concerned.

22/22

16-11778
