54

General A111embly-Seventeenth Session

report of the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly
at its sixteenth session, 15
Recognizing that the principle of an equitable geographical distribution it: the composition of t~e Se~retariat does not conflict with the paramount considerat10ns
of employment of staff, namely, the necessity of securing
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity as laid down in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral16 and the improvements that have taken place
in the geographical distribution of the staff,
Recognizing that significant imbalances in t~e geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat continue to exist,
Recognizing further the necessity of correcting these
imbalances as early as possible,
1. . Recommends that the Secretary-General should be
guided in his efforts to achieve a more equitable geographical distribution, within the general framework
of his report, by the following principles and factors :
(a) In the recruitmen_t of all staff, ~ue reisar? s~all
be paid to securing as wide a geqgraphical d1stnbut10n
as possible ;
( b) In the Secretariat proper, an equitable geographical distribution should ta~e i!1to account _the fact
of membership, Members' contnbuhons and their populations as outlined in the Secretary-General's report,
particularly paragraph 69 ( b) thereof; no Member
State should be considered "over-represented" if it has
no more than five of its nationals on the staff by virtue
of its membership;
( c) The relative importance of posts at different
levels;
(d) The need for a more balanced regional composition of the staff at levels of D-1 and above;
( e) In career appointments, particular account should
be taken of the need to reduce "under-representation" ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General ta review periodically the geographical distribution of the staffs of the
Technical Assistance Board, the Special Fund and the
United Nations Children's Fund, and to report annually
to the General Assembly on this matter;
3. Requests the Secretar~•-General to report to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session on the progress achieved in the geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1853 (XVII). United Nations lntemational School
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, together with the report of the Board of Trustees
of the United Nations International School,17 and the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on this subject, 18
111 Ibid., Sixteenth Sessio11,, Annexes, agenda item 64, document A/5063.
16 Ibid., Seventeenth Sessi01t,, Annues, agenda item 70, document A/5270.
1T Ibid., agenda item 72, document A/5308.
18 Ibid., document A/5319.

Noting the action taken by the Secretary-General and
the Board of Trustees to locate a permanent site for the
School, to raise funds from voluntary sources to acquire
the site, and to build the new School,
Noting further the progress made in reducing the
operating deficit of the School,
Noting also the increasing number of applications for
admission to the School and its role in the recruitment
and retention of qualified personnel for the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 1439 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 by which the General Assembly decided to contribute to the International School Fund for a period
of five years such continuing financial assistance as the
Assembly might consider necessary, and its subsequent
resolutions 1591 (XV) of 20 December 1960 and 1727
(XVI) of 20 December 1%1 by which it contributed
grants to liquidate the operational deficit and to begin
planning for the permanent accommodation of the
School,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Mayor and the
City of New York for their continuing co-operation in
the location of a permanent site for the United Nations
International School and in extending the availability of
the present temporary premises;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices to assist the Board of Trustees in raising from voluntary sources the additional funds required
for the construction of the School and the creation of
an endowment fund ;
3. Decides to contribute $50,000 to the International
School Fund towards liquidating the operational deficit
anticipated for the current school year ;
4. Decides to contribute $20,000 to the International
School Fund for the purpose of forwarding plans for
the permanent accommodation of the School.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1854 (XVII). Administrative and budgetary procedures of the United Nations
A

The General Assembly,
Having regard to resolution 1731 (XVI) of 20
December 1961, in which the General Assembly recognized its need for authoritative legal guidance as to
obligations of Member States under the Charter of the
United Nations in the matter of financing the United
Nations operations in the Congo and in the Middle East,
Recalling the question submitted to the Internation"i'l
Court of Justice in that resolution,
Having received the Court's advisory opinion of
20 July 1962, 19 transmitted to the General Assembly by
the Secretary-General,20 that the expenditures authorized in the General Assembly resolutions designated in
resolution 1731 (XVI) constitute "expenses of the
Organization" within the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter,
19 Certain expenses of the United Nations ( Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter), Advisory Opinion of 20 July 1962:
I.C.J. Reports, p. 151.
20 Official Records of the Genn-al Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Annexe.r, agenda item 64, document A/5161.

55

Resolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

Accepts the opm1on of the International Court of
Justice on the question submitted to it.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

B
The General Assembly,
~ecognizi?1g that peace-keeping operations of the
U1;1ted Nat10n~, such as those in the Congo and in the
Middle East, impose a heavy financial burden upon
Member States, in particular on those having a limited
capacity to contribute financially,
Recognizing that in order to meet the expenditures
caused by such operations a different procedure is required from that applied to the regular budget of the
United Nations,
7:aking into account ~he advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 20 July 196219 in answer
to the question contained in General Assembly resolution 1731 (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
C_onvince~ of the necessity of establishing at the
earliest possible opportunity different financing methods
from those applied to the regular budget to cover, in
the future, peace-keeping operations of the United
Nations involving heavy expenditures, such as those for
the Congo and the Middle East,
l. Decides to re-establish the Working Group on the
Examination of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of th~ Unit~d Nations with the same membership
as that established m General Assembly resolution 1620
(XV) of 21 April 1961, and then to increase its membership to twenty-one by the addition of six Member
States to be appointed by the President of the General
Assembly with due regard to geographical distribution
as pr?vided in resolution 1620 (XV), to study, in con~
sultatlon. a~ ap12ropriate with the Advisory Committee
on Ad_mmistrative -;nd . Budgetary Questions and the
~omm1ttee on Contnbut10ns, special methods for financing peace-keeping operations of the United Nations
involving heavy expenditures, such as those for the
Congo and the Middle East, including a possible special
scale of assessments;
. ~- Requests the _Working Group to take into account
m its study the criteria for the sharing of the costs of
peace-keeping operations mentioned in past resolutions
of the General Assembly, giving particular attention to
the following :
. ~a) The references to a special financial responsibility of members of the Security Council as indicated in

General Assembly resolutions 1619 (XV) of 21 April
1961 and 1732 (XVI) of 20 December 1961;
( b) Such special factors relating to a particular peacekeeping operation as might be relevant to a variation in
the sharing of the costs of the operation ;
( c) The degree of economic development of each
Member State and whether or not a developing State is
in receipt of technical assistance from the United
Nations;
( d) The collective financial responsibility of the
Members of the United Nations;
3. Further requests the Working Group to take into
account any criteria proposed by Member States at the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly or submitted by them directly to the Working Group;
4. Requests the Working Group to study also the
situation arising from the arrears of some Member
States in their payment of contributions for financing
peace-keeping operations and to recommend, within the
letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations,
arrangements designed to bring up to date such payments, having in mind the relative economic positions of
such Member States;
5. Requests the Working Group to meet as soon as
possible in 1963 and to submit its report with the least
possible delay and in any case not later than 31 1farch
1963;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
report of the Working Group to Member States as soon
as possible with a view to its consideration, when
appropriate, by the General Assembly.
1199th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

•

• •
The President of the General Assembly, in Pursuance of
paragraph 1 of the above resolution, appointed six additiottal
members of the Working Group on the Examination of tile
Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United
Nations, as follows: ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA CAMEROON MoNGOLIA, NETHERLANDS and p AKIST,\N_21
'
'
As a result, the Working Group is composed of the following
Member States: ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, BRAZIL, BULGARIA,
CAMEROON,

CANADA,

CHINA,

FRANCE,

INDIA,

ITALY,

JAPAN,

MEXICO, MONGOLIA, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, SWEDEN,
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND

and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA .
21 See A/5398.

1860 (XVII). Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1962
The General Assembly
l. Resolves that for the financial Y:ar 1962 the amount of $US 82,144,740 appropriated by its resolution 1734 A
(XVI) of 20 December 1961 shall be mcreased by $3,673,480 as follows:
