TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

4 DECEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l559)

. . . . , , . . . , . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . I 1

Expression of thanks to retiring President and statement by the President

1

Adoption of the agenda , , , , . . , . . , . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . 2
Complaint by Guinea:
(n)
(b)

Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9987);
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . 2

S/PV. 1559

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents am composed oJcapita1 letters conzbined withj?gures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nutions document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published
in quarterly Slrppkernents of the Official Records of the Security Co~uzcil. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions arzd Decisions
of the Security Courzcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively
to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that
date.

DANDFIFTY-NINTHMEETING
eld in New York on Friday, 4 December 1970, at 4 p.m.

Mr. Y. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).

which are members of the Security Council; its report
is before the Council today [S/l0009 rind A&l].

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

4. I should also like to express gratitude to the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General,
who have concerned themselves with this question,
and to the other members of the United Nations Secretariat for their quick and efficient processing of the
report of the Security Council Special Mission, which
enabled the Council to meet today to consider this
report.

&w&w:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l559)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2.

5. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): First of all I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council during this
decisive month of our deliberations. I do not think
that I shall add much to the knowledge of the members
of the Security Council and the international community if I say that your presidency of the Coundll will
bring to it the experience of a man whose name has
been associated with the consideration of some of the
greatest problems which the last two decades of our
life have known, as well as with the determination
to solve those and other pending problems peacefully.
Yours is a very rich experience in which not only the
Security Council and we .ourselves as your colleagues,
but also the international community as a whole, should
rejoice.

Complaint by Guinea:
(a) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9987);
(6) Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established
under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and
Add.1).

Expression of thanks to retiring President and
statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT
(tr~~sluted from Russian):
Before we take up the question on the agenda for
today’s meeting, I should like to pay a tribute to my
predecessor, Ambassador Tomeh, who was President
of the Security Council last month, and to thank him
for all he did while he was President.

6. I would go on to mention very gratefully the collaboration of all the members of the Security Council
when we met with the difficult problem that you, referred to, Mr. President, that of Guinea, and their
awareness of the dangers that threaten world peace
and their response in acting in a most active and
dynamic ,manner.

2. Ambassador Tomeh is widely known not only as
a distinguished diplomat and talented speaker but also
as a great scholar. I am especially pleased to note that
he is the representative of a State with which the Soviet
Union maintains friendly relations.

7. I -wish also to express my gratitude and thanks
to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, U,
Thant, for his very close co-operation, and I hope I
shall have another opportunity to say more on this
subject when we come to the discussion of it; but,
finally, I, as the representative of Syria, certainly
rejoice in the fact of seeing a representative of a country
to which my country is bound by strong ties of
friendship, understanding and mutual respect, assume
the presidency of. the Security Council during this
month.

3. Last month, under his wise and effective guidance,
a number of meetings were held and important decisions were taken. ‘At its 1558th meeting, the Security
Council adopted a decision demanding the immediate
cessation of aggression against the Republic of Guinea
and the immediate withdrawal &all external armed
forces and mercenaries from the territory of Guinea.
The Security Council also adopted the very important
decision to send to the Republic of Guinea a Special
Mission’ composed of representatives of five countries

8. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian):
Thank you for your kind words about my country and
about me personally,

1 Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under resolution 289 (1970).

1
.

.

Adoption

the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic
of Guinea has been circulated in document S/10014.

of the agenda

12. The first speaker on my list is the Chairman of
the Special Mission, the representative of Nepal, who
has expressed a wish to introduce the report of the
Mission. I invite him to do so.

Complaiut
by Guinea:
(a) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President
of the
Security Council (S/9987);
@I

13. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): Mr. President, I should
like, first of all, to extend to you the warm congratulntions of my delegation upon your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council, as well
as to express my personal admiration and respect for
your conspicious ability and qualities of character. I
atn sure that during your presidency of the Security
Council you will display a high degree of authority,
objectivity and wisdom. I wish to assure you that in
the discharge of your great responsibilities as President
you will enjoy the full co-operation and support of
my delegation.

eport of the Security Council Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea established under
resolution 289 (1970) (S/10009 and Add.1)

9. The PRESIDENT
(fr.crnsl~fe~ $vrn
Rrtssiat~):
Before we proceed to consider the substance of the
question on the agenda, I should like to remind the
members of the Council that at our 1558th meeting
it was decided to invite the representatives of Guinea,
Senegal, Mali, Saudi Arabia and Mauritania to participate in the Council’s debate on the question before
it. I should also like to inform the members of the
Council that the representatives of Algeria [SllOOlO),
Liberia [S/l001 l]? Tanzania [S/10012], the People’s
RepublicoftheCongo[S/IOO13],
Yugoslavia~S/f0015~,
Mauritius [S/10016] and the Sudan l;s/lOOl7] have sent
written requests asking that their delegations be invited
to participate, without the right to vote, in the Council’s
debate on this question. If there are no objections 01
comments from members of the Council, I propose
also to invite the representatives of all these countries
to participate in the Council’s meeting in accordance
with our established practice and the relevant rules
of procedure.

14. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador George Tomeh, for the great
decision that was taken by the Security Council under
his presidency last month. He further deserves OUI
tribute for the outstanding manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Security Council. He showed
an absolute sense of impartiality
and a high level of
competence. I am personally deeply grateful to him
for the consideration and friendship he has always been
good enough to show towards me.
15. I now turn to the matter under consideration.
16. In my capacity as Chairman ofthe Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under resolution 2X9 (1970) of 22 November,
I have the honour to introduce the report of the Special
Mission, contained in document S/l0009 and Add.].

10. In view ofthe limited number of seats at the Council table and in accordance with the Council’s established practice, I propose to invite the representative
of Guinea to take the place reserved for him at the
Council table, The other representatives are invited
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber. Under this arrangement, they
will all be invited to take places at the Council table
when their turn comes to speak.

17. In compliance with the decision of the Security
Council, the Special Mission undertook the implemcntation of its tasks by leaving immediately for Conakrp.
the capital of the Republic of Guinea. The Special Mission approached its tasks with a high sense of responsibility and concern, bearing in mind the great significance and urgency of the situation.

At the invitrrtion of the President,
Mr. A. Toure’
(GldiFleu) took (I plrtcc c~f the Council tub/c; rltzd Mr.
I. Boye (Scnegctl), Mr. G. Sow (Mali), Mr. J. M.
Baroody
(Saudi Arvrbia),
Mr. S. A. Ould Tctycz
(Mauritania),
Mr. M. Yazid (Algerin), Mr. N. Barnes
(Liberia), Mr. S. A. Salitn (United Republic of Tmzania), Mr. N. MorzQo (People’s
Republic of the
Congo), Mt.. L. Mojsov (Yugoslavia),
Mr. R. K.
Ramphul (Mawititrs)
and Mr. M. Khnlid (Sudan) took
the places reserved for them.

18. During its stay in Guinea, from 25 to 28
November, the Special Mission was able to gather a
substantial amount of information and to carry out a
heavy programme of activities, with the fUll* Cooperation of the Government of the Republic of Gumea.
On the basis of the information received and the observations made, the Special Mission has arrived al certain
conclusions and its considered opinion, as set out in
section III of the report. The Special Mission hopes
that its report will serve the purpose of fully clarifying
the situation in order that the Security Council nW’
take any further action it may consider necessary.

I I. The PRESIDENT
(ttwtzs/arecif,ott~
Rttssian): At
today’s meeting the Security Council begins its consideration of the report of the Special Mission sent
to the Republic of Guinea. This report is before the
Council for consideration
in documents S/l0009 and
Add. 1. I should like to inform the members of the
Council that a letter from the Charg& d’affaires of Portugal to the United Nations referring to the report of

19. The PRESIDENT
(ttvttzslctted fi’otn
call on the representative of Guinea.
2

Rtrssi~t~~: 1

20. Mr. TOURE
(Guinea) (interpretutim
jkm
Fmzch): The Security Council, which is the principal
United Nations organ charged with the maintenance
of international peace and security, once again is seized
of the consideration of a flagrant act of premeditated
aggression perpetrated by a Member State, the fascist
Government of Lisbon, against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Guinea, an African Member State of our Organization.

tuguese invaders were, in effect, the Port of Boulbinet,
the headquarters of the radio, the central power station,
Camp Almamy Samory, Camp Boiro, the headquarters
of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde (PAIGC), the President’s residence
at Bellevue, the Mini&-e beach, Conakry Airport,
Gbessia, and the presidency of the Republic.
26. It seems to us obvious that the aggression of 22
November 1970 by the Portuguese soldiery, acting,
on behalf of and for imperialism, did not occur merely
by chance, nor was it an isolated event. That is why
the Republic ofGuinea, which at no time was surprised
at this new treachery and which did not wait for the
United Nations to defend its inalienable right to its
territorial integrity and its sovereignty, warded off the
aggression, as you know, because of the heroic resistance of its people.

21. In violation of paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the
Charter, in the early hours of 22 November 1970, Portugal committed a treacherous aggression against the
Republic of Guinea, thus once more gravely jeopardizing the territorial integrity and political independence
of the people of the Republic of Guinea, and trampling
underfoot their fundamental freedoms.
22, After the incessant violations of Guinean airspace
since July 1961, after numerous acts of deliberate provocation on our frontiers with occupied Guinea (Bissau),
after the seizure of a Guinean civilian aircraft and of
its crew by Portuguese authorities, after the Portuguese
naval aggression at BokC on 13 November 1969, followed by the hijacking of a civilian trawler in Guinean
territorial waters, it is today Conakry, one of the
citadels of Africa’s struggle for its true freedom and
independence, which has been chosen as the target
Of a large-scale operation by imperialism to confiscate
the victorious gains of Guinea and its revolution.

27. The Security Council of the United Nations will
remember that in July 1961 and in February 1962, in
a letter addressed to the President of the Security
Council, the Government of the Republic of Guinea
informed the Council of the constant violations of its
air space by Portuguese military aircraft.
28. The Council will also remember a communication
addressed’ to it by the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations, on 26 February 1965,
stating that four houses in the small village of Soupan
in the Republic of Guinea had been set on fire, and
three civilians seriously wounded, by the Portuguese
intervention forces.

23. Conakry, which is a peninsula surrounded on all
sides by the Atlantic, and having within its borders
‘the national radio station, the central electricity
generating station, the summer villa of President
Ahmed SCkou Tour&, the headquarters of the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde,
the Gbessia international airport, Boiro military camp,
and the Palace of t,he President of the Republic, situated
011 the northern and southern carniches, and which
at this time of year is covered by heavy fog, is propitious
for operations of this sol:t.

29. Once again the Security Council’s attention was
drawn by the Republic of Guinea to the series of crimes
committed by the Portuguese forces on 17 April 1965
in the Guinean village of Paicaille, when eighteen
houses were set on fire, one person was killed and
two were seriously wounded.
30. On 7 October 1965, in another communication
addressed to the Security Council, the Government
of Guinea submitted for consideration by the members
of the Council information on the acts of deliberate
provocation and the constant violations of Guinean
air space by the Portuguese air force based in Guinea
(Bissau).

24. The population of Conakry, the majority of whom
are Moslem, exhausted by the hard period of Ramadan,
was sleeping peacefully. Thus everything seemed to
contribute to the execution of the treacherous and criminal operation. Two LST ships from the last war, supported by ten cruiser warships, submarines, silent
motor-launches,
Zodiac barges, together with mercenaries who had fought against African freedom in
Katanga, with the support of the regular Portuguese
army, were used by Portuguese fascism in the name
Of imperialism
to perpetrate the crime.Their numbers
were 380 men, distributed as follows: 150 infantrymen
from the regular Portuguese army; 80 Portuguese
marines; 15’0 mercenaries of different nationalities. It
was the Governor General, Spinoza Da Rivera, of the
Portuguese colonies, who went aboard the ships to
harangue, exhort and encourage those who were
responsible for this criminal expedition.

31. On 2 and 24 November 1966, and on.9 and 13
June 1967, the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral, U Thant, were infoi-med by the Government
of the Republic of Guinea of the armed attack by Portugal against the territorial integrity and the sovereignty
of the State of the Republic of Guinea, as well as of
the considerable damage that had been inflicted and
the loss of human lives in the villages of Bandiga, Missira and Kandika, as a result of renewed Portuguese
aggression.
32. The Security Council of the United Nations will
also remember that on 13 October 1967, in Security
Council document S/8i93, the Republic of Guinea once
again informed the United Nations organ charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,

25. The attack occurred at 2 o’clock in the morning.
The population was asleep, and the targets of the Por3

the Portuguese , colonialists
army against the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of my country.

of the bellicose acts perpetrated by the fascist Government of Lisbon, from the occupied territory of Guinea
(Bissau) against the national territory of the Republic
of Guinea.

38. These facts amply demonstrate that the crisis with
which the Security Council is now concerned did not
begin today. This crisis has as its source the determination of imperialism to re-establish its hegemony, under
the cover of Portugal, over the African territories of
Guinea. It is also to be found in the will of imperialism
to jeopardize the attainments of the struggle of African
peoples to safeguard their sovereignty, their political
independence and the territorial
integrity of their
nations.

33. Furthermore, the Security Council of the United
Nations will remember that it was informed by the
Government of the Republic of Guinea in the same
document that on Wednesday, 4 October 1967, at 17
hours GMT, three aircraft of the Portuguese colonial
military army had attacked and bombed the Guinean
village of Kannkodi,
forty kilometres
inside our
national territory, killing eleven civilians, of whom five
were children; the others were two women, two old
men and two adults.

39. The imperialist aggression carried out by Portugal
on 22 November 1970 against Guineaproves once again
that the obstinacy of the forces of evil against the freedom of the people of Guinea is an integral part of an
over-all policy of aggression directed against progressive African rCgimes. Imperialism
has sought in vain
to overwhelm Guinea and its popular regime, because
on 28 September 1958 the free State of Guinea swore
that, whatever happened, it would remain in the vanguard of the anti-imperialist,
anti-colonialist
and antineocolonialist struggle in the struggle of the African
peoples for freedom.

34, Members of the Security Council will remember
too the communication
from the Republic of Guinea
dated 27 August 1968, reporting that on that date a
Guinean civilian aircraft, which had been the victim
of a navigational error and had been compelled to make
a forced landing in Guinea (Bissau) because of a shortage of fuel, had been seized, and the two Guinean
crewmen had been arrested by the Portuguese
authorities, despite the appear made by President
Ahmed SCkou Tour6 to the fascist Salazar and to world
public opinion.

40. It is because the Revolutionary African Government of Guinea has given the country political and
economic structures which for ever exclude any compromise with imperialism, in the exclusive interest of
the Guinean population, that imperialism
is bent on
destroying it. It is also because the twelfth anniversary
of the rebirth of Guinea’s freedom coincided with its
economic take-off that this latest aggression was perpetrated. But despite all the plots hatched by imperialism and its tools and all the imperialist aggressions,
a people that is enIightened, free and jealous of its
freedom will always be victorious over the forces of
evil.

35. On 3 December 1969, in a message to the
Secretary-General,
U Thant, the President of the
Republic of Guinea, the supreme leader of the
revolution, Comrade Ahmed SCkou TourC, informed
the United Nations Organization of the following:
“Have the honour to draw your attention particularly to a deliberate act of aggression once again
perpetrated
by Portuguese
colonial
authorities
against territorial integrity of Republic of Guinea and
fundamental freedoms of frontier populations. Portuguese fascist Government by bombing two Guinean villages, causing important material damage, thus
bears responsibility
for acting against sovereignty
of our State and for plunging region concerned into
permanent climate of wars of aggression gravely
threatening
peace and security in bordering
countries. Republic of Guinea intends to bring matter
before international bodies so as to inform international community
of odious crimes committed
against our country by that rCgime soon to be condemned by history.”

4 1. Just a few years in the exercise of independence
have indeed enabled the Guinean State to endow itself
.with a rCgime which basically looks to Africa, to
achieve complete political independence, to pursue its
economic future in complete freedom, with control
over all the vital sectors of the national economy, to
mint an African currency independent of all monetary
zones, and to ‘proceed to an economic development
that is fundamentally
anti-capitalist
and antiimperialist-and
there is no doubt that all these decisions have not been carried out without difficulties.
Imperialism
and its agents, whether from Africa or
elsewhere, found therein sufficient reasons not to allow
such a rkgime to see the light of day in Africa, and
for ever to eIiminate this challenge flung at imperialism
and all its puppets.

36. The Security Council might recall the appeal
launched by all the Heads of ,State of Africa at the
summit cvnference at Addis Ababa, as a result of the
aggression of 27 August 1967, which was perpetrated
in the area of Bokt by five Portuguese scout ships
against the Guinean trawler Patrice Lumumbn, carrying goods and passengers, during which act of open
aggression a teacher was killed and three civilians were
wounded.

42. Thus it is that Stateless persons from certain
neighbouring States who had served the cause of the
French colonial army became candidates to serve the
cause of imperialism. So it is that mercenaries who,
in the Congo, fought side by side with Moise Tshombk
against the freedom of Africa,’ were recruited for that
same cause aimed at destroying any intention Of real

37. On 1.5 December 1969 the Security Council, at
the request of the Government
of the Republic of
Guinea, was, as will be rechlled, convened [f522nd
tneeting] after the hideous aggression committed by
4

independence in Africa. Operating in the name of
imperialism, the fascist Goirernment of Lisbon supplies
training camps on the frontier territory of occupied
Guinea (Bissau) and provides instruction to stateless
Africans for the struggle against the guerrilla activities
which the nationalists are waging and against the liberation movements. It finances and supplies the equipment
and materiel necessary to commit this crime so as to
wipe out, to the detriment of Africa, the victorious
conquests of the struggle of the revolutionary people
of Guinea.

47. Following the example of the Asianization of the
criminal war waged by imperialism against the will of
the peoples of Asia, Portugal and its African territories
are being used today in the new operation of imperialism to Africanize the conflict which results from the
fundamental contradictions which puts them in opposition to Africa.
48. I recall how, after the October Revolution of 1917,
international imperialism was relentlessly determined
to destroy the Soviet revolution. Today we are witnessing the same thing with respect to the glorious people
of Guinea, but the people of Guinea will rise ‘and
unflinchingly defend its most sacred rights.

43. In appealing to the United Nations for concerted
action by air-borne United Nations troops and the
Guinean national army, the Republic of Guinea evinced
not only its faith in the norms of international law but
renewed its freely given support for the United Nations
as an organization able to serve as a bulwark against
any encroachments on the sacred principles of the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States Members and of their political independence.

49. In the course of this debate which is starting,
my delegation wishes to reserve its right to return to
certain aspects of the Portuguese armed aggression
against the Republic of Guinea. I wish to supply members of the Security Council with certain photographs
of the crimes as well as with the instruments used
by the Portuguese colonial army.

44. Hence it must be considered that, by repelling
the Portuguese aggressor without awaiting the conclusions of the mission of inquiry of the United Nations
on the veracity of the affirmations of a legitimate
Government-a
Meqber
of the United Nations
moreover-the
people of Guinea, victims of a deliberate violation of their most fundamental freedoms, as
one man and weapons in hand, have definitely placed
themselves in the ranks of the peoples who will never
again prostrate themselves before imperialism.
It is
in the name of its inalienable right to liberty, justice
and social progress that it took that action, as well
as in the name of the defence of the fundamental principles which govern the United Nations itself.

50. The PRESIDENT
(tr.nnslatecl fionz
Russian):
Before calling on the next speaker on my list, I wish
to thank the representatives of Nepal and Guinea for
their statements. The representative of Nepal is the
Chairman of the Security Council Special Mission and
I should like to express my gratitude for his informatlve
introduction of the Mission’s report to the Council.
I should also like.to thank him for his kind words about
my assumption of the post of President of the Security
Council.
5 1. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

45. The grave situation resulting from the survival
of the Portuguese colonial r6gime in Guinea (Bissau),
Mozambique and Angola constitutes even today a constant threat to international peace and security, Therefore, what is at issue today is not only the aggressive
and retrograde policy of Portugal against Africa, but
also the conduct to be adopted by the United Nations
to achieve respect for the principles created by the
Organization in whose name it was created and in
which, for twenty-five years, mankind has placed its
complete confidence.

52. Mr. YAZID
(Algeria) (interppretcrtion from
Finch):
In the discussion of the item on the agenda,
I should like to emphasize that the complaint now under
study is not just a Guinean complaint, it is a complaint
by the whole of Africa. My statement will be brief.
It may perhaps be regarded by some as harsh, and
by others as too harsh. But Africa and my own country
have lived through situations and through realities that
require us to be far-sighted and not to over-estimate
the likelihood that the United Nations, or any positive
step on the part of our Organization, will solve our
problems.

46. The conclusions of the United Nations Special
Committee on Decolonializatior?
as well as the report
of the Special Committee on the Policies of A&rlzeid
of the Government of the Republic of South Africa
have more than once brought to light the close links
which exist between the aggressive behaviour of Portugal against the African States and the assistance
which that country, a member of NATO, receives from
that organization, an organization which at this time
when I am speaking is meeting with the participation
of the Minister of Defence of Portugal.
i
’ SpecialCommittee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial

53. In a letter which we addressed to the President
pF the Security Council on 24 November 1970, the text
of which is coritained in document S/9998, we
emphasized that Algeria regards itself as directly concerned by the unsp,eakable aggression of which Guinea
has been the victim.
54. The repeated attempts by Portuguese mercenaries in the service of international imperialism to
invade the territory of Guinea constitute a threat to
the independence of all the countries of Africa, particularly the progressive countries.

Countries and Peoples.

5

55. The Portuguese aggression’ against Guinea is not
directed solely at that brother country; it is part of
a general offensive imperialism has decided to mount
against all the forces of justice, progress and peace
in the world.

the only just position, the only position in keeping with
the profound feelings and realities of Africa.
63. Africa is counting on itself and has no more illusions. It is Africans who,through their own resources,
will throw back the imperialist aggressor, of which Portugal is only an agent, and will sweep from our continent
any colonialist or racist presence. The liberation of
Africa and the preservation of its independence will
be the work of the resistance and struggle of Africans,
particularly their armed resistance and struggle.

56. Guinea’s appeal to the Security Council has not
thus far produced any positive response. Two weeks
have passed, and the Security Council now has new
information before it proving what everyone already
knew, namely the responsibility
of Portugal for the
aggression perpetrated against Guinea. We had no need
to await the results of the Security Council mission
to be persuaded that there had been Portuguese aggression. Guinea’s complaint and the proofs submitted by
the delegation of Guinea were sufficient. We are certain
that the great Powers in particular,
with all the
resources at their disposal, were not unaware of the
facts.

64. The international community, as reflected in the
organs of the United Nations, has not so far been able
to respond to the hopes of the African countries that
have been victims of armed aggression, the colonized
African peoples and the victims of hateful racism. We
in Africa must draw the lesson and consequences from
such a situation, aware of the threat that hangs over
us all because an attack on Conakry is an attack on
Algiers.

57. The conclusions of the Security Council Special
Mission-and
here I should like to pay a tribute to
the Chairman and members of the Mission for the work
they accomplished-are
an indictment of Portugal and
merely confirm the information
the Government of
Guinea had already communicated
to the Security
Council,

65. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of office as President of the Security
Council. There can be few at the United Nations possessing the same amount of experience and skill in
international diplomacy as yourself. We are confident.
therefore, not only that this Council will operate
smoothly under your direction but also that we shall
be privileged to learn something new from YOUI
activities during this month.

58. We Africans therefore haire the right to be surprised that during this long period of two weeks that
has elapsed since the beginning of the aggression the
Security Council has been unable to assist the victim
of the aggression in any way or to condemn the Portuguese aggressors.

66. We congratulate Mr. George Torneh, our President for November, for the masterly way in which
he conducted our affairs that month. The meticulous
care, courtesy, consideration and wisdom he showed
under difficult circumstances have all earned him OUI
admiration and gratitude. We congratulate him and his
delegation.

59. This new experience only confirms the impotence
of the United Nations and the incapacity of its essential
bodies to face up to the concerted actions of
imperialism,
colonialism
and neo-colonialism.
This
impotence and this incapacity are easy to explain. They
are due to the influence still exerted by the imperialists,
colonialists and neo-colonialists
in our Organization.
This situation is assuming the proportions of a veritable
farce of which the African peoples are the victims.

67. We are most appreciative
of the speed and
thoroughness with which the Chairman and members
of our fact-finding mission carried out their task at
such short notice. We have just finished reading both
their report and its annex, and my delegation is impressed with the amount of work they were able to
accomplish in a few days. We are grateful for their
report and its annex.

60. Confronted with this impotence and this incapacity of the international
community,
it is therefore
natural that our countries, and particularly the African
countries, should assume the historic responsibility of
defending their national independence and their right
to economic development and social progress.

68. My delegation unequivocally
condemns Portugal’s unprovoked aggression against our neighbour
Guinea on 22 and 23 November. It was not necessary
for us as a Government nor for many other countries
to receive verification of Portugal’s aggression; but for
those Member States that have always hesitated when
we have asked for condemnation
of Portuguese
activities in Africa, this report shows that our me
has been clearly proved. The statement of the captured
Portuguese forces, and particularly that of the African
Lieutenant Lopes, which is contained ih document
S/l0009/Add. 1, and which can be easily checked, verifies the statements of the Diplomatic Corps in ConaW
that there was external aggression and pins down its
source as the Government of Portugal.

61. The people and Government
of Guinea, led by
President Ahmed SCkou Tour& have shouldered that
responsibility, and with their own means have repulsed
the Portuguese aggressor and its mercen,aries.
62. The people and Government
of Guinea are not
alone. They have all Africa and the whole democratic
and progressive world at their side. Algeria stands side
by side with Guinea, and by agreement with the
Government of Guinea the Algerian Government has
taken various specific measures to aid our Guinean
brothers to confront any further aggression. Many African countries have taken similar measures. That is
6

69. The evidence of other prisoners of war shows
_ ._
also the way Portugal conscripts Africans unwillingly
to its military forces-not
only by force but also by
bribery-from
its captive-held territories and from the
unemployed, illiterate and homeless of neighbouring
territories.
The resolution
which these Africans
showed in surrendering and refusing to fight against,
another African country when they landed in Conakry
and discovered what their objective was supposed to
be illustrates the decay and forthcoming collapse of
the armed forces of Portugal in Africa.
70. The Prime Minister of Sierra Leone announced
soon after-in fact immediately after-the invasion that
a top-level delegation led by a senior cabinet minister
of our Government had been sent to Guinea to express
our sympathy and to get an evaluation of the situation.
He later ordered a contingent of soldiers of the Sierra
Leone military forces to stand by on the Sierra LeoneGuinea boundary in case the Govenment of Guinea
required any assistance in repelling further invading
forces.
.
7 I. The Government of Sierra Leone has condemned
the unwarranted aggression perpetrated by the Portuguese racists and imperialists against the Republic
of Guinea and has expressed complete support and
solidarity with their great President, Sekou Tour-C, and
his Government and people.
72. The incidents which have occurred in the past
few days illustrate the type of danger to which all African States are exposed as long as racists remain on
our continent and are supported by members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. It would have
been impossible for Portugal to have attacked the
Republic of Guinea without using the arms supplied
by its NATO allies. The warships, aeroplanes, guns
and ammunition
which Portugal used against Guinea
can equally be used against territories bordering on
Portuguese-held
territories, such as Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Gambiaand the Ivory Coast, bordering
on Guinea (Bissau), and black African States such as
Zambia, Tanzania, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and other countries around
Mozambique
and Angola. We think it necessary that
firm action should now be taken to remove Portugal
and Portuguese influence from the entire African continent. The first step towards that would be for the Western Powers to consider the severance of all their military ties with Portugal and the provision of all possible
help to the liberation movements in the Portugueseheld territories.
73. We would, in conclusion, and with all deference
to the Council’s agenda, point to a case which we feel
to be directly connected with this matter. Military,
naval and air equipment sold to Portugal for the defence
of Western Europe has been used to attack an independent.African State and to murder its innocent citizens
-and also those of foreign countries who have gone
to assist in their development. My delegation would
like to express its ‘sympathy to those who have been
wounded, widowed and orphaned, the majority of
whom are Guineans but some of whom are European

/ ~~tiCdS.
We feel that if the United Kingdom decided
to sell arlns to South Africa for its maritime defence
‘Purposes it would inevitably find that in a short while
those arms would be used to attack independent African countries, some of them within its, own Cornmonwealth group. There can be no surer evidence of
the result of military support to Portugal and South
Africa than the conclusions of the fact-finding Mission
‘which have just been before us this afternoon by the
Ambassador of Nepal and his colleagues.
74. The only ray of light in this dismal and deplorable
affair is the bravery and courage displayed by the armed
forces and citizens of the Republic of Guinea in defending their kountry and repelling the enemy successfully.
We congratulate them on their victory in battle.
7.5. I reserve my right to participate further in the
debate.
76. The PRESIDENT
(translated jl~nq Russian):
I Thank you for the kind wards you have spoken about
me. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Liberia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
77. Mr, BARNES (Liberia): The delegation of
Liberia is grateful for. the opportunity to be heard in
the Security Council’s discussion of the matter of Portuguese aggression against the Republic of Guinea.
.~
78. On 10 March 1961 1944th meeting], the international community was alerted to the danger of the continued presence in Africa of Portugal as a colonial
‘Power. On that date, almost ten years ago, Liberia,
supported by the African and Asian Member States
’ of the United Nations, drew the attention of the Security Council to the crisis-in Angola, created by Por1tugal’s outrageous military repression of the people
1 of that Territory in a growing wave on terror and
: atrocities which required immediate action to prevent
provoking a full-scale colonial war.
79. Thanks to the doubting Thomases in the secu+Y
Council at the time who questioned whether the snuation in Angola was sufficiently serious to disturb internationa] peace and security, this alarm, so to speak,
‘fell on de,xf ears, A Nelson’s eye was turned to the
situation in Angola and the Security Council was thus
prevented from arresting an already dangerous situation or even damping the flames that were to spark
a war in that Territory.
go. We, the representatives of the African and Asian
States, left this chamber bowed in defeat, but not
bowed in spirit. For we knew then, as we know today,
that truth crushed to the earth shall rise again; that
though evil at times may seem to triumph, Yet when
I wounded it shall writhe with pain and eventually die
among its worshippers.
81. And error did indeed succumb, for the Security
Council, having again considered these charges of Portugal’s ruthless repression of the peoples of Angola

glehold on the African Territories under its domination,
has, like Naaman’s leprosy, become a plague to Africa,

by the use of napalm bombs and other highly destructive weapons of war, expressed its conviction that the
continuation of that situation was likely to endanger
international peace and security[resolution
163 (1961)].

85. Portugal’s large-scale armed attack against the
Republic of Guinea, resulting in loss of life and the
destruction of property, renders even more glaringly
the danger posed to peace and security in Africa,

82. I have taken the liberty, for which I respectfully
crave the Council’s indulgence, to chronicle the genesis
of the Security Council’s consideration of the danger
of Portugal’s continued presence in Africa as a colonial
Power. And I have done so having in mind the progressive deterioration of the situation in Africa from 1961
to the present, brought about by Portugal’s excesses
in that continent. Not content with its otherwise condemned policy in its worst and most backward aspects
in the African Territories under its administration, Portugal has embarked upon reckless adventures and
armed aggression against the independent African
States of the Republic of Guinea, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Senegal, the People’s Republic
of the Congo, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia-the
latest of these acts of aggression being
the fourth armed attack against the Republic of Guinea,
which was aimed at overthrowing its Government.

86. The report of the Security Council’s Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under Security Council resolution 289 (1970) alone is sufficient to
prompt the Council to immediate action, and it appears
almost redundant to add information that would be
more telling, convey a greater sense of urgency and
render the menace more real.
87. Be that as it may, I would nevertheless wish to
acquaint the Council with a report I have received
from my Government, which has a direct bearing on
this matter. That report reads as follows:
“The Government of Liberia has received evidence that commando troops of the regular Portuguese armed forces participated in the recent
attempt to invade the Republic of Guinea.

83. No African State could be an idle witness to this
aggressive attack by Portugal against the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of a sister
African State, and that position is summed up by the
statement of my Government issued on 23 November:

“The now abortive invasion originated at Bafata
in Guinea (Bissau), where a large force of Portuguese
and other soldiers boarded warships, frigates and
other vessels and were disembarked off the shores
of Conakry with instructions to invade Conakry.

“The Government
of Liberia has learned with
great dismay of the invasion in the early hours of
Sunday, 22 November 1970, of our sister Republic
of Guinea by Portuguese forces and mercenaries.

“Earlier reports of Portuguese involvement were
confirmed here today by Francisco Gomez Nanque,
a private in the Portuguese armed forces whose serial
number is 821 844/1970. Private Nanque said he was
recruited into the Portuguese army about nine
months ago and specifically trained in commando
operations. He was stationed at the Portuguese military barracks at Bafata and is a member of Grow
3 of the First African Commando Company known
as Adido.

“This wanton act of aggression by the Portuguese
coIonialists, which is another flagrant violation by
Portugal ofthe United Nations Charter and the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, should be
considered as an aggression against all of independent Africa, and calls not merely for condemnation
but also for the sternest measures against the aggressors by the United Nations as well as by the Organization of African Unity.

“Private Nanque said that on 20 November 1970
he, in company with thirty members of his commando unit, fully armed under the command of
Lieutenant Galvan of the Portuguese army, was
‘taken from his barracks at Bafata and transported
to Soque in the Portuguese-held Bissagos Islands.

“The Government of Liberia warmly applauds the
heroic resistance of the Guinean Government and
people in the defence of their hard-won liberty and
assures them of its undivided support until every one
of the criminal aggressors has been expelled from
Guinean soil.

“At Soque they were joined by a large number
of other heavily-armed
troops whose armament
included heavy and light artillery weapons.

“The Government of Liberia also calls upon the
United Nations and the Organization
of African
Unity to come to the assistance of Guinea and to
take appropriate measures to punish the aggressors
and their accomplices in keeping with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Charter of the Organization of African Unity.”

“They were put aboard warships and transported
off the coast of Guinea, where they were transferred
into small landing craft and off-loaded at Conakry
with instructions to invade Guinea.
“Private Nanque is at present in Monrovia, where
he was brought after having been rescued about two
miles off the coast of Conakry by a Dutch merchant
ship, the Stmat Buli of ihe Royal Interocean Lines,
under the command of Captain E. Pels.”

84. It was to be hoped that the pressure of international public opinion would have persuaded Portugal
to attune its thinking to the new constellation of events
that are part of our world today. Unfortunately, however, Portugal, in its determination
to maintain a stran8

88. In the light of ‘that revelation of Portugal’s full
responsibility
for the aggressive attack against the
Republic of Guinka, a State Member of the United
Nations, coupled with the report of the Special Mission
indicating Portugal’s culpability, it is clear that a grave
responsibility
lies on the Security Council to take
adequate preventive measures as a deterrent to a
recurrence of this’ dastardly act by Portugal, as well
as enforcement measures of a punitive nature against
that country.

and for independence, it is needless for me to say who
are the martyrs and who are the fools.
93. The PRESIDENT
(translated
j>orrz Russian):
Before calling on the last speaker on my list, I should
like to transmit the following information to members
of the Council.
94. I have just received letters from the representatives of the United Arab Republic [S/10018] and
Ethiopia [S/10019] requesting that the delegations of
those countries be invited to participate, without the
right to vote, in the meetings of the Security Council.
devoted to the consideration of this item. If there is
no objection, I propose to invite the representatives
of the United Arab Republic and Ethiopia to participate
in the debate in accordance with the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. I invite the representatives
of the United Arab Republic and Ethiopia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber. Each of them will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when his turn comes to speak.

89. It is well that it has been recognized that Portugal’s armed aggression against the Republic of
Guinea has had the effect of assuring the solidarity
of the African States against the Portuguese menace.
But more than that it has awakened the African States
to their clear duty to render to the hapless people of
the African Territories under Portuguese administration full moral and material assistance in their struggle
to throw off the Portuguese colonial yoke which has
fastened them to the humiliations
and miseries that
colonialism entails, The aggressive attacks by Portugal
against independent African States are increasing and
this fact naturally begets a more militant attitude by
the African States to render assistance to their brothers
in Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (B&au), who are
forced to more and more desperate measures to defend
their lives and obtain their rightful place in human
society. It is therefore easy to see that the interaction
of these two forces will rapidly develop into a conflict
the consequences of which are not difficult to imagine.

At tiw invitation of the President,
Mr. M. H. ElZayyot (United Arab Republic) and Mr. T. Gebre Igzy
(Ethiopia) took the places resewed for* them.

95. The PRESIDENT
(rr.anslatedfrom
Russian): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania, on whom I now call.
96. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Allow me to express on behalf of my delegation our
appreciation at being allowed to participate without
vote in the deliberations of the Council on this important item.

90. There are a variety of measures which the Security Council could adopt to remove this threat to
international
peace, foremost among which is the call
for the immediate
exercise of, the right of selfdetermination
by the African peoples in the Territories
under Portuguese colonial domination, since this is
inextricably
linked to the effect of that situation of
Portugal’s
continuous
aggression against African
States. Failing this the Security Council should take
the necessary enforcement action to expel Portugal
from these African Territories, in a manner similar
to Portugal’s expulsion from the Indian sub-continent.

97. Two weeks ago the Secretary-General
received
an urgent and tnoving appeal for military assistance.
That appeal was sent by the Government and people
of the Republic of Guinea and it was directed to the
United Nations. The assistance sought by the Government of Guinea was to help that Government to ward
off a shameless act of aggression organized and led
by the Government of Portugal against the peace, security and territorial integrity of that State.

9 1. When a mad dog runs amuck and indiscriminately
injures people, the policeman, who is the guardian of
the safety of the community, shoots it on the spot,
not out of revenge but as a humanitarian contribution
to the safety of society. The Security Council, which
is the organ of the United Nations having responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has an overriding dut$ to remove this threat to the
peace that exists in Africa. It must therefore take those
measures that will eventually lead to the removal from
the continent of Africa of this plague called Portugal.

98. The request of the Guinea Government was both
justified and timely, and Members, particularly the
smaller ones of our Organization, can understand and
share the high expectations that the Guinearis had
placed in our Organization.
For after all is this not
the Organization
whose main purpose is to maintain
international
peace and security? And is this not the
one place from which Member States can hope for
redress when themost grievous injuries to their dignity.,
honour and freedom have been committed? Yet two
weeks have elapsed and the request of the Guinean
Government for timely and appropriate assistance has
not only been brushed aside but indeed has apparenty
been forgotten.

92. I shall conclude this brief statement by saying
that when one fights for a cause and dies, and the
cause for which he fights lives on after him, he dies
as a martyr. But when one fights for a cause and dies,
and the cause for which he fights dies after him, he
dies as a fool. In the struggle for liberation, for freedom

99. President
Skkou Tour& and his Government
requested prompt military assistance. Instead of acceding to that request the Security Council preferred toV’
9

send a Special Mission and thereby demonstrated once , dignity know perfectly well that Guinea stands in the
forefront of the African battle for freedom and indepenmore its unwillingness or its incapacity to take approdence. Africa and the international community are fully
priate measures in accordance with the needs of the
aware of the sacrifices which the people of Guinea
hour. That performance on the part of the Council,
have had to make, not only for the liberation and
whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of
defence of their own country, but above all for the
international peace and security, is a sad indication
of the real effectiveness of the United Nations in a’ cause of freedom and justice in Africa and elsewhere.
crisis such as the one now under consideration.
In striking at Guinea, Portuguese colonialism and its
collaborators had hoped to deprive free Africa of one
100. It is undoubtedly a vivid demonstration of the
of its most cherished and invaluable pillars. They had
weakness of this Organization in the task of peacealso hoped to frustrate the struggle for freedom and
keeping. Certainly, one dreads to think what would
independence of the people of Guinea (Bissau). In both
have been the fate of Guinea today had its Government
these designs imperialism has failed totally, and Africa
and people relied solely on the United Nations to take
owes a debt of deep gratitude and appreciation to the
prompt and effective measures in defence of its territoheroism displayed by the people and Government of
rial integrity and independence in the face of this
Guinea
in crushing the latest Portuguese invasion. My
t aggression.
delegation would like at this juncture to convey to the
Government and people of Guinea its most heartfelt
101. Indeed, it is hard to disagree with the conclusiongratitude for the manner in which they have routed
reached by the Government of Guinea at the first meetthe aggressors, thus rendering a great service to the
ing of the Special Mission, as recorded in document
African continent.
S/10009/Add. 1, that:
105. This Council, and indeed the United Nations
66. . . the attitude of the United Nations, from the
as
a whole, is not unfamiliar with the aggressive policies
point of view of the Portuguese aggression, must
of the rbgime in Lisbon. The Council and the Assembly
be considered . . . as a dangerous attitude for its
have on a number of occasions condemned the PorMember States, and also as contradictory to the funtuguese
Government not only for the continue oppresdamental aim of the United Nations, which , . . is
sion of the African people under its coloiliid
that of bringing about international
solidarity.”
domination, but also for several direct acts of aggression
against independent African States. This attack
102. If I am highlighting this disappointing aspect of
on
independent
African States has been carried out
the role of the Council in dealing with this particular
by
Portugal
from
time to time in order to prop up its
crisis, it is merely to record my Government’s reservaown
defeats
in
its
colonial Territories in Africa. The
tions at the apparently casual manner in which the
present invasion of Guinea by the Portuguese aggresCouncil has handled this situation, It must be realized
sors should therefore be viewed as being within the
that the situation in Guinea constitutes, within the
colonial
policies of Portugal. Portugal’s war against
meaning of Article 39 of the Charter, a threat to the
the
African
people in Guinea (Bissau) has met with
peace, as well as an act of aggression committed by
one
set-back
after another. More particularly, in recent
Portugal against one of the Member States of this
months, the African Party for the Independence of
Organization. The report of the Special Mission estabGuinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) has scored greater
lished by resolution 289 (1970), which is now before
victories
in that Territory in its fight for the realization
the Council, is quite specific as to the responsibility
of its inalienable
right to self-determination
ant1
of Portugal in this matter. In paragraph 40 the Mission
independence.
Despite
constant
aggression
against
concIudes that the force that invaded Guinea ‘was led
Senegal and Guinea, including bombardments of those
and commanded by “white Portuguese officers”, and
countries’
civilian populations, Lisbon has realized that
that:
neither its intimidation of the civilian population, nor
its merciless and fierce pursuit of a war of suppression.
“Theforce consisted of units of Portuguese armed
could undermine the resistance movement inside
forces. . . under the command of regular white PorGuinea
(Bissau).
tuguese officers, as well as of a contingent composed
of dissident Guineans trained and armed on the terri106. A committed and independent Guinea is undoubI tory of Guinea (Bissau).”
tedly a thorn in the flesh of imperialism; and behind
the present events in Guinea lies the crude determina103. Furthermore, a careful reading of the testimony
tion of those who would wish to see Africa in perpetual
in the material in the addendum to the report of the
bondage and degradation. That plan has failed, but
Special Mission shows that the intention of the Porhis does not mean that it will not be attempted again.
tuguese invaders was to overthrow the legally conThis time ‘the effort was directed against Guinea. It
stituted Government of the Republic of Guinea. One
stands to reason that each and every African State
of the acts the Portuguese Government had wanted
which upholds the freedom and dignity of man is a
to accomplish was the assassination of the President
potential victim of a similar aggression. Time and again
of Guinea and other officials of the Government.
it has been pointed out that Portugal is too
impoverished
to carry out three costly wars in
104. This latest threat ;o the independence and terAfrica-namely,
in Mozambique, Angola and Guinea
ritorial integrity of the Republic of Guinea is not a
(Bissau). Many Members of this Organization, incl@
\ mere accident. The enemies of, African freedom and , ing my own delegation, have pointed out the resPonsl*
I
i
./

10

;,

bility of the allies of Portugal for the misery which
that small State inflicts on millions of innocent people
in its colonies. It has been pointed out that without
the massive military and economic, as well as diplomatic and political, support accorded to Portugal by its
Western allies in NATO, Portugal would not have been
able to carry out its war of exploitation and oppression
in Africa,
107. As the President of the United Republic of Tanzania stated during the commemorative
session of the
United Nations at the 1867th plenary meeting:
“Would anyone have imagined that one of the
poorest States of Europe could, unaided, fight colonial wars in three Territories which are together
twenty times its own size? Its NATO membership,
however, allows it almost to disregard its domestic
defence needs and devote its armies to Africa. Its
membership of the European Free Trade Association
strengthens ‘the Portuguese economy and thus helps
it to meet an otherwise intolerable burden. And factors like the planned foreign investment in the Cabora
Bassaproject enable Portugal to increase its exploitation of our continent,”
108. The NATO Powers cannot therefore be exoncrated from the responsibility of the latest aggression
committed by their ally. On numerous occasions African leaders have warned that the time has come
-indeed,
that the time is overdue-when
the West
must surely choose which side it is on. If it continues
to give the bombs that kill and maim the Africans in
Mozambique,
Angola and Guinea (Bissau), to provide
Portugal with the means to challenge the independence
and territorial integrity of independent African States,
to supply economic and other facilities and thereby
to share in Portuguese plunder and exploitation of the
riches and resources of its colonial territories, surely
it cannot pretend with any meaningful credibility that
it is also the friend of Africa?
109. The allies of Portugal must therefore decide
whether they should be on the side of justice or on
that of tyranny and inhumanity. They must cease perpetuating policies that leave one with no other COIKILIsion than that they are at best hypocritical. We urge
them to pursue the course ofjustice, peace and freedom
by coming out in both word and deed in total opposition
to the criminal policies of Portugal.
1 10. MY Government would like to make use of this
opportunity
to call on the members of NATO to stop
aiding and abetting a criminal and an aggressor. They
should forthwith expel the fascist rCgime from NATO
and thus deprive it of the means which are so vital
in its wars of aggression against the African people.
To do or to behave otherwise would be a blatant betrayal of justice as well as a callous denial to millions
of innocent people of the humane treatment which is
the basis of man’s common humanity.
I1 I, Africa and the world is following with keen interest the deliberation of this matter by the Security

Council. The small countries which have declared theil
faith in the United Nations are waiting anxiously lo
see if this organ will use its powers under the Charter
of the United Nations to redress the injustice which
has been committed once again against a small peaceloving Member of this Organization. For the question
before the Council is not whether aggression has or
has not been committed:
that question has been
answered affirmatively by the Council’s own Special
Mission to Guinea. The question is: now that an act
of aggressior, has been committed, what should the
Council do? The Charter provisions on this matter are
quite clear, If the Council accepts the findings of its
own Special Mission-and
I can see no other attitude
which the Council can justifiably
adopt-then
the
Council should not be satisfied with a mere strong condemnation of Portugal for its wanton aggression against
the Republic of Guinea. Nor should the Council merely
confine itself to wLarning Portugal seriously against
what has now become a habitual policy in committing
aggression against independent African States. True,
the Council should unanimously condemn Portugal,
but it must do more than this, The only effective way
of ensuring that similar acts of aggression are avoided
is for the Council to take appropriate measures by
applying fully. the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter against Portugal.
112. The Charter provides in Articles 39 and 41 for
the application of measures against States which have
b&en found to be guilty of aggression. In this particular
case I should like to refer to paragraph 3 (0) (ii) and
(iv) of the programme of a&on adopted at the twentyfifth commemorative
session of the General Assembly
[t-esolu~ion 2621 (XXV)] which respectively draws the
attention of the Council to the need “to give careful
consideration
to the question of imposing sanctions
upon . , . Portugal, in view of [its] refusal to carry
out relevant decisions of the Security Council”; and
“To consider urgently the adoption of measures
to prevent the supply of arms of all kinds to Portugal,
as such arms enable that country to deny the right
of self-determination
and independence to the
peoples of the Territories under its domination.”
113. The time has clearly come when the Council
should take this course of action. To do otherwise
would merely encourage Portugal to continue with its
present policies of aggression in Africa. Finally, the
Council should unanimously decide that Portugal must
pay for the damage to property and human lives which
its premeditated
aggression has inflicted upon the
people and Government of Guinea.
114. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): Mr. President, I
shall have an opportunity to pay you a well-deserved
tribute at a later meeting.
315. For the moment I wish to inform the Security
Council that I have been authorized to announce that
this evening the Government of the RepubIic of Zambia
decided to give the Government of the Republic of
Guinea a sum of $2.1 million as a practical contribution
of the Government and people of Zambia to the cod-

solidation, defence and preservation of the territorial
integrity of the Republic of Guinea. We are certain
that the Government and people of Guinea will accept
this modest sum of money as a positive token of our
solidarity and brotherhood,

the verbatim records at the outset; or are we to beli
that actually the French verbatim record will be
pared on the basis of the English translation? 7
would really be the limit. I do not insist unduly,
I wish this protest to be placed on record.

116. I reserve my right to make a substantive intervention at a later meeting of the Council.

122. The PRESIDENT
(trunskated from Russi,
Unfortunately, the position is much the same for
other two working languages-Russian
and Span
We too do not yet have the addendum in Russian
it has not been issued in Spanish. In view of all
circumstances surrounding the discussion of this qt
tion and the special appeal of the Afro-Asian gr
and the African group of States Members of the Un
Nations that the Security Council should accele
its consideration of this question for a number
reasons set forth by the representatives of those
groups, it would obviously be advisable to ask the 5
retariat to accelerate the translation and circular
of the addendum to the report of the Special Mis!
in the three working languages in which it has not
been issued-French,
Russian and Spanish.

117. Mr. TOMEI-I (Syria): I wish to thank most
warmly and sincerely two representatives and friends,
Ambassador Khatri of Nepal and Ambassador Nicol
of Sierra Leone, for their very generous words
,addressed to me personally, and I wish to assure them
that their sentiments are reciprocated.
118. The PRESIDENT
(translated fbom Russian):
There are no more speakers on the list for today’s
meeting.
119. I call on the representative
of order.

of France on a point

123. In this connexion, I must thank the Secreta
for preparing, translating and circulating the Spe
Mission’s report itself in all four working langual
Thus, the brief r@sumC, if it can be called that, provi
in the report of the Special Mission is available tr
in all four working languages.

120. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation from French): Although this is actually
a point of order, I should like to avail myself of this
opportunity to associate myself with the congratulations addressed to our colleague from Syria on the
effective and skilful manner in which he conducted
the difficult work of the Security Council. As for yourself, Mr. President, you are a veteran of the Security
Council and we know that you will guide its work with
much objectivity
and effectiveness.
You know,
moreover, in what esteem you are held by your colleagues.

124. It is expected that the Secretariat will make
effort to ensure that the addendum to the repor
also circulated as soon as possible in the other tt
working languages-French,
Russian and Spanish
12.5. It would be most undesirable for us to dt
or postpone the work of the Security Council and
consideration of this urgent and important quest
for that reason, particularly in view of the opini
and wishes of such a large number of States Mem\
of the United Nations, in the Afro-Asian and Afri
groups, to which I have already referred. Consultilti
with members of the Security Council have shown I
the majority of the members of the Council have
objection to holding the Council’s next meeting on
question tomorrow, Saturday, at 3 p.m. If there is
objection, I shall take it that it is so decided.

121. The point of order is the following. We have
before us only the English text of the addendum which
contains all the verbatim records of the hearings carried
out by the Mission of the Security Council. I did not
wish to delay the debate in the Security Council by
pointing out this fact-which
we consider abnormal-at the beginning, but we consider, on the one
hand, that it prevents the proper progress of our work
n priori and, on the other hand, that it is rather shocking
that the French text has not yet been distributed when
at least three quarters of the statements presented in
the addendum were originally made in French. The
hearings were conducted in French, so that it would
not have been difficult to give us the French text of

It wus so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies sont en vente
dons les librairies
et les agences
depositoires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
aupras
de votre librairie
ou odressez-vous
a:
Nations
Unies, Section de-s ventes, New York ou Genbve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones
Unidar estan
en todor partes
del mundo.
Consulte o su librero
Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

N;ttion$,,

New

York

Price:

SU.S.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
y colas distribuidoras
o dirijose
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccian

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82160--June

1973-2,050
