142

General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Session

Least Developed Countries and urgent implementation
of the Imme<liate Action Programme for 1979-1981,
called for in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,
1. Decides to convene a United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries in 1981;
2. Decides further that the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries should have
the objective of finalizing, adopting and supporting the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s
for the least developed countries, outlined in resolution
122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to designate the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, bearing in mind the focal role
which the Conference has played in the preparation of
the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries, as Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries;
4. Decides to designate the Intergovernmental
Group on the Least Developed Countries of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to act
as the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, open to
the full participation of all States members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
5. Further decides to initiate the preparation of
studies, as provided for in resolution 122 (V) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
by the relevant secretariats of the United Nations system,
requests donor Governments and the least developed
countries themselves to initiate similar studies, and re~uests the Preparatory Committee to consider any additional studies that may be necessary;
6. Requests the Intergovernmental Group on the
Least Developed Countries, which is scheduled to meet
in February 1980, to recommend additional sessions
which may be necessary in 1980 and 1981 to complete
the preparations for the United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries;
1. Requests ihe Preparatory Committee to report on
its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in response to
paragraph 33 of resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to entrust
the Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation with the responsibility for taking the necessary steps, with the collaboration of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to ensure the full mobilization
and co-ordination of all organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system in the further elaboration
and implementation of the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
and in the preparations for the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;
9. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system concerned, especially the
regional commissions, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank, to extend their fullest
co-operation, support and contribution to the preparatory process for the United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/204.

Effective mobilization and integration of
women in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
3517 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the mid-term
review and appraisal of progress in the implementation
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 3201 (S-VI)
and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation and 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development,
Taking into consideration its resolution 3520 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975 on the World Conference of the
International Women's Year, in which it, inter alia, proclaimed the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and decided to establish
the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women,
Taking note of the part of the Economic Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, relating to the role of
women in development, 196
Also taking into consideration its resolutions 3505
(XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the integration of
women in the development process and 31 / 175 of 21
December 1976 and 33/200 of 29 January 1979 on the
effective mobilization of women in development,
Affirming that women and men should participate and
contribute on a basis of equality in the social, economic
and political processes of development, incJuding decision-making, and should share in improved conditions
of life,
Aware of the need for continuing and increased measures aimed at the effective participation of women in the
over-all development of their countries,
Bearing in mind the preparations for the international
development strategy for the third United Nations development decade,
Bearing in mind also the preparations for the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, to be held at Copenhagen in 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the effective mobilization and integration of women
in development, 197
1. Welcomes the inclusion in the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian
Reform and Rural Development108 of special provisions
relating to the integration of women in rural development and calls upon the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations DevelopSee A/34/S42, annex, sect. IV, paras. 112 and 113.
A/34/S31.
See Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform
and Rural Development, Rome, 12-20 July 1979 (WCARRD/
REP); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by
a note of the Secretary-General (A/34/ 48S).
196
197
198

v.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ment Programme and other relevant United Nations
agencies and organizations:
(a) To assist Governments in the implementation of
those provisions;
(b) To take all necessary measures to initiate research, projects and programmes which will facilitate the
integration of women in rural development, by addressing themselves, inter alia, to:
(i) The problems experienced by women as a resu It
of migration from rural to urban areas;
(ii)

The need for training programmes which will
enable women to take advantage of all aspects
of new agro-technology;

. •.)
( 111

The impact of agro-business on women's traditional work in rural areas;
(iv) The need to encourage women's participation
in the co-operative movement and to ensure
their access to land, credit and marketing
facilities;
2. Welcomes also resolution 2, entitled "Women,
science and technology", adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Science and Technology for Development on 31 August 1979, 199 and reque8ts the SecretaryGeneral to proceed wi th th e implementation of th at
resolution and to report th ereon to th e General Assembly at its thirty-six th session;
3. Emphasizes the importance of the integration
and participation of women in the process of industrial
development and requests the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization at its Third General Conference, to be held at New Delhi from 21 January to
8 February 1980, to consider this question, giving particular attention to:
(a) The impact of new technology and the deployment of modern industries on women's traditional skills
and occupations, which may be endangered;
(b) The identification of ways and means to enhance
and facilitate the equal participation of women in industrial development, in both rural and urban areas;
4. Welcomes further Economic and Social Council
resolution 1979 / 11 of 9 May 1979, in which the Council
recommended that the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
should be located in a developing country and requested
the Institute to give priority in its programme of work to
the question of the effective mobilization and integration
of women in development;
5. Calls upon the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace to include in the Programme of Action for the
second half of the Decade concrete measures for the
effective mobilization and integration of women in all
sectors of development, which will contribute to the
economic and social development of their countries;
6. Stresses the important role of the interagency
programme in the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace with regard to the
co-ordination of activities relating to the integration and
participation of women in the process of development
and requests the participating United Nations agencies
and organizations to proceed with the implementation
of the interagency programme;
1 0 9 See Report of the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda),
chap. VI, sect. A.

143

7. Requests Governments to provide information
on successful projects or programmes aimed at ameliorating the present situation of women in development
through, inter alia:
The effective mobilization of women in development;
(b) The facilitation of the integration and active
participation of women in development, including development planning;
8. Notes with regret that it has not been possible for
the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session the comprehensive
report requested in its resolution 33/200;
(a)

9. Urges the Secretary-General to prepare the report as soon as possible and to submit it to the Preparatory Committee for the New International Development
Strategy at its fifth session and to the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women at its third session;
1O. Urges the United Nations agencies that have not
already done so to submit to the Secretary-General without delay the information called for in resolution 33/200
and requests the Secretary-General to submit the report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session; 200
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to pay
due attention, in preparing his analytical report to the
General Assembly at its special session in 1980, to the
importance of the effective mobilization and integration
of women in development.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/205.

Action programme in favour of developing
island countries 201

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 dealing, inter alia, with efforts to meet the special problems
of developing island countries,
Reiterating the specific action in favour of developing
island countries envisaged in resolution 98 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 202
Recalling its resolutions 31/156 of 21 December
1976 and 32/185 of 19 December 1977,
Mindful that further specific action is needed in the
case of developing island countries to assist them in
offsetting their major handicaps, in particular those developing island countries which suffer handicaps due
especially to smallness, remoteness, constraints in transport and communications, great distances from market
centres, highly limited internal markets, lack of marketing expertise, low resource endowment, lack of natural
resources, heavy dependence on a few commodities for
their foreign exchange earnings, shortage of administrative personnel and heavy financial burdens,
Emphasizing the need for a more effective response
by the international community to the various resolutions
Issued as document A/35/82.
See also sect. I, foot-note 11.
202 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
2 0°
2 01
