UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/193
5 March 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 27 FEBRUARY 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
25 February 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

97-05925 (E)

050397

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/193
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 25 February 1997 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
second monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.
The past month has been an eventful one in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as this
report makes clear. However, in the wake of the Brcko arbitration decision and
the violent events in Mostar and the zone of separation, the military situation
in the region remains calm. Nevertheless, the recent violence gives cause for
concern, and the international community must remain prepared to face further
challenges in the months ahead. SFOR is prepared for such challenges, and will
continue to play its part in contributing to a lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/193
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
There are approximately 32,000 SFOR troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with contributions from all the NATO nations and from 18 non-NATO
countries. The first phase of Operation Joint Guard, which began on
20 December 1996 under the authority of Security Council resolution 1088 (1996),
terminated on 3 February 1997, with all SFOR headquarters and manoeuvre forces
deployed and fully mission-capable. The second phase of Operation Joint Guard,
the stabilization phase, has now begun, and over the coming months SFOR will
continue its efforts to keep the peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
accomplishing its principal military tasks and by providing selective support to
the international civil organizations in theatre, thereby contributing to a
progressive implementation of broad civilian programmes. At the same time, SFOR
will remain vigilant to threats to the Force and challenges to the provisions of
the Peace Agreement.
2.
Over the past month, SFOR has continued to carry out area reconnaissance
and surveillance through ground and air patrols across the region. Random
inspections of cantonment sites have been conducted, and SFOR and the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) have worked together to clear illegal
checkpoints from the zone of separation.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
3.
Although the parties are still assessed as being in general compliance with
the military provisions of the Peace Agreement, the past month has seen an
increase in tension; houses have been destroyed by arson or explosion, displaced
persons attempting to return to their homes have been forced back and violence
has flared up, most notably in the city of Mostar and in villages in and around
the zone of separation.
4.
Since the beginning of its mandate (20 December 1996), SFOR has conducted
more than 750 compliance inspections. Unauthorized weapons continue to be
confiscated and destroyed, and discrepancies have been found in the number of
declared and stored weapons. Occasionally, the parties have moved weapons
without authorization, and SFOR has then responded with weapon and ammunition
confiscation and subsequent destruction. In mid-January, at a Joint Military
Commission meeting, SFOR temporarily suspended its confiscation policy in order
to give the parties an opportunity to declare additional weapons and ammunition
and to move newly declared weapons and ammunition to cantonment sites. This is
a two-phased suspension - the first phase (17 January to 15 February) allowed
the Parties to declare previously undeclared weapons and to move them to
authorized cantonment sites; the second (15 February to 17 March) will allow
only the transportation of weapons declared during the first phase.

/...

S/1997/193
English
Page 4

5.
Freedom of movement and, more specifically, freedom of return continue to
give rise to concern, and over the reporting period there have been serious
incidents in and around the villages of Celic, Gajevi and Stolac, as well as in
the city of Mostar. Between 30 January and 20 February, 15 illegal
checkpoints - 2 Bosniac, 5 Bosnian Croat and 8 Bosnian Serb - were dismantled by
SFOR and IPTF.
6.
On 23 January, following tensions between Bosnian Serbs and Bosniacs
attempting to return to their pre-war homes, SFOR declared a temporary
restricted zone on the Bosnian Serb side of the zone of separation near Celic,
in which civilian police were required to be escorted by IPTF. On 26 January,
in the nearby village of Gajevi, an organized and orchestrated incident took
place when a large group of Bosnian Serbs attacked Bosniac workers who were
constructing houses as part of an approved return process under the aegis of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In the
absence of Bosnian Serb police, SFOR troops moved in, separated the two groups
and restored order. In a subsequent joint démarche to the Bosnian Serb
President, Dr. Plavsic, the Commander of SFOR, the High Representative and the
IPTF Commissioner called for the immediate suspension of the local Chief of
Police, the apprehension of the individuals involved in the attack and the
immediate participation by the Bosnian Serb police in joint patrols. The joint
SFOR/IPTF/Bosnian Serb patrols began in early February and are continuing.
Meanwhile, Bosniac resettlement attempts were suspended. They began again on
12 February, when approximately 20 Bosniacs resumed construction of
prefabricated homes in the village.
7.
In a further incident, on 31 January, nine Bosniac families tried to return
to Stolac from Mostar. SFOR troops had been deployed, at the request of UNHCR,
to provide general area security. However, the Bosniac convoy was stopped by
approximately 400 Bosnian Croats, mainly women and children, who began throwing
rocks and eggs. UNHCR then cancelled the operation, and the settlers returned
to Mostar. The Bosniacs have not yet attempted to return to Stolac.
8.
Mostar itself has been the scene of a recent violent confrontation between
Bosniacs and Bosnian Croats. During the first week of February, the situation
in the city began to deteriorate, with reports of numerous explosions and
evictions of Bosniacs by Bosnian Croats. In response, SFOR and IPTF patrols
were increased. On 10 February, violence flared between a group of Bosniacs
visiting a cemetery in West Mostar and a Bosnian Croat carnival parade in the
vicinity. Shots were fired and the Bosniacs withdrew. One Bosniac died, and
between 20 and 40 people, mainly Bosniacs, were injured. At the request of
IPTF, SFOR assistance was provided and SFOR troops succeeded in isolating the
incident and preventing it from spreading. The SFOR presence in Mostar was
subsequently increased, with additional checkpoints and patrolling, in order to
prevent any similar clashes between the two local communities. As a result of
this increased presence, a number of small arms were confiscated and several
illegal Croat checkpoints dismantled. On 12 February, SFOR participated in a
meeting of Federation representatives and international officials, when
agreement was reached on decreasing inter-ethnic tension in Mostar. IPTF has
now been tasked with conducting an independent investigation to determine who
was responsible for the escalation of violence and attacks on Mostar citizens.
At the moment, the situation in the city remains tense, but calm.
/...

S/1997/193
English
Page 5

9.
In anticipation of the Brcko arbitration decision in mid-February, tensions
ran high both in the city itself and in the region generally. In late January,
therefore, SFOR imposed a temporary exclusion zone around Brcko, prohibiting the
parties from moving forces within 10 km of the city. SFOR patrols in the city
were also increased.
10. In late January and early February, in what appeared to be a reaction to
the anticipated arbitration decision, there were numerous reports of
mobilization by Bosniac and Bosnian Serb units. Reservists were called up, and
there was an overall significant increase in training activity. On 11 February,
in order to defuse the tensions caused by these developments and to pre-empt any
acts that might be misunderstood or considered provocative by either side, SFOR
suspended, with immediate effect, all training outside barracks, with the
exception of flight training. All troops involved in training outside barracks,
whether regular or reserve, were ordered to return to barracks by midday on
13 February. This suspension period will remain in force for as long as SFOR
deems necessary. SFOR also ordered the immediate stand-down of all reserves and
their return to their homes by 1800 hours on 13 February. The parties complied
with the training ban and with the order to stand-down their reserves.
11. In the immediate aftermath of the arbitration decision on 14 February, the
situation in Brcko remained calm. SFOR will continue to play its role in
contributing to a secure environment in and around Brcko, and will also provide
support to IPTF as it increases its presence there.
12. None of the parties is yet judged to be compliant with respect to demining,
although it is hoped that the decisions taken at the mid-January meeting of the
Joint Military Commission (paragraph 7 of the previous monthly report refers
(see S/1997/81)) will speed up operations significantly. Within the framework
of those decisions, the parties are to produce a properly resourced demining
programme by mid-February.
13. The Bosniac and Bosnian Serb Parties are still non-compliant in the
mandatory return of prisoners of war (POWs). The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) records 13 POWs still held in Bosniac and Serb prisons, and it
is also possible that there may be more POWs detained by the entities.
Cooperation with international organizations
14. SFOR continues to provide support within its capabilities to the
international civil organizations in theatre and, as noted above, continues to
work extensively with IPTF on a daily basis to maintain local security and to
facilitate freedom of movement for the local population. SFOR will continue to
assist the Office of the High Representative, UNHCR and IPTF in implementing
jointly developed procedures for the orderly and phased return of refugees and
displaced persons in the zone of separation. In addition, SFOR has assisted
IPTF in developing a number of programmes, such as the definition of entity
jurisdictional boundaries for IPTF.
15. SFOR and OSCE have established a close and cooperative relationship,
especially with regard to preparations for the municipal elections, currently
scheduled for July. SFOR has played an increased role in helping to staff the
/...

S/1997/193
English
Page 6

OSCE Election Operations Centre and in providing assistance to OSCE staff in the
correlation and consolidation of election plans.
16. SFOR support will continue to be given to OSCE in its role with respect to
Annex I B of the Peace Agreement. Updated data on the parties' weapons holdings
in SFOR-authorized sites will continue to be provided to the Personal
Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office.

-----
