General Aanmbly-Twenty-fifth Sea1ion

128

duct of the fellowship programme in international law
sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the
Institute;
6. Notes with thanks the offer of the Government
of Ghana to provide facilities for the regional symposium to be held in Africa in 1971 ;
7. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme
and expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1971 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, to submit recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in
1972 and subsequent years;
9. Decides to include in the provisional a$enda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Umted Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law".
1926th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

Having heard the different views expressed during
the consideration of the item at its twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth sessions,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to communicate to him, before 1 July 1972,
their views and suggestions on the review of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to ~ubmit to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session a report containing the views and suggestions
of Member States communicated to him pursuant to
paragraph 1 above;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Need to
consider suggestions regarding the review of the
Charter of the United Nations".
1926th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2698 (XXV). United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in ~e Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of international Law, 1 0
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out
in 1971 the activities specified in his report, including
the provision of:
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) Current United Nations legal publications to
institutions in developing countries which have previously received United Nations legal publications
under the present Programme and to other institutions in developing countries for which requests for
such publications are made by the Member States
concerned;
2. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to provide assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country invited to
the regional symposium to be held in Africa and to
the regional training course to be organized in Latin
America;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to promote training and assistance in international trade law within the framework of the Programme, in order to meet the need, particularly on
the part of developing countries, for strengthening
legal expertise in this field;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its participation in the Programme, especially as regards
its efforts to develop the teaching of international law;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation
in the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional symposia and training courses and in the con18 A/8130

2723 (XXV). Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice is
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
Considering the desirability of finding ways and
means of enhancing the effectiveness of the Court,
Bearing in mind that a study of the Court will in no
way impair its authority, but should seek to facilitate
the greatest possible contribution by the Court to the
advancement of the rule of law and the promotion
of justice among nations,
1. 1nvites Member States and States parties to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice to submit to the Secretary-General, by 1 July 1971, views
and suggestions concerning the role of the Court on
the basis of the questionnaire to be prepared by the
Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Court the records of the discussions and proposals
in the Sixth Committee on this item;
3. Invites the Court to state its views, should it so
desire;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive report in the light of the opinions expressed by States and the Court, should the Court so
desire;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Review of the
role of the International Court of Justice", with a view
to taking such appropriate measures as may seem desirable.
1931st plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.

and Corr.I.

•

•

•
