S/2021/372

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 19 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr.
Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of
China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the Middle East
(Yemen)” convened on Thursday, 15 April 2021. A statement was also delivered by
the representative of Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter (S/2020/372) dated
7 May 2020 by the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council, which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
These briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
President of the Security Council

21-05245 (E) 200421 140521

*2105245*

S/2021/372

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths
Allow me to start by extending my warmest wishes to the people of Yemen
and to Muslims around the world for the Holy Month of Ramadan. Ramadan kareem.
For many Yemenis, the conflict has changed the way they see their lives and
their futures. In many areas of the country, a generation of children has suffered
sporadic or no schooling. Employment is too often partial or non-existent. The
institutions of the State, essential for the delivery of basic services, have suffered
years of attrition. The problems in getting fuel imported drive up prices of basic
commodities. Electricity in some parts of Yemen is a daily struggle. And, as we
will hear from Mark Lowcock, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
unleashed itself again on the people of Yemen. Six years gone and, as bad as anything
else, no sense as to when this tragedy might end.
Ending this war is the simple and heartfelt aspiration of any and every Yemeni
polled, consulted or otherwise included in the national conversation about the war.
It is very likely that a similar massive popular consensus in favour of peace exists in
all conflicts. The people are always the champions of peace. And in this Yemen is no
different from other countries burdened by conflict.
But, in two other ways, Yemen is indeed different. The first is that the
international community, as represented by the Security Council, is united. I
am grateful to the Council for keeping Yemen high on its agenda and for always
delivering a central, clear and consistent message: that the only way out of the
conflict is a negotiated political solution.
Generally, it is also true that there is a convergence of diplomatic interests in
favour of an end to the war and its successful political resolution. Since we last met
(see S/2021/266), I have visited Muscat, Amman, Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Berlin.
In all these capitals I have discussed in detail our current efforts to end the war in
Yemen. And in all cases I have come across at a minimum a consensus in support,
and as often an active role in support for, the four points on which we are seeking
agreement between the parties. So the Security Council’s unity is reinforced by
diplomatic unanimity and by specific actions by key Member states. They know who
they are, and I thank them deeply.
And in one last, and perhaps most important, regard there is reason for hope:
the way to end the war is known and its principal elements are frequently discussed
with the parties. We have what my counterpart Tim Lenderking calls “a fair plan”
on the table. It is a plan that favours the humanitarian, knowing that this is what the
people need. It is a plan that learns from experience of previous agreements. Thus,
no partial ceasefires, only a nationwide ceasefire; no agreement without adequate
preparation, for we are ready to put into immediate effect the decisions reached; a
specific time agreed for the launch of that crucial political process. All we need now
is for the parties to agree to this deal. That is all.
The urgency of progress towards a peaceful settlement makes the continued
violence on the ground all the more concerning. Ma’rib remains the major centre
of gravity for the conflict. The fighting in the area is showing dangerous signs of
escalating once again. Internally displaced people, along with local communities,
have been in the line of fire. I am also alarmed by reports of multiple drone and
ballistic missile attacks carried out by Ansar Allah against Saudi territory during the
past week, including against civilian facilities.
In Al-Hudaydah, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) has been undertaking intensive discussions with the
2/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

parties on the resumption of the activities under the umbrella of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and to rebalance UNMHA’s presence so as to be equally
accessible to both parties. I hope these discussions are going in the right direction.
This will be a considerable boost for the efforts to maintain calm in Al-Hudaydah
and implement the Agreement reached in Stockholm.
In Taiz, fighting has increased and tensions continue to build. The city’s
civilian population continues to suffer the worst of the conflict and its impact
on basic services and the freedom of movement. Like many areas of the country,
Taiz has also been hit by an alarming resurgence of COVID-19 cases. Key roads
in Taiz have been closed for several years, inflicting terrible social and economic
consequences on the people.
What I have described provides only a small glimpse of the effects of the war.
Listening to Yemeni women gives us a deeper insight into the often-untold stories
of this conflict. My Office has just completed a second digital consultation with
Yemeni women from several governorates. They highlighted the erosion of the social
fabric, the political marginalization and the severest humanitarian impacts of this
war, the worst of which has often been on women and girls.
The terrible effects run much deeper than I can ever capture in one briefing.
But let me provide encouragement by saying something about the meaning of the
deal for the Yemeni people and about how it will immediately contribute to the
alleviation of their suffering. And here I may be forgiven for some hope.
First, the guns will fall silent and the roads long blocked by front lines will
open for the passage of goods, humanitarian first, for the free movement of people,
for children to go to schools unhindered and for workers to return to their places of
work across the lines.
Secondly, impediments to the entry of ships into Al-Hudaydah will be lifted,
allowing those ships carrying fuel and other crucial commodities to berth and
discharge their cargo. Revenues from those ships will go into the Central Bank of
Yemen in Al-Hudaydah and be put towards civil service salaries.
Thirdly, Sana’a airport will see flights to international and national destinations,
students will come home and the sick will travel easily for medical treatment.
Fourthly — and this is really a hope — the parties might agree to release those
still jailed by the war so that families at long last are reunited. I am deeply alarmed
by the situation of detained Yemeni journalists, especially the 15 detained in Sana’a
since 2015, who are facing capital punishment. I welcome the recent statements from
the parties that they are ready to engage in a full-fledged release of detainees. I urge
them to follow through on their commitments to bring relief to thousands of families
waiting for their loved ones.
These events and arrangements will allow for a normalization of life, which
has all too often seemed like a cruel hope for the people of Yemen. Let us together
call upon the parties not to disappoint and to instead deliver Yemen from its
tragic plight.

21-052453/31

S/2021/372

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
The situation in Yemen — already the world’s largest humanitarian crisis —
is quickly getting even worse. In recent weeks, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has come roaring back. A devastating new wave of infections has more
than doubled the number of confirmed cases in just six weeks.
Many more people are getting sick, including doctors, nurses and aid workers,
although reporting mechanisms capture only a small share of cases. Hospitals and
health facilities are increasingly turning people away because they have no more
room or because they lack supplies.
Aid agencies are doing everything we can to help, including more surveillance,
public outreach, testing and critical supplies such as fuel and medicines. We are also
working with the Government on vaccines. The first shipment from the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access Facility arrived in Aden two weeks ago — about 360,000
doses, which the Government is dispatching now with support from UNICEF and
the World Health Organization. Another 1.6 million doses are expected to follow in
the coming months.
But right now the virus is moving much faster than we can keep up. Vaccines
will not be enough to suppress the second wave. We urgently need more resources
to scale up treatment, monitoring and other activities that will mitigate the impact
of the pandemic.
This second wave is coming at a time when large-scale famine is still bearing
down on the country. Tens of thousands of people are already starving to death, with
another 5 million just one step behind them. To stop this unfolding catastrophe, we
urgently need action on five points: the protection of civilians, humanitarian access,
funding, support for the economy, and progress towards peace.
Let us start with the protection of civilians, which is a requirement under
international humanitarian law. March was the deadliest month for civilians so far
this year. More than 200 civilians were killed or injured as a result of hostilities. That
is seven civilian casualties every day. Nearly 350 private homes were also damaged
or destroyed, and 10 camps hosting displaced people were impacted.
About a quarter of civilian casualties occurred in and around Ma’rib, where
Ansar Allah forces have continued to press a military offensive that has so far displaced
nearly 20,000 people. Many of the displaced had already fled the war at least once
before. The offensive in Ma’rib is a severe threat to millions of people, including more
than 1 million internally displaced persons who had sought safety in what was one
of Yemen’s last oases of stability. Hostilities in Ma’rib have also set off escalations
elsewhere, notably in Taiz and Al-Hudaydah, with heavy civilian casualties.
All parties must take constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects
throughout military operations. If the fighting continues, aid agencies expect tens
of thousands more people to flee. That will be extremely dangerous as COVID-19
tears through the country. It will also put more pressure on aid agencies, which are
already struggling to avert famine and meet other needs with insufficient resources.
My next point is on humanitarian access, which is equally a requirement of
international humanitarian law. Humanitarian agencies are quickly expanding their
presence in Ma’rib to help people affected by the recent escalation there. Regular
United Nations flights to Ma’rib have also been approved and will soon start. The
Government and the coalition are working with us to facilitate this. The Government
4/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

also recently released humanitarian assets that had been stuck in customs in Aden,
which is a welcome development.
However, bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian action remain a severe
challenge in Yemen. On the west coast, local authorities in Government-held areas
recently introduced regulations requiring movement permits and other paperwork
for aid agencies. These regulations were issued independently without Government
approval and brought aid delivery in the area to a near stand-still. The regulations
have now been suspended for Ramadan, which is a good start. We hope to see them
reversed altogether. The Government has also been supporting us on this.
In the north, we continue to engage Ansar Allah at all levels to accelerate the
improvements we saw last year on key issues like biometric registration, assessments
and project approvals. Those improvements have mostly held, but further progress
has stalled. This remains a major priority for agencies and donors.
Regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker, a deal might be in sight to resolve the
impasse on logistics and practical arrangements to implement the agreed mission
plan. The United Nations has been as flexible as possible in these discussions because
we are eager to get started. If Ansar Allah leadership agrees to move forward, which
recent statements would indicate they do, the United Nations assessment team could
arrive by early July.
My third point is on funding for the aid operation. More money for the United
Nations response plan is the fastest, most efficient way to save millions of lives.
Right now, agencies are helping about 9 million people every month, down from
nearly 14 million a year ago as a result of funding cuts. On 1 March, the world
promised $1.7 billion for humanitarian action in Yemen this year. That is less than
half of what we need. So far, about half of those pledges have been paid. Today
the United Nations response plan is only about 22 per cent funded. Without more
funding, millions of Yemenis will be staring down a death sentence this year. I call
on donors to disburse outstanding pledges right away and to increase their support.
Sustained assistance will be essential throughout the year if we are to avert famine,
ramp up the COVID-19 response and address other severe needs.
The fourth issue is on Yemen’s economic collapse, which is a major driver of
famine risk. As I have said in the past, there are two immediate steps that can help
stem this collapse right now. The first is to strengthen the currency. The rial is still
trading near record lows, which means millions more people cannot afford food or
other essentials, nearly all of which must be imported. Foreign-exchange injections
through the Central Bank stabilized the rial in the past. Those injections should
be renewed. The Government is eager to work with Yemen’s partners to make this
a success.
The second is to ensure adequate quantities of commercial imports keep
entering all ports. Last month, I stressed my concern that commercial fuel imports
through Al-Hudaydah had dropped to zero. This drop was contributing to severe
fuel shortages, mainly in the north. Fuel is an absolutely essential commodity. It is
needed to pump clean water, run sanitation systems, keep health facilities running
and drive sick people to hospital.
With COVID-19 again ravaging the country, a reliable fuel supply is more
important than ever. Several weeks ago, the Government allowed four commercial
fuel ships to berth in Al-Hudaydah, carrying 75,000 metric tons of fuel, which is
equivalent to about two weeks’ worth of fuel imports. These were the first fuel ships
to enter the port since January. And on Tuesday, the Government also announced
it will allow three additional ships to proceed to Al-Hudaydah, carrying another
90,000 metric tons of fuel. These are welcome steps that will relieve some of the
21-052455/31

S/2021/372

most immediate shortages. But the basic problem remains, which is a political
dispute between the parties on how to manage import revenue.
Until that dispute is resolved, Yemenis will be stuck in a cycle of fuel shortages
that drive up the prices of food, water, transportation and everything else, while
simultaneously cutting into basic services. Yemenis cannot cope with that cycle,
especially now as famine and COVID-19 are bearing down on the country. I call on
the parties to find a workable, lasting solution that will ensure a reliable, affordable
fuel supply across the country.
My final point is on progress towards peace. The war is the central driving force
behind the misery we see today. I strongly support Martin Griffiths’ efforts to mediate
a nationwide ceasefire, not just in Ma’rib but across the country, and to resume the
political process. The only way to end the crisis in Yemen is to end the war.

6/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings. China appreciates the unremitting efforts of the United
Nations in advancing the peace process in Yemen and carrying out humanitarian
relief operations.
Recently, Saudi Arabia put forward a peace initiative on the Yemeni issue.
Oman has stepped up efforts to promote peace talks. The meeting of high officials in
the P5+4 format was recently held in Berlin. The momentum for a political solution
to the Yemeni issue has been strengthened.
At the same time, we have noticed that the military clashes in Ma’rib are still
escalating. Saudi civilians and civilian infrastructure are still being attacked. The
humanitarian crisis in Yemen continues. The positive momentum so far has not yet
led to a meaningful political process to fundamentally improve the situation on the
ground or substantially alleviate the plight of the Yemeni people.
A resolution of the Yemeni issue must rely on the political and diplomatic
means. Positive developments in resolving hard issues such as Libya and the Sudan
in recent years have shown that, with the strong will from all parties, the mediation
by the United Nations and support from the international community, we can find a
solution that takes into account the concerns of all parties, no matter how complex
or difficult an issue might be.
China welcomes Saudi Arabia’s new initiative and appreciates the measures
taken by Saudi Arabia to ease the situation in Yemen. We hope relevant parties will
respond positively and initiate dialogue and negotiations on the specific content of
the initiative at an early date. China supports the voice of the Security Council in this
regard to support diplomatic efforts.
To solve the Yemeni issue, countries in the region must play a role. China
appreciates the efforts of Oman and other countries in the region to promote peace
talks. We hope that countries that have influence on parties to the conflict in Yemen
will continue to play an important role. State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang
Yi last month proposed a five-point initiative to achieve peace and stability in the
Middle East, which supports a political settlement in Yemen and other hotspot
issues with countries and people in the region playing a central role. China calls on
countries of the region to strengthen dialogue and continuously improve the regional
security environment,so as to create favourable conditions for the restoration of
peace in Yemen.
To solve the Yemeni issue, priority must be given to humanitarian needs.
The international community must increase humanitarian assistance to Yemen,
and donors must pay their pledges as soon as possible. All parties to the conflict
must ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to ensure that humanitarian
supplies smoothly arrive in the hands of those in need. They should also ensure
access to food, oil and other imported commodities. China notes that the Yemeni
Government has approved entry for four oil tankers into the port of al-Hudaydah and
hopes that can alleviate the local energy shortage.
It is pressing to solve the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue. We call on the Houthis
to maintain communication with the United Nations Office for Project Services,
confirm the relevant logistical arrangements within the prescribed time frame and
21-052457/31

S/2021/372

assist the technical team to board the ship for inspections and repairs as soon as
possible, so as to avoid economic, humanitarian and marine environmental disasters.
Over the years, China has provided a large amount of food assistance to Yemen
and signed agreements on economic and technical cooperation with the Yemeni
Government. We will continue to provide rice and medical supplies to Yemen as
part of our contribution to alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people.

8/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings.
Estonia shares the deep concern about the continuing military escalation in
Yemen, as it undermines the United Nations-led efforts to find a political settlement
and aggravates the humanitarian crisis. We call upon all parties to immediately deescalate and put an end to the hostilities, including the Houthis’ assault on Ma’rib
and the cross-border attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia. We also urge all parties
to refrain from indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects, as they are a violation
to international humanitarian law.
Due to the fighting, the need for humanitarian assistance is rapidly increasing
in several areas, as there are thousands of newly displaced families, especially in the
Ma’rib governorate. Five million people across the country are already on the verge
of famine, and there is a sharp increase in the number of coronavirus disease cases,
while only half of the country’s health facilities are functioning.
In this context, we welcome the recent decision of the Yemeni Government
to approve the entry of four fuel ships into the port of Al-Hudaydah, as well as the
decision of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to grant $422 million worth of fuel to
the Government of Yemen. However, in order to improve the severe humanitarian
situation, additional steps are needed, including a sustainable solution for removing
obstacles from the import of fuel and commercial items.
We also call on all parties to protect civilians, particularly those in the most
vulnerable situations, including internally displaced people, women and girls. We are
concerned about the reports of systematic repression of journalists, sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. The parties must cease
these violations immediately, and perpetrators must be held to account.
We welcome the tireless diplomatic efforts made to end the war, including
those by Special Envoy Griffiths, United States Special Envoy Lenderking, the
Sultanate of Oman and the P5+4 group, who met at the beginning of this week. We
also welcome the recent announcement by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on ways to
end the crisis.
We encourage all parties to engage with the Special Envoy and agree on a
ceasefire immediately in order to start an inclusive political process, with the
participation of women and youth.

21-052459/31

S/2021/372

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings and to
reiterate to them France’s full support.
It is high time for the Houthis to make peace in Yemen. They must immediately
put an end to their offensive against Ma’rib, which is home to millions of civilians.
The attacks on Saudi Arabia must also stop.
There is an opportunity to put an end to six years of war through diplomacy.
We welcome the diplomatic efforts of the United States and Oman and the
announcement by Saudi Arabia in that regard on 22 March. The Yemeni parties,
especially the Houthis, need to seize this opportunity. They must undertake
constructive discussions with the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy in good faith
and without any further delay.
The elements for a peace plan are well known. It is more than time:to conclude
without delay and without preconditions a ceasefire agreement throughout Yemeni
territory; to open the ports and airports to allow humanitarian and commercial
supplies in; and to start credible political negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations.
There is only a political solution to the war in Yemen. It should be comprehensive
and inclusive and guarantee the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen, in
line with the Riyadh agreement.
To establish lasting peace, we must fight impunity in Yemen. We are very
concerned about the recruitment and use of children into the fighting in Ma'rib.
The conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict should be
fully implemented.
We must also prevent an environmental disaster, which would also be a human
and economic disaster for Yemen, and more broadly for the region. The Houthis will
be responsible for it if they do not immediately allow the United Nations assessment
team have access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We call on them to act responsibly
and for the Yemeni people.
The new wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is extremely
alarming. It is essential to ramp up the vaccination campaign, thanks to the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access Facility and to provide equitable access to the vaccine.
The risk of famine continues to increase on a daily basis. In this context, it is
more essential than ever to guarantee full humanitarian access to all those in need,
particularly in areas controlled by the Houthis.
Finally, we cannot repeat it enough: even war has rules. International
humanitarian law must be respected by all. I am thinking in particular of the
protection of civilians. Violations of international humanitarian law will not
go unpunished.
You can count on France to remain fully engaged and mobilized for peace in
Yemen and to work towards de-escalation and the implementation of confidencebuilding measures in the region.

10/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I welcome Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary General Mark
Lowcock and thank them for their briefings on the current situation in Yemen. I
also welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Yemen, Ambassador
Abdullah Ali Fadhel Al-Saadi.
As a country with a centuries-old relationship with Yemen and strong peoplepeople ties, India is concerned by the instability, violence and suffering in Yemen.
We are also deeply concerned about the humanitarian consequences of the ongoing
military escalation in Ma’rib. The fighting has put the large population of Ma’rib,
including more than 1 million internally displaced people, at grave risk. We hope
that the ongoing diplomatic efforts result in the fighting ending soon.
Reports about the growing presence of Al-Qaida in Ma’rib and its attacks
in southern Yemen are also a cause for grave concern. We have repeatedly stated
that the instability in Yemen will be exploited by terrorist groups to expand their
presence in the country. While focusing on the political and military conflict, the
Security Council must not overlook the threats posed by terrorist groups to peace
and stability in the country and the region.
The protracted conflict and deteriorating economic situation have only
exacerbated the suffering of Yemeni people. The humanitarian situation is dire. The
famine-like conditions in many governorates is expected to worsen the humanitarian
crisis in the coming months. The full support of the international community is
required to prevent a famine in the country. I would like to highlight two important
issues in this regard.
First, aid agencies must receive adequate funding to continue their aid
programmes. They would otherwise be forced to scale down or end the aid, which
would impact the people of Yemen.
Secondly, humanitarian and commercial supplies cannot be linked with other
issues. Restrictions that hamper the flow of essential commodities into Yemen and
all impediments to the internal movement of humanitarian aid must be removed. We
welcome the clearances issued by Government of Yemen recently for fuel ships to
enter into Al-Hudaydah to ease the pressure on, access to and the availability of fuel
in Yemen.
We are glad that vaccines from India reached Yemen on 31 March and will
contribute to the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
However, the fight will not be effective until testing capacities are enhanced and
complete information about the number of COVID-positive cases, especially in
northern Yemen, are made available in a transparent manner.
Another issue that is of concern is the FSO SAFER oil tanker. If not addressed,
the deteriorating condition of the FSO SAFER tanker can result in an ecological and
maritime catastrophe. We hope that all pending issues will be resolved urgently and
that Ansar Allah will provide early access and facilitation to the United Nations to
inspect the vessel and conduct any essential repairs without further delay.
The only way to end the crisis in Yemen is through lasting and inclusive peace.
The recent diplomatic initiatives have opened a new window of opportunity. We
commend the efforts by Oman in facilitating dialogue among the key stakeholders
towards finding a comprehensive solution to the conflict in Yemen. We also welcome
the initiative announced by Saudi Arabia for fostering peace in Yemen.
21-0524511/31

S/2021/372

India supports all efforts to find an inclusive and peaceful political solution
to the Yemen crisis through negotiations led and owned by the Yemeni people. The
full and equal participation of women and youth in these negotiations is important.
We call for an immediate halt to the offensive in Ma’rib and military operations in
other parts of Yemen to create a conducive environment for these negotiations. We
appreciate the efforts of Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha and the team from the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement to prevent an escalation
of hostilities in Al-Hudaydah. We hope that all parties in Yemen will engage in
good faith with the United Nations Special Envoy and come to the negotiating table
immediately to end the conflict.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s strong commitment to Yemen’s unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. We hope to see enduring peace
return to Yemen soon.

12/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
Like others, I would like to send our sincere best wishes for the Holy Month
of Ramadan. I also thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their briefings and
their candour again today.
Every time we discuss this, we say it and we mean it: the terrible conflict in
Yemen continues to cause unimaginable human suffering. However, as Mark said
earlier, until we end the fighting, we cannot end the suffering.
We urge support for all efforts to bring this conflict to an end. Ireland is
encouraged that dialogue is continuing among the parties to the conflict and has been
bolstered by recent intensified diplomatic efforts from international and regional
actors, as well as the tireless dedication and resilience of Special Envoy Griffiths.
We welcome and commend the recent initiative and commitment of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia towards a peace agreement. We also acknowledge the longstanding and the constructive role played by the Sultanate of Oman to bring an end
to this horrific conflict. The work of United States Special Envoy Tim Lenderking,
European Union Ambassador to Yemen Hans Grundberg, as well as other envoys, is
particularly valuable at what we hope now will prove to be a critical juncture.
Now more than ever, the international community and the Security Council
must stand fully united behind efforts to end the conflict. An end to the conflict
cannot come too soon for the people of Yemen. As we heard earlier today, the toll
of human suffering is rising and the situation on the ground remains dire. Ma’rib
has become the crucible of renewed hostilities and violence, resulting in widespread
displacement, and we urge an immediate end to this offensive.
We all know that there can be no military solution to this conflict — a
nationwide ceasefire is urgently needed. Only then can the work begin on a
comprehensive political settlement, including — and we underline this again — the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women at every step in the process.
We are very concerned by the rapid rise that we have heard about in coronavirus
disease cases and the shocking reports of high levels of associated fatalities.
Yemenis face a shattered health system and a deeply degraded economy.
Amid widespread hunger, the devaluation of the rial means that millions of Yemenis
are unable to purchase food. Those who are not paid a salary are totally unable to
support their own families. Fuel shortages limit the functioning of schools, transport,
hospitals and other vital infrastructure.
In addition to ensuring that fuel and food are imported and delivered to those
who need it most, we know it is also vital to ensure basic economic stability. The
recent import of fuel into Al-Hudaydah port was welcome, and we call on all parties
to urgently implement further practical actions that might go some way towards
easing the suffering of the Yemeni people.
The instability of the FSO SAFER oil tanker — we raise it every time —
continues to threaten a new catastrophe. It is welcome news that there were recent
talks on this issue, and we call on all parties to rapidly conclude discussions so that
the United Nations teams, which are ready to go, can access the tanker and carry out
the necessary repairs.
I want to mention in particular today the plight of children in Yemen, which
has come into sharper focus as a result of recent hostilities. As Mr. Griffiths lamented
21-0524513/31

S/2021/372

this week: “a generation has been lost”. We continue to witness grave violations
against children, including killing and maiming, denial of basic humanitarian access
and the horrific recruitment and use of child soldiers. Over 2 million Yemeni children
are out of school.
We call on all parties to the conflict to abide by their obligations and
responsibilities under international humanitarian law and international human rights
law and to take the necessary measures to end and prevent such violations. Surely
the children of Yemen, who have suffered six long years of conflict, at a minimum
deserve peace and the chance of a brighter future.

14/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings.
Kenya strongly condemns the increasing aerial cross-border attacks by the
Houthis on civilian facilities in Saudi Arabia. We call on all the parties to refrain
from any activities that would jeopardize ongoing peace efforts.
Kenya remains deeply concerned over the deteriorating situation in Ma’rib.
Over the last week, we have witnessed an increasing number of casualties. Sadly,
this is eroding any previous gains towards peace. We note that the fighting has
now displaced around 20,000 people — 5,000 more since the Security Council last
met (see S/2021/266) in March — thereby placing an additional burden on already
constrained relief and humanitarian efforts.
The humanitarian crisis is compounded by the second wave of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is rapidly spreading across Yemen. With the
fragile health infrastructure, deteriorating economy and enduring violence, the
international community has to step in and offer COVID-19 response solutions,
including the provision of additional vaccines.
Kenya has previously cautioned that the violent conflict is creating a vacuum
that is filled by terrorist groups. The reports that former combatants affiliated with
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and with the Islamic State are being equipped
to fight in Ma’rib must be acted on urgently. We condemn the use of terrorism for
political ends. We reiterate our conviction that terrorist groups should not be rewarded
any political legitimacy. We believe the world will rue the day when attempts to
build peace and security with actors who have undertaken terrorist atrocities to sit
at the negotiating table.
We hope that this viewpoint is carefully considered by Special Envoy Griffiths.
We remain supportive of his efforts to resolve Yemen’s complex crisis. We welcome
the recent initiatives by the United States, Saudi Arabia and Oman that dovetail
with the Special Envoy’s task. We hope for a united stance by the Security Council
to reinforce these efforts to assist the parties to successfully achieve a peaceful
political solution. That solution will emerge from an inclusive and comprehensive
resolution that will address the immediate and long-term concerns of all parties and
bring to an end to the unbearable suffering the people of Yemen have had to endure.
Kenya notes the positive developments on the FSO SAFER tanker. We reiterate
our call on the authorities handling the ship to urgently provide unhindered access to
the United Nations technical team to conduct the necessary inspection and repairs so
as to avert the looming environmental threat.
In conclusion, we believe that peace in Yemen is achievable if the process
proceeds with its being Yemeni owned and Yemeni-led. We wish our brothers and
sisters in Yemen a Ramadan Kareem and pray that this holy month will bring with it
lasting peace and prosperity to them and their families.

21-0524515/31

S/2021/372

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock has noted, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate severely due to the pandemic, economic fragility and, above
all, the unnecessary prolongation of the armed conflict. We note with great dismay
the growing impact of violence on the civilian population, which, among other
things, has led to an increase in the number of displaced persons, which now stands
at more than 4 million. Without an end to the hostilities, humanitarian work will be
almost impossible and basic care for vulnerable groups difficult.
Mexico therefore expresses great concern over the persistent Houthi offensive
against Ma’rib, in addition to the 50 open conflict fronts and the accentuation of
violence in towns such as Al-Hudaydah, Hajjah, Sana’a, Sa’ada, Al-Jawf and Taiz.
We condemn in the strongest terms the Houthi attacks on Ma’rib, as well as on various
Saudi targets. We urge Ansar Allah, as well as the other parties, to immediately
cease hostilities and heed the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
We also note an increase in the number of African immigrants transiting
Yemen, and extend our heartfelt condolences to the families of those killed in this
week’s incident off the coast of Djibouti. We call on both Ansar Allah and the
Government of Yemen to guarantee the protection of the rights of all migrants.
On the other hand, we welcome the improvement measures implemented by
the International Organization for Migration in the camps for displaced persons,
including improvements in the electricity network and cooking areas, the reduction
of overcrowding and the development of training and prevention for the residents of
these camps.
While we welcome the first batch of coronavirus disease vaccines that Yemen
received on 31 March, thanks to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility, it is clear that the number of doses is insufficient. We hope for an early
delivery of more batches and for the vaccination campaign to develop expeditiously
and efficiently. We reiterate the importance of the cessation of hostilities in
contributing to the efficient performance of humanitarian work, including medical
care and vaccination.
Similarly, my delegation welcomes the recent initiative proposed by Saudi
Arabia and commends the mediation efforts of the Sultanate of Oman. Mexico
supports all projects in favour of peace and stability in Yemen, particularly those
aimed at ending the suffering of the population. There being no military solution
to the conflict, we once again urge the parties to participate in the negotiation of a
broad and inclusive political agreement, facilitated by the United Nations and based
on resolution 2216 (2015).
While welcoming progress in the implementation of the Riyadh accords, we
urge the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council to continue
the application of measures focused on the consolidation and reactivation of public
institutions and reforms in favour of economic recovery.
Before concluding, we reiterate the urgent call on Ansar Allah to allow
the immediate inspection of the SFO SAFER oil tanker by United Nations teams.
As has been mentioned, the SFO SAFER poses an environmental, economic and
16/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

humanitarian threat. The repercussions of a catastrophe of this magnitude would
affect not only the residents of the Red Sea, but also the members of Ansar Allah
themselves.
Finally, at the start of the holy month of Ramadan, I wish all our Muslim
friends around the world Ramadan Kareem — Happy Ramadan.

21-0524517/31

S/2021/372

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
briefings on the situation in Yemen.
We also welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of Yemen
in this meeting.
The war in Yemen has now raged for six years and inflicted multifaceted
suffering on the people. The actors in the conflict in Yemen must show a sense of
real compromise and go beyond their selfish interests to resume the dialogue, which,
moreover, remains the only way to lead to a lasting peace in the country.
We condemn the escalation of hostilities, in particular around Ma’rib, the
drone attacks on Saudi territory and the recruitment of child soldiers by parties to
the conflict. The renewed hostilities will only dash any hope for the resumption of
negotiations and the delivery of humanitarian assistance to populations in need.
In this regard, my delegation calls on the Yemeni authorities to allow the
reopening of ports and airports so as to ensure the entry of basic necessities and fuel
in order to alleviate the difficulties faced by the populations.
The Niger reiterates that resolving the crisis will inevitably require inclusive
dialogue among Yemenis, with the support of the international community. We call
on all parties to work together for the return of peace to Yemen and for the good of
all its people.
Likewise, resolving this crisis will require a paradigm shift and a new and
creative, diplomacy-driven approach on the part of the United Nations and Yemen’s
international partners.
In this regard, my country welcomes the offer by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to end the fighting and restart the political process in Yemen, as well as Oman’s
mediation efforts. We invite the other regional actors and members of the Council
with influence on the parties to the conflict to spare no effort in supporting the
Yemenis on the difficult but unavoidable path of dialogue, reconciliation and peace.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong support and encouragement
to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in his efforts to restore dialogue between the
Yemeni parties. We are hopeful that the diplomatic mobilization that has manifested
itself in recent times will help trigger a positive dynamic conducive to a resolution
of this conflict, which has devastated Yemen and hurt its people.

18/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
We are encouraged by the Special Envoy’s continued efforts, in close
collaboration with United States Special Envoy Lenderking and with the engagement
of regional actors such as Oman and Saudi Arabia. Hopefully, this will lead to more
positive developments in Yemen. We believe that inclusive political processes — in
which all regions and parties to the conflict are represented — are important to
building durable peace.
This, of course, includes women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and
taking a gender-sensitive approach to conflict resolution. The need for inclusivity
must be kept in mind during the current United Nations-led consultations, and also
when the parties are deciding on the members of the two negotiation teams.
Norway remains very concerned by the offensive in Ma’rib, and continuing
cross-border attacks into Saudi Arabia. This threatens stability not only in Yemen,
but in the region. We also see the emergence of new front lines. These actions could
lead to a serious escalation of the conflict.
The humanitarian situation continues to be extremely troubling; where the
prospect of widespread hunger and the shortage of fuel is added to by a reported
second wave of the coronavirus disease pandemic now spreading through the
country. We welcome recent announcements by the Government allowing a number
of fuel vessels into the port to ease the humanitarian crisis; however, more steps
are needed. All parties must facilitate humanitarian access and avoid using these
issues politically.
The many reports of violations of international humanitarian law and of
human rights violations and abuses are of grave concern. Recent attacks on camps
for internally displaced persons in Ma’rib are appalling. I also find it especially
difficult to find words to describe and respond to the continued violations and abuses
against children in Yemen. They have been subjected to the denial of humanitarian
access, leading to malnutrition and starvation, killing and maiming, as well as
recruitment and use in armed conflict. Such acts are completely unacceptable and
must immediately come to an end. Those responsible must be held accountable.
The Riyadh agreement and the establishment of the new Government in
December 2020 were important steps towards peace. The parties to the agreement
should now work constructively to ensure its implementation. We would like to
stress the need for those who have supported the Government, including in the south
and on the west coast, to cooperate and combine efforts. Fragmentation will serve
only to undermine the prospects for peace.
It is important for the Security Council to keep its attention on the situation
in the south. And it will be important to support the Government’s ability to ensure
good governance and the delivery of basic services to the population. This could be a
beacon of hope and could enhance prospects for a peaceful solution. We also remain
concerned by the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We continue to encourage the Houthis to
act constructively in this regard.
We have just entered the month of Ramadan. We call on all parties, especially the
Houthis, to show mercy and compassion by engaging in an unconditional nationwide
ceasefire and political talks. All parties should enter into such arrangements without
preconditions. And there is a need for all parties to make difficult compromises. It is
their duty to prevent the onset of widespread hunger and put a final stop to the everworsening humanitarian crisis.
21-0524519/31

S/2021/372

Annex XII
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Under
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for the reviews of the political and humanitarian
situations in Yemen.
Unfortunately, the negative trends still persist in Yemen, and there has been
no breakthrough that would bring closer the political settlement of the crisis. We
are concerned over the continuing escalation in Ma’rib, reported armed action in
other parts of the country as well as strikes against the territory of Saudi Arabia. We
once again call on the sides to look for political and diplomatic solutions in order to
resolve the conflict.
We welcome the initiative of Saudi Arabia aimed at a peaceful resolution
of the crisis through terminating armed action, resuming operations at the Sana’a
International Airport, allowing humanitarian and commercial vessels to enter the
Al-Hudaydah port and starting inter-Yemeni negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations that should define the future political structure of the country. This
initiative is in line with the previously announced plan of Special Envoy Griffiths.
We proceed from the understanding that a comprehensive long-term settlement of
the conflict can be achieved once the interests of all key political forces in Yemen
are taken into account.
We are going to further support the corresponding efforts of the Special Envoy
and encourage President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour and the leaders of Ansar
Allah movement to stick to a constructive approach and be ready for compromise.
We welcome the constructive role of States of the region, including Oman, in the
mediation efforts.
An important step towards promoting the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement of 5 November 2019, which was designed to normalize the situation in
the south of Yemen, was taken in December 2020 when a new coalition Government
was formed to include representatives of the Southern Transitional Council. We hope
that the implementation of the agreements mentioned will enhance public safety and
security and allow for a focus on acute socioeconomic and humanitarian problems
in that part of Yemen.
The numerous humanitarian challenges cannot be addressed effectively
unless there is progress on the political track. That includes lifting the sea, air and
land blockade of the country and other urgent practical steps aimed at improving
the critical socioeconomic situation. Broad-based assistance from the international
community is needed to counter famine and disease. We are concerned over United
Nations reports that since March 2021 Yemen has witnessed an increase in the
incidence coronavirus disease and related deaths. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance, the 2021 humanitarian response plan for
Yemen has been financed only to the level of 13 per cent. We therefore call on the
donors, including in the region, to enhance the required financial support for United
Nations programmes that are providing basic assistance, including those ensuring
food security for the population and non-discriminatory access to clean water and
medical services.
We are convinced that mutually acceptable solutions, free from any political
implications, can also help solve the problem of the FSO SAFER tanker.
20/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

The entire Persian Gulf area needs to de-escalate. We therefore recall that
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the Russian collective security
concept can lay the groundwork for advancing the international efforts aimed at
stabilizing this subregion.

21-0524521/31

S/2021/372

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their informative briefings and sustained commitment to the
people of Yemen and to a peaceful settlement to the conflict.
The protracted conflict continues to deny the people of Yemen basic rights
and freedoms. First, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is particularly concerned
by the stark resurgence of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic against
the backdrop of a strained health-care system and a lack of adequate supplies.
We welcome the shipment of vaccines that arrived at the end of March through
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility as being critical to the COVID-19
emergency response. However, more must be done to support the fight against the
pandemic in Yemen.
More broadly, we recall the pledges made by Member States during the
pledging conference held in March and urge the rapid disbursement of funds. We
acknowledge the difficult economic circumstances globally, but financial aid is what
maintains humanitarian operations and makes the difference between life and death
for many Yemenis.
We also take this moment to underscore our concern over the persistent fuel
shortages, which have adversely impacted health facilities, undermined humanitarian
operations and exacerbated the dire humanitarian situation. We call for a durable
solution to this issue, which necessitates the lifting of the blockade.
Turning to the security situation, we condemn the continued hostilities,
including the cross-border attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The ongoing
fighting within Yemen, particularly in Ma’rib, remains of huge concern on all fronts.
It threatens to reverse any political progress previously made and further threatens
the lives of many internally displaced persons who initially fled to Ma’rib to seek
refuge. These continued forced displacements underscore that civilians, particularly
women and children, are paying the price for this conflict and that a long-lasting
solution is urgently needed.
Against this dire backdrop, the momentum within the international community
to end the war in Yemen is a positive sign. In this regard, we welcome the recent
engagement between the United States Special Envoy, Tim Lenderking, and the
German Foreign Minister, in conjunction with Special Envoy Griffiths, and further
welcome all efforts undertaken by the international community to bring an end to
the conflict. What is needed now is the unconditional political will to end the war
from all stakeholders within Yemen and among those connected to the situation.
That begins with an unwavering commitment to a nationwide ceasefire and the
resumption of a comprehensive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political process. We
underscore that inclusive dialogue, with meaningful representation and participation
by all stakeholders, is critical to sustainable peace in Yemen.
Before concluding, we would like to address the unresolved issue of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We recognize and welcome the efforts being undertaken to secure
the deployment of the United Nations team. Denial of access to the tanker is a threat
to the environment, the economy and the people of Yemen. Politicization of this
issue diminishes any opportunity for cooperation and confidence-building, which
are critical to achieving concrete progress. To that end, we call on parties to work
towards a meaningful compromise, with the environment and the people of Yemen
at the fore. When the environment becomes a victim of war, it creates a multitude of
problems in the complex relationship between humans and nature that reverberate
for generations. We owe it to Yemenis and their future generations to leave a
better legacy.
22/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex XIV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their valuable briefings.
Ongoing diplomatic efforts in the region aim to pave the way for the
peaceful settlement of a conflict that has progressively gotten worse and that has
brought Yemen nothing but devastation and hostilities that have left thousands
dead or wounded and millions displaced, creating the world’s largest humanitarian
disaster. The coronavirus disease pandemic has further complicated the situation
and compounded the suffering of the Yemeni people, undermining prospects for a
peaceful solution.
Tunisia reiterates that there can be no military solution to this crisis. The
experience of the past few years, marked by tragedies and dangerous repercussions,
has shown that the only solution that can prevent the situation from deteriorating
further and end the Yemeni people’s suffering is a political settlement on the basis of
the agreed-upon terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National
Dialogue Conference, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). A settlement will remain elusive unless the parties to the
conflict commit to an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire, engage seriously
and constructively in political negotiations, strive to reach consensus, and place the
interests of the Yemeni people above all other considerations. We call on all parties
to comply strictly with international humanitarian law and international human
rights law.
Tunisia supports all United Nations, international and regional efforts to
help end the Yemeni crisis through a political settlement that will put an end to the
suffering of the Yemeni people and preserve the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Yemen.
In that context, Tunisia once again commends the Saudi Arabian initiative
to resolve the various elements of the crisis in Yemen. That initiative constitutes an
important step towards ending the fighting and resuming the political process in
Yemen, in line with the efforts of United Nations Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.
Tunisia appreciates the mediation efforts and the important role of Oman in bridging
the gap between divergent views and easing tensions. We also commend the efforts
of the United States envoy to the region to support a political settlement, end the
fighting and defuse the conflict.
The ongoing fighting in Ma’rib may well undermine efforts to end the crisis
and increases the likelihood of further deterioration and complications, with perilous
humanitarian consequences. The people of Ma’rib have endured the worst mass
displacement since the crisis began, with over one million people under siege, their
living conditions and health at risk of further decline and their very lives in danger.
We also once again condemn the repeated attacks on the territory and civilian
infrastructure of Saudi Arabia.
Yemen is still in the throes of the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. Twothirds of the population require humanitarian assistance to survive, with 16 million
people at risk of going hungry this year, and more than half of Yemeni children under
five suffering from acute malnutrition. These alarming figures underscore just how
21-0524523/31

S/2021/372

dire the humanitarian situation in Yemen is; hence the need to continue supporting
humanitarian efforts and to facilitate uninterrupted access to aid by those in need.
In closing, we reiterate our deep concern about the risk that the SFO SAFER
oil tanker poses to the region. We once again call for the facilitation of measures to
deploy United Nations experts to carry out the necessary technical inspections and
repairs as soon as possible in order to avert an environmental, humanitarian and
economic catastrophe.

24/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I join others in sending good wishes for the Holy Month of Ramadan.
As Yemen and the Muslim world celebrate the Holy Month of Ramadan,
Yemen, as we have heard, is sadly experiencing the darkness — the darkness of a
second coronavirus disease (COVID-19) wave, with official case numbers doubling
since the beginning of the year. Lack of testing means this is but the tip of the
iceberg. The darkness, too, of imminent famine; its people can ill afford a renewed
COVID-19 crisis. And we note, too, the testimony of the Special Envoy on the
particular experience of Yemeni women at this time and throughout the war. So
we very much support United Nations agencies’ efforts to redouble their efforts
to respond to COVID-19, and we encourage the Yemeni authorities to disclose
data, implement suppression measures and allow access for international staff
and supplies.
The United Kingdom fully supports the work of Special Envoy Griffiths to
secure a national ceasefire and a resumption of the political process, for which he
set out a very clear vision. The increased engagement from the United States and
from Oman in support of the United Nations process is important and welcomed. But
despite increased dialogue, the Houthis have continued their offensive on Ma’rib,
displacing thousands and endangering civilians. Indeed, in the same week that Saudi
Arabia publicly reiterated its commitment to a peace deal, the Houthis launched a
massive drone and missile attack on civilian targets in Saudi Arabia.
With the notable exception of Iran, the international community has welcomed
the Saudi announcement and condemned the Houthi military escalations. We must be
clear about who is frustrating United Nations efforts, and I encourage all parties to
engage constructively and without preconditions with the United Nations proposals.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent release of further fuel ships into
Al-Hudaydah. However, as we have heard, this equates to only around 30 per cent of
the fuel that the port would have expected to receive since the beginning of the year.
We strongly urge the Government of Yemen to immediately release all remaining
fuel ships and for all parties to work constructively with the Special Envoy towards
a sustainable solution. Severe fuel shortages continue to threaten food distribution
to millions of Yemenis over the coming months, at a time when 16 million risk
starvation. And so the United Kingdom calls on the Houthis to ensure that any fuel
that arrives is distributed transparently and not used to fund their escalation of
the conflict.
Finally, the FSO SAFER oil tanker continues to pose a grave risk to Yemen
and to the Red Sea. The Suez Canal incident only highlights how fragile maritime
routes are, and we welcome Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s recent update.
While there were constructive United Nations-Houthi discussions last week, the
Houthis have not yet agreed to facilitate the United Nations assessment mission. The
vessel is under Houthi control, and the responsibility for this matter rests on Houthi
shoulders. If the Houthis fail to act on their stated desire to avert this crisis, then we
will look to the Security Council to discuss further what steps we can take.

21-0524525/31

S/2021/372

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me thank the briefers for their informative updates. Today I would
like to talk about three aspects of the situation in Yemen: our efforts towards a
ceasefire, the Houthi violence and violations preventing peace, and the country’s
dire humanitarian crisis.
First, diplomacy can, should and must end the war in Yemen. And we heard
that from Martin Griffiths. United States Special Envoy Timothy Lenderking is
leading our diplomatic efforts, working closely with the United Nations to bring
the parties together and conclude this conflict. The goals are clear: achieve a
comprehensive, nationwide ceasefire, re-open Sana’a’s international airport,
implement the Stockholm Agreement’s financial provisions and immediately start
political consultations. Special Envoy Lenderking’s return in late March from
Saudi Arabia and Oman, where he held productive meetings with Omani, Saudi and
Yemeni senior leaders, in coordination with Special Envoy Griffiths, is part of that.
As he outlined on that trip, the first step is for all parties to stop fighting and commit
to a ceasefire.
So we welcome Saudi Arabia’s announcement on 22 March of its commitment
to reach a ceasefire and engage in inclusive political talks to help end the conflict.
We also welcome the Government of Yemen’s continued commitment to reach a
ceasefire. We now urge the Houthis to respond and to engage productively.
This leads me directly to my second point: Houthi actions to date do not lead
us to believe they are committed to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The Houthi
offensive in Ma’rib continues to take Yemeni lives, including among those internally
displaced. And we condemn the Houthis for their violence against internally
displaced persons sites on the outskirts of Ma’rib, as well as the almost daily drone
and ballistic missile attacks on Saudi Arabia.
The Houthis also continue their dereliction of duty with the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, delaying the United Nations assessment and initial repair of the vessel. This
needs to end. For nearly two years, the Houthis have continued to move the goalposts.
And we call on them to allow the assessment to proceed without further delays and
urge other nations to press the Houthis to allow the assessment immediately.
Worst of all, the Houthis continue to consistently defy people’s basic human
rights. Levi Marhabi, a Yemeni Jew, has been wrongfully detained by the Houthis
just for his religious beliefs. For years he has sat behind bars without cause. His
mother stayed in Yemen — risking her own life — to be near him. And she refused
to abandon her child. But a few weeks ago the Houthis summarily deported more
members of the Yemeni Jewish community, including Levi’s mother. And the pain
that the Marhabi family is experiencing exemplifies the pain of so many Yemenis
today. So we reiterate our call for the Houthis to immediately release Levi and stop
their human rights abuses. And we ask that the international community also join
us in that call.
Enough of the violence. And enough of the violations. It is time for the Houthis
to respond to the proposal for a nationwide ceasefire. And it is time they respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, including obligations regarding
the protection of civilians. Just look at what the continued conflict is doing to the
country. Yemen faces the worst humanitarian emergency in the world. Over 16 million
Yemenis — more than half of the country’s population — are in acute need of food
assistance. So we call on all parties to permit the free flow of both commercial and
26/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

humanitarian commodities, including fuel, food and medical supplies. And until we
can end this war, the international community must step up to fund the humanitarian
responses without delay. And we heard that from Mark Lowcock.
On the fuel shortage specifically, thank you to Saudi Arabia for contributing
over $422 million in fuel grant support to the Republic of Yemen Government, aimed
at providing electricity to the population. We ask Saudi Arabia to ensure this fuel is
delivered as quickly as possible. The recent clearance of four fuel vessels in northern
Yemen is a positive step in the short term, and we welcome the Yemeni Government’s
announcement of its intent to clear three additional ships. But these measures are not
enough. We understand the urgent need for fuel to get into Al-Hudaydah port. This
is a constant priority in our conversations with the Yemeni Government and with
Saudi Arabia. But it is critical that all parties — including the Houthis, who use fuel
to fund their war effort — allow both commercial and humanitarian commodities
to reach those who need them. Otherwise, the humanitarian emergency in Houthicontrolled areas will become unimaginably bleak.
Fortunately, I believe we have a real opportunity here. We can implement a
ceasefire. We can pressure the Houthis to stop the violence and violations. And we
can address the humanitarian crisis. This is a rare opportunity for progress. It will
take all of us — all of us working together — to make this happen. And I hope we
have the courage to do that.
Eid Mubarak to all of our Muslim colleagues and to all the Yemeni people.

21-0524527/31

S/2021/372

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their comprehensive briefings.
It has been nearly seven years since the war broke out in Yemen. The country
continues to face prolonged fighting and crisis. We remain concerned about military
escalations and cross-border fighting in parts of Yemen. It is also distressing to learn
that civilians, especially women and children, continue to be targeted.
In this context, we welcome the Special Envoy’s efforts during his recent
trips to meet the parties concerned to promote the United Nations-facilitated peace
process, which includes the nationwide ceasefire, the re-opening of Sana’a airport
and the facilitation of operations at the Al-Hudaydah port. We echo his call for the
international community’s full support for a comprehensive political settlement in
Yemen at this critical juncture.
We also welcome all efforts by the countries in the region, including the recent
mediation activities of the Sultanate of Oman, in promoting an inclusive political
process under the auspices of the United Nations to end the conflict comprehensively
and sustainably. We stress the importance of the coherence of these contributions
with the continued efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths. We urge the parties concerned
to immediately cease all hostilities and resume the political process without further
delay. We call on parties to the conflict to stop attacks on civilian infrastructure and
neighbourhoods and protect the most vulnerable.
Yemen’s dire humanitarian situation, after seven years of protracted conflict,
has faced more tremendous challenges including, among others the economic crisis,
fuel shortages, food insecurity and the prospect of a large-scale famine. Yemenis have
had limited access to food, medicine and essential services — 16.2 million people
are projected to go hungry in 2021. Four million Yemenis have been displaced. Over
2 million children have been deprived of opportunities to go to school. Fuel prices
doubled or tripled in some areas as a result of desperate shortages.
Moreover, the recent second wave of the coronavirus disease pandemic
has hit the country with a surge in infections and deaths. The hindered access for
humanitarian workers has further exacerbated the vulnerability and predicament of
people across the country. We are very concerned about such prolonged trends.
Therefore, we reiterate our calls on all parties to provide prompt, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to, and facilitate humanitarian operations in, Yemen.
It is also necessary to tackle the funding shortage adequately and immediately so
that humanitarian assistance can be delivered to the people in need in a timely
manner. Yemeni people are dying every day. The more quickly we react, the more
lives we save.
It is encouraging to learn that Ansar Allah and the United Nations have
reached a verbal technical agreement on the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue. We look
forward to seeing a written deal so that the United Nations team can perform its
duties without any further delays. We are running out of time. We need to prevent an
environmental disaster for Yemen and the region.
Last but not least, it is imperative for parties to the conflict to fully implement
the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement. We also call on the parties to
ensure women’s meaningful participation in the political process.
We commend the tireless work of Special Envoy Griffiths and the United
Nations team and support their peace proposals for Yemen.
28/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Al-Saadi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month, and to wish you every success in the fulfilment
of your mandate, and to thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
United States, for her successful presidency of the Council.
The Government of Yemen, under the guidance and leadership of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, is making every effort to end the war, alleviate
the suffering of Yemenis and achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting peace through
the United Nations-led peace process, on the basis of the terms of reference for a
political solution in Yemen, namely, the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive
National Dialogue Conference, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015). The Government reaffirms its support for United
Nations efforts, through Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, to establish peace in
Yemen, and for all proposals and initiatives aimed at achieving that objective. It
welcomes the initiative of Saudi Arabia in the context of international efforts to
end the insurrection and the war. That initiative, which enjoys broad international
consensus, constitutes an important step towards ending the crisis.
While the Government of Yemen continues to engage constructively in the
aforementioned efforts offering many concessions, it lacks a partner genuinely
interested in pursuing peace. The Houthi militias remain intransigent, publicly
rejecting all initiatives and proposals aimed at ending their senseless war and
establishing peace. They continue their barbaric aggression against Ma’rib
governorate, attacking civilians and camps for displaced persons with ballistic
missiles, uncrewed aerial vehicles and other heavy weapons. Most recently, militias
bombed three camps for displaced persons in northern Ma’rib, firing 37 artillery
shells and missiles. There were dozens of casualties, most of them women and
children. Since 6 February, more than 2,400 families have been displaced by the
brutal attacks, which blatantly defied the Council’s calls for an end to the aggression
and which imperil the peace process, undermine the political process as a whole,
place the lives of millions of civilians at risk, and are spurring a fresh wave of
displacement, compounding the suffering of Yemenis. We call on the Council and
on the international community to condemn those vicious attacks, which contravene
international humanitarian law and international human rights law; to exert the
utmost pressure in order to put an end to the militias’ violations against millions
of civilians and displaced persons; and to address the militias’ disregard for the
international community and their failure to abide by any agreement or commitment,
most recently the Stockholm Agreement.
The Government of Yemen is aware of the magnitude of our people’s suffering
in the current humanitarian situation and of the economic and development challenges
caused by the protracted unjust war being waged by the Houthi militias. In order to
alleviate that suffering, the Government has continued recently — specifically in the
first quarter of 2021 — to facilitate the flow of oil derivatives to areas under Houthi
control at a normal rate compared to the past two years and in amounts that meet
existing needs. Despite the looting by Houthi militias of more than 70 billion Yemeni
rials in Government fuel shipment revenues, which the militias used to finance their
war effort, instead of paying the salaries of civil servants per the agreement with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the Government of Yemen has granted
21-0524529/31

S/2021/372

entry permits to some 40 ships through Hudaydah port since 2020. Port fees have
been collected and confiscated by the militias, which have refused to allow the office
of the Special Envoy to monitor revenues. The Government has also facilitated the
entry of fuel through liberated ports and by land. In the past two days, the Government
has granted entry permits on an exceptional basis to a number of ships carrying oil
derivatives to Al-Hudaydah port to mitigate human suffering despite the Houthi
militias’ continued violation of the Stockholm Agreement. The oil imported to areas
under Houthi control accounts for approximately 60 per cent of overall oil imports
into Yemen. That amount is sufficient to cover civilian and humanitarian needs.
The Government of Yemen affirms that it is committed to ensuring that fuel
supplies reach all areas, especially those areas under Houthi control. However, it calls
on the international community and all international organizations to demand that
the Houthi militias stop capitalizing politically on human suffering by fabricating
crises and then trading oil derivatives on the black market to fund their war against
Yemenis. Pressure should be brought to bear on the militias to agree to use the
proceeds of those shipments, as agreed with the Special Envoy, to pay public sector
employees their salaries, thereby alleviating real human suffering.
Once again, we ask the Council, out of respect for the victims and for
international humanitarian law, to ensure that the perpetrators of the attack on Aden
International Airport are held accountable. The Panel of Experts should also conduct
a transparent and independent investigation to uncover the details of the heinous
crime, perpetrated by Houthi militias, of setting African migrants on fire in Sana’a,
and bring those involved to justice.
The terrorist attacks perpetrated by the Houthi militias against Saudi
Arabian civilians, civilian objects and economic installations systematically and
deliberately target energy resources and the nerve centre of the global economy,
the security and stability of oil supplies and the freedom of global maritime
navigation and trade, in f lagrant violation of international humanitarian law.
These attacks confirm that the Houthi militias reject all political efforts to end
the crisis, especially following the announcement of the Saudi Arabian initiative.
They also prove that Iran continues to direct the political and military decisions
of these militias, through which that country is carrying out its subversive agenda
of sowing chaos and undermining regional security and stability. These militias’
decision-making is not their own but is instead dependent on the Iranian regime.
The international community must shoulder its responsibilities, put an end to the
irresponsible conduct of these militias and take all necessary measures to maintain
regional and international security and stability.
The deterioration of the Yemeni economy continues to compound human
suffering, especially as a result of the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
whose second wave has recently hit many Yemeni governorates. We demand that
the Houthi militias disclose the number of coronavirus cases in the areas under
their control, and we appeal to the international community and international
organizations to increase their support for Yemen to combat the pandemic. In spite
of the difficult circumstances, the Government of Yemen continues to work to
stimulate development, maintain the value of the Yemeni rial and achieve economic
recovery. Doing so will require generous international support in the economic and
development areas and an increase in contributions to the humanitarian response
plan. We greatly appreciate the grant by Saudi Arabia of $422 million worth of oil
derivatives to support the operation of power stations in Yemen.
If the situation of the SFO SAFER oil tanker continues to deteriorate and no
tangible progress is made, environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster will
ensue. Hundreds of communities on the Red Sea coast in Yemen and neighbouring
30/31

21-05245

S/2021/372

countries rely on fishing as livelihood and for food supply. The leakage of more than
1 million barrels of oil would have grave environmental consequences, depriving
those communities of their sources of subsistence and survival, in addition to placing
global trading routes at risk. The time has thus come for this Council to take strict
deterrent measures against the militias’ intransigence and stalling, in order to prevent
a major catastrophe. The Council must do more than call for the Panel of Experts to
be granted access to the tanker, as such calls have gone unheeded by the militias.

21-0524531/31
