S/2005/744

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union adopted at its 40th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005, and to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, under
which an International Working Group was created to assist the Ivorian Government
in the implementation of its programme and to consolidate and strengthen existing
follow-up mechanisms.
Please find attached the communiqué issued by the International Working
Group after its first meeting, held in Abidjan on 8 November 2005 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-62172 (E) 301105 301105

*0562172*

S/2005/744

Annex
[Original: French]

International Working Group — meeting of 8 November 2005
Final communiqué
The International Working Group at a ministerial level on Côte d’Ivoire held
its first meeting on 8 November 2005 in Abidjan. It should be recalled that the
Group was established, upon the recommendation of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Summit of 30 September 2005, by the 6 October
2005 meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa “in
order to assist the Government in the implementation of its programme and
consolidate and strengthen the existing follow-up mechanisms”. The United Nations
Security Council, by its resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, endorsed that
decision and urged the International Working Group to meet as soon as possible.
The meeting was co-chaired by Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria, and Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Côte d’Ivoire, and attended by Ministers from Benin, Ghana, Guinea,
Niger and France, the United Nations High Representative for elections and
representatives of South Africa, the United Kingdom, the United States of America,
the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union, the
Organisation internationale de la francophonie, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.
In accordance with its mandate, the Group shall evaluate, monitor and follow
up closely the peace process, including ensuring that all the Ivorian parties comply
with their commitments. After adopting its agenda and rules of procedure, it
considered ways and means of implementing its mandate over the entire transitional
period starting from 31 October 2005 and not lasting more than 12 months.
Members of the Group unanimously agreed that its role is to act as a guarantor and
impartial arbitrator of the peace and reconciliation process charged with the
organization of incontestable elections before 31 October 2006.
The Group notes that the primary basis of the process is Security Council
resolution 1633 (2005), which is binding on all the Ivorian parties.
The Group is of the view that the resolution grants to the soon-to-be appointed
Prime Minister inherent powers and all the necessary resources to fully and
effectively carry out his mandate in accordance with resolution 1633 (2005). The
Group recalls that the resolution provides, inter alia, that “the Prime Minister must
have all the necessary powers according to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and all
the governmental financial, material and human resources, particularly with regard
to security, defence and electoral matters, to ensure the effective functioning of the
Government, to guarantee security and the redeployment of the administration and
public services throughout the territory of Côte d’Ivoire, to lead the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and the operations of
disarmament and dismantling of militias, and to ensure the fairness of the
identification process and of voter registration, leading to the organization of free,
open, fair and transparent elections, with the support of the United Nations”.

2

S/2005/744

As far as the exercise by the Prime Minister of full authority over his cabinet is
concerned, the Prime Minister shall have the necessary powers to discharge his
administrative civilian and military duties to appoint and dismiss senior officials and
to manage financial resources. In that regard, and in accordance with resolution
1633 (2005) and the agreements in force, the Group has decided as follows:
– To give to the new Prime Minister and his cabinet all the necessary support.
The Group shall specifically address obstacles of any kind, such as political,
legal, financial and human obstacles, that the Prime Minister may face in
exercising his full authority in order to implement his mandate;
– To foster among all the Ivorian parties the climate of trust necessary for the
successful completion of the peace and reconciliation process in Côte d’Ivoire;
disarmament, in particular, will be the result of the parties’ confidence that
resolution 1633 (2005) will be fully implemented; voter identification is also a
key ingredient of that trust as a prerequisite for the elections;
– To promote a practical results-oriented approach; believing that, like all the
Ivorian parties, its success will be measured in terms of results, the Group is
determined to remove without delay any obstacles or impediments to the peace
and reconciliation process in Côte d’Ivoire;
– To invite the day-to-day Mediation Group, co-chaired by South Africa and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and composed of the High
Representative for elections and representatives of the African Union and
ECOWAS, to bring to its attention any obstacle to the smooth implementation
of the process as well as any other violation that may call for its intervention;
the Group, fully aware of what the United Nations expects it to accomplish,
will identify those responsible and draw all the consequences as a matter of
law, including, if necessary, by referring the matter to the Security Council or
its sanctions Committee.
With a new Prime Minister to be appointed soon, and as so requested by the
Security Council, the Group has prepared a road map for the holding of free, open,
fair and transparent elections as soon as possible, but not later than 31 October
2006. That road map has the following components: governance and political
process; disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion of ex-combatants;
disarmament and disbanding of militias; redeployment of the administration;
identification and citizenship; electoral process; restoration of security with the
support of the impartial forces; respect for human rights; sanctions and hindrance to
the freedom of movement; media monitoring and humanitarian action. The road map
is accompanied by a timetable.
The Group agreed to hold its next meeting in the first week of December in
Côte d’Ivoire.

3
