S/PV.8079

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8079 th meeting

Friday, 27 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre/Mrs. Gueguen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Wallström
Ms. Klympush-Tsintsadze
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Realizing the promise of the women and peace and security agenda: ensuring
its full implementation, including the participation of women
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2017/861)
Letter dated 20 October 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2017/889)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-34962 (E)
*1734962*

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Realizing the promise of the women and
peace and security agenda: ensuring its full
implementation, including the participation
of women
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2017/861)
Letter dated 20 October 2017 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/889)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I extend a special welcome to all the ministers
attending, including those representing Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany, Sweden
and Ukraine.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women; Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas,
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security;
2/104

27/10/2017

and Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary-General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender
and the Implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women, Peace
and Security of the European External Action Service
of the European Union; Ms. Amarsanaa Darisuren,
Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe; Ms. Louise
Sharene Bailey, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Observer Mission of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Mr. Krisztian Meszaros, Civilian Liaison
Officer of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the
United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/861, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/889, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti.
Ms. Viotti: I thank the French presidency for
highlighting the importance of the women and peace
and security agenda. Let me start by expressing
appreciation to the Security Council for its recent efforts
to bring women’s voices into the centre of its work.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Earlier this month, the Council heard the moving
account of Joy Bishara, one of the young women
kidnapped in Chibok by Boko Haram. Such testimony
helps to deepen our understanding of the challenge. It
also underscores the pressing need for more concerted
and tangible action. In that spirit, today I will focus
largely on prevention — a core pillar of the women and
peace and security agenda and a key priority of the
Secretary-General.
The links between prevention and gender equality
are many and clear. Women are affected in distinct
and distinctly negative ways by armed conflict and
violence. Just as gender discrimination is a constant in
peacetime, so it prevails when society collapses into war,
with devastating impact. Women are the overwhelming
majority of victims of rape used as a weapon of war,
as well as of abductions and human trafficking. In
urban warfare, they are at particular risk during house
searches and at checkpoints. The lower women’s status
is in terms of health, wealth and education, the greater
is their exposure to harm. Their underrepresentation
in the justice and security sectors and in the upper
echelons of political power likewise increases their
exposure to harm. In turn, this extreme political
marginalization undermines the potential of women as
actors for conflict prevention — a vital role that the
Security Council has emphasized repeatedly, including
in resolution 2242 (2015) and the twin resolutions on
sustaining peace (Security Council resolution 2286
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262).
When the Council visited the Lake Chad basin earlier
this year, local leaders all raised women’s empowerment
and its relationship with birth rates — which are among
the highest in the world — in their discussions about
root causes and solutions to the current crisis. When
four senior leaders of the United Nations and the
African Union, led by the Deputy Secretary-General,
visited Nigeria together in the first high-level mission
of its kind focused entirely on women and peace and
security, they found that in spite of the presence of
strong networks of women peacebuilders and activists,
the views of women were underrepresented both in the
military and in the humanitarian response. Recently,
the Group of Women Facilitators in Guinea-Bissau — a
network of civil society leaders — came together to
defuse a potentially explosive political impasse and
to open a communications channel between two main
political leaders that had been closed for two years.

S/PV. 8079

Indeed, there are countless women-led prevention
initiatives that are either insufficiently supported or
disconnected from national or regional early-warning
mechanisms or decision-making bodies in general.
The Secretary-General is strongly committed to
promoting gender equality in the work of the United
Nations for peace and security, and to fully integrating
conflict gender analysis into that work. His Executive
Office includes a Senior Adviser in policy at the level
of Under-Secretary-General, with twin mandates on
prevention and gender, who is working to ensure the
linkages between the two. The Secretary-General’s
current visit to the Central African Republic aims not
only to support the operation at this fragile moment,
but also to witness first-hand how the new approach to
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse is translating
into changes on the ground.
The Secretary-General has also put forward a
concrete plan to achieve gender parity across the
United Nations. In this regard, we are farthest behind
in our peace operations in crisis countries, where the
role of women is often needed most. We are working
with troop- and police-contributing countries to
increase the number of female uniformed personnel. It
is simply unacceptable that in 2017 only 3 per cent of
our peacekeepers — the most visible face of the United
Nations — are women.
We are also striving to increase the pool of women
mediators. The recently established High-Level
Advisory Board on Mediation is both high-level and
gender-balanced. The new Office of Counter-Terrorism
is integrating a gender perspective into its efforts to
address this threat and prevent violent extremism, and
proposals for the reform of the Secretariat’s peace and
security architecture must include a strong emphasis
on strengthening the link between political strategies
and gender expertise. Looking ahead, our efforts to
strengthen the United Nations capacity for effective
prevention will also include the following.
First, we will engage more systematically with
women’s organizations on the ground as natural
partners for prevention.
Secondly, we will ensure that our prevention
initiatives and monitoring include a focus on women’s
rights violations, including violence against women
and girls, anti-women rhetoric, increased levels of
militarization, shifts in the political marginalization
of women or women’s groups and strict enforcement

17-349623/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

of traditional gender norms, dress codes, segregation
of the sexes or other steps that may not adhere to
international human rights standards.
Thirdly, we will tackle the structural and root
causes of crisis, including gender inequality.
Fourthly, we will strengthen the collection and
analysis of gender statistics and encourage Member
States to monitor gender-quality indicators as part of
their work to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals. Gender equality and the security of women are
among the most reliable indicators of peace.
Fifthly, 17 years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), our own implementation too often remains ad
hoc. While there is clear recognition of the relationship
between gender equality, women’s participation and
stability and resilience, too little is being done to
operationalize that understanding. Starting next year,
the Secretary-General’s annual report on this issue will
focus more on results and less on our own activities. I
invite all participants to share their evidence, examples
and impacts. Let use this opportunity to examine gaps
and build on successes.
Implementing that vision will depend upon
deepening our partnership with Member States, regional
organizations and civil society. We look forward
to working with participants based on their shared
conviction that women’s meaningful participation
makes our peace efforts stronger and more sustainable.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Ribeiro
Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour to address
the Security Council and to present the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/861) on women and peace and
security. As mentioned by the Chef de Cabinet, the
Secretary-General is currently in the Central African
Republic. It is a pleasure to be accompanied today by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Navamanee Ratna
Patten, who was part of our recent solidarity mission
with the Deputy-Secretary-General to Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Together, we sought
to enhance our joint support for the women and peace
and security agenda in those countries.
The Secretary-General’s report on women and
peace and security celebrates progress and good practice
4/104

27/10/2017

and sets out his vision and recommendations. It also
brings into the spotlight a number of alarming trends
and setbacks. I am pleased to be here in the Chamber
today with a Colombian activist who represents the
many Colombian women who gave peace in their
country a real chance. That is one example of the
progress we have made. The United Nations has lauded
their achievements and is following their lead, helping
to implement a peace agreement with more than 100
provisions on gender equality. For example, the United
Nations Mission in Colombia engages regularly with
women’s organizations and has a record percentage of
women among its military observers — at 11 per cent,
much higher than we have ever seen — with women
representing 48 per cent of civilian staff.
Unfortunately, Colombia is an exception to the
global practice, but one that we can follow. Although
women’s absence from peace tables is no longer easily
brushed off as normal, it is still commonplace. Every
year, we track women’s overall participation in peace
processes led by the United Nations, the the inclusion
of gender expertise and gender-sensitive provisions in
peace agreements, and the requirement to consult with
women’s civil-society organizations. On all of those
indicators, we performed slightly worse than a year ago.
At the Union of Myanmar peace conference in 2016,
before the current crisis, there were seven women and
68 men among the delegates. Recent peace talks on the
Central African Republic hosted by the Community of
Sant’Egidio did not include a single woman. Six years
into the Syrian civil war, and in spite of significant
efforts by the United Nations, partners and the Special
Envoy, women’s participation in the peace talks is still
inadequate and often limited to an advisory role.
That political marginalization extends beyond
peace talks. Only 17 countries have an elected woman
Head of State or Government. That includes only one
post-conflict conflict, namely, Liberia, where the
presidency of Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf just ended after
two terms that included democratic elections and
the peaceful transfer of power. That is something to
celebrate. The proportion of women parliamentarians
in conflict and post-conflict countries has stagnated at
16 per cent in the past two years. The use of quotas and
temporary special measures would help. In Somalia, for
instance, representation jumped to nearly 25 per cent,
as compared with 14 per cent in the previous elections.
In local elections in Mali at the end of last year, women
represented 30 per cent of the elected candidates in
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu, four times higher than the
previous result.
Atrocities against women and girls in armed conflict
have never been more thoroughly documented than they
are now. International and national war crimes courts,
commissions of inquiry, comprehensive mappings of
human rights violations and documentation efforts
led by civil society, expert investigators and reporters
pay much closer attention to sexual and gender-based
violence than ever before. The international community
has more than enough evidence of these crimes in Syria,
South, the Sudan and Central African Republic. In some
of those places we have amassed the most extensive
documentation of sexual and gender-based violence in
history. What we do not have are consequences for the
perpetrators and justice, dignity, and support for the
survivors. That impunity should not continue.
The international community is reaching hundreds
of thousands of survivors with assistance and
programmes, which did not exist one or two decades
ago. But many more cannot be reached owing to lack
of resources, access and security. Many organizations,
including UN-Women, participate in those efforts. I
appreciate the work that has been done by the United
Nations Population Fund with regard to women’s
reproductive health and gender-based violence
survivors in some of those complex emergencies.
The consequences of war on women and girls go
beyond sexual violence. In conflict and in natural
disasters gender inequality compounds the many
obstacles to accessing food, water, sanitation, hygiene,
health care, education, employment, housing and legal
identity. Child marriage in Yemen is estimated to have
increased from 32 to 52 per cent, with a significant
minority of girls being married before they are 15
years old. The percentage of female-headed households
tripled during the current crisis, and those households
have significantly lower incomes and more food
insecurity. The percentage of Yemeni women who are
illiterate was projected to reach two thirds, quickly
erasing the hard-won gains in education and literacy,
which took decades to achieve.
The maternal mortality rate in Nigeria is almost
10 times higher in the conflict-affected northeast than in the south-west. Often, that is the result
of the destruction or closure of medical facilities
due to insecurity. International non-governmental
organizations providing specialized services on

S/PV. 8079

reproductive health and clinical management of rape
recently left the Central African Republic because
they could not protect their aid workers. A maternity
hospital in Hama, Syria, was attacked at least 10 times,
and finally put out of service in April of this year.
Only a few months ago, we celebrated the release of
82 of the Chibok schoolgirls, most of whom are now
young women, after more than three years in captivity.
They are being supported with extensive trauma
counselling, medical care, educational support, child
care, and allowances for personal upkeep and family
visits. UN-Women is glad to be part of that process.
The Council had the opportunity to hear directly from
one of the escapees two weeks ago and everyone in the
room was visibly moved by her testimony. We must do
something to find the girls who are still missing.
At a time when mass abductions, trafficking, forced
recruitment and radicalization are the common tactics
of violent extremist groups, we have much to learn about
the rehabilitationand reintegration of returnees and their
children. The Council has debated peacekeeping reform
multiple times over the past year alone. Peacekeeping
operations are one of our most important tools and the
face of the Organization in many corners of the planet.
We have been calling for more women in peacekeeping
for 17 years. Now, the numbers are still very low. We
have been trying to stamp out sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers for almost as long, and we have
fallen short at every turn. Thankfully, the SecretaryGeneral is taking that issue very seriously, as we can
see by the current developments. This damages our
effectiveness and our reputation, if we are unable to
cross the line.
I welcome all the measures put in place to change
that, which are detailed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security. I encourage
the States Members of the United Nations to consider
using all the tools at their disposal, from conditions
to financial incentives. It is encouraging to see the
reduction in the number of allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the Central African Republic,
recent improvements in victim support and assistance
and that a culture of accountability is taking hold. It is
dispiriting, however, to see gender advisory posts being
lost or downgraded due to cuts in the peacekeeping
budget. Gender should not be cut first whenever budgets
must be managed, and for very good reason.
This is a time when we need more gender expertise
and capacity in our missions and country teams, rather

17-349625/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

than less. For example, both the United Nations and the
Security Council agree on the importance of gender and
conflict analysis. We are committed to collaborating
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and United Nations partners and to ensuring that that
analysis is reflected in mission planning, mandates,
budgets and drawdown. It is equally crucial for our
prevention work, as gender equality is one of our most
reliable indicators of peace.
The Peacebuilding Fund again exceeded the
minimum 15 per cent target in 2016 and allocated
19.2 per cent of funds to gender equality and
women’s empowerment as a principal objective.
That is something to celebrate. I call on all donors to
reward the Peacebuilding Fund’s good track record in
financing and driving innovation in gender-responsive
peacebuilding, and to continue supporting this vital
instrument of United Nations work. The instrument
works well. The 15 per cent standard should be adopted
by donors in their bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
and by multi-partner trust funds in conflict-affected
and fragile settings, such as that proposed for Liberia
upon withdrawal of the mission.
With more resources, the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, the only United Nations fund
dedicated solely to women, peace and security, will be
able to support women’s organizations in many more
places, from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to Iraq to Somalia and to Palestine. Women in those
countries should not be left to their own devices when
we have instruments to support them. Women’s human
rights defenders are under tremendous attack and we
do not have enough to protect and support them. They
need all our support and the support of the Council. The
least we can do is to protect their space to speak out and
raise their voices.
I would like to applaud the Council for regularly
inviting women from civil society organizations to brief
it when discussing specific countries. I call upon all
members to support the new practice — a commitment
the Council adopted in resolution 2242 (2015). I also
applaud other innovations in the Council’s work, such
as the adoption of the first-ever resolution devoted
solely to addressing sexual exploitation and abuse,
and human trafficking and sexual violence and their
intersection with violent extremism, as well as the work
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. But the Council can and should do more to
6/104

27/10/2017

put its full political weight behind the implementation
of the agenda.
In closing, we can build on the progress we have
made. The annual report of the Secretary-General has
many examples of the international community’s will
to find alliances and form coalitions in pursuit of the
protection and empowerment of women. The regional
roster of women mediators has been established. The
African Women Leaders Network is one example of the
ever-stronger cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union on this issue, which has also
been supported by Germany. A total of 68 countries in
our territories have adopted national action plans, and
63 countries are now part of the new women and peace
and security national focal points network. We know
that with more resources we can do more, as we have
seen with the Peacebuilding Support Office.
We have expanded our work on preventing violent
extremism to over 25 projects across several countries
and regions. More than 60 countries, international
and regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations have united through the Call to Action on
Protection from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies.
A total of 122 countries voted to adopt a historic Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and women-led
groups rightly received the Nobel Peace Prize for their
tireless campaign and organization efforts, which is
another major achievement.
There are some encouraging signals for gender
justice in the international courts, despite some of the
challenges we face. Only a few days ago, the Economic
Community of West African States court in Banjul set a
significant precedent by making its first-ever judgment
on the violation of the Maputo Protocol, which is an
important provision for addressing gender equality
in Africa.
The women and peace and security agenda continues
to expand its footprint on global policymaking. It is now
an essential pillar in global affairs but its advocates
and champions are animated by the conviction that
it is only the beginning. I share that conviction. The
chorus of voices that are appalled by the persistent
political marginalization of women in decision-making
is becoming louder. The number of people who are
determined to find solutions to the human suffering
caused by conflict is growing. This agenda unites us
because people from all over the world, every day,
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

look up to the United Nations for peace, equality
and inclusion.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing and commitment.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mina-Rojas.
Ms. Mina-Rojas (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Afro-descendants of Colombia’s ancestral regions, I
bring warm greetings of life, joy, hope and freedom. I am
present at today’s meeting in my capacity as a member of
the human rights team of the Proceso de Comunidades
Negras, the Red de Solidaridad Afro-Colombiana, la
Alianza Negra por la Paz and the Instancia Especial de
Alto Nivel con Pueblos Étnicos. I am also speaking on
behalf of the non-governmental organizations working
group on women, peace and security.
I am an Afro-descendant woman and a peace
and human rights activist. I have spent half of my
life raising awareness about and fighting for the
cultural, territorial and political rights of Afrodescendant women and our communities, and for
our self-determination. It is an honour and a great
responsibility to have been nominated by my colleagues
around the world to represent the women and peace
and security civil society and community at today’s
important debate. As spokesperson for the AfroColombian Peace Council, I was extensively involved
in the historic Havana peace process between the
Colombian Government and the guerrilla group Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), and
I advocated for the rights and expectations of Afrodescendant peoples to be part of the peace accord
that Colombia and the world are celebrating today.
I can speak first-hand to the importance of inclusive
negotiations and implementation processes that support
the participation of women and groups from ethnically
and racially diverse backgrounds, in reflection of the
principles underlying resolution 1325 (2000). Columbia
has become a fresh source of hope because of the
comprehensive peace accord that was reached.
Two provisions were particularly progressive,
though we had to push that door really hard. Those
two provisions could radically change future peace
processes around the world. The first is the explicit
inclusion of a gender perspective as an intersectional
principle, and the second the inclusion of the ethnic
chapter, which provides important safeguards to ensure
respect for the autonomy of indigenous and Afrodescendant peoples and the protection and promotion

S/PV. 8079

of their rights from a gender, family and generational
perspective. The inclusion of these two specific
principles is a historic advancement in the area of peace
and security from which the United Nations and other
countries experiencing violence and armed conflict
could learn. The peace accord was very important for
civil society, women, indigenous and Afro-descendant
peoples and our communities. We continue to expect
that its implementation will include our engagement
and active participation of women.
Colombia, however, risks wasting this opportunity
for peace if it does not completely disarm and if the
communities most impacted during the internal armed
conflict, including women, human rights leaders and
activists, continue to be ignored in the implementation
of the peace accord. I am here today to make visible
their urgent calls and wish to stress that for my people,
this is truly a matter of life and death.
I should like to focus on three urgent priority
areas: the participation of ethnically diverse women;
ensuring the security of human rights defenders, civilsociety activists and indigenous and Afro-descendant
communities; and the inclusive monitoring and
implementation of peace processes.
First is ensuring the ongoing participation of
women, in all areas related to the implementation of the
peace accord, with a focus on diversity. As with women
around the world, women in Colombia, and particularly
Afro-descendant women, have been mobilizing for
decades to make visible the violations of our rights but
also to ensure significant transformations in the way
peace and security is approached.
My dear sister Rita Lopidia, from South Sudan, was
here last year (see S/PV.7793) and gave testimony on
the importance of South Sudanese women participating
in the ongoing peace and security dialogues. In
Afghanistan, the few women on the High Peace
Council must continue fighting to have their voices
heard. In Colombia, there is no representative of Afrodescendant women on the High-level Body on Gender,
the body established to oversee the implementation of
the accord’s gender chapter.
As the parties to the peace accord work with the
international community to demobilize FARC fighters,
paramilitaries and other armed actors have filled the
power vacuum left by FARC forces in many areas
in Colombia. This has created an urgent need for
local women’s organizations and community leaders

17-349627/104

Women and peace and security

S/PV.8079

to be consulted and to participate in the design of
local protection strategies aimed at keeping our
communities safe.
The Security Council and the international
community must support the Colombian Government
in the process of designing and implementing genderresponsive, community-based security and selfprotection systems, in consultation with Afro-descendant
and indigenous communities. The failure to listen
to our security concerns and warnings has had
devastating results.
(spoke in English)
We believe that
vitally important.

to

listen

and

comply

is

(spoke in Spanish)
This brings me to my second point: the need to
guarantee our integral and collective security. Security
involves the safety of our leaders and communities
and respect for and the protection of territories and
territorial rights. The proliferation of weapons is
fuelling increased fear and forced displacement among
largely indigenous and Afro-descendant communities
and negatively impacting women’s participation and
mobility, as well as resulting in increased sexual and
gender-based violence. We are alarmed at the increasing
number of assassinations and threats to human rights
defenders and peace activists across Colombia.
For example, in Tumaco, a municipality near the
border with Ecuador, urban leaders and members of
the Community Council of Alto Mira and Frontera
continue to be targeted by paramilitary groups and
FARC and other dissidents who seek territorial control
in order to grow and sell coca. Just last week, we buried
our brother Jair Cortés, the sixth leader killed in that
municipality, and we had to urgently move out several
women leaders and their families who had received
death threats.
Sexual and gender-based violence and the stigmatization
that comes with it, especially for indigenous and
Afro-descendant women and their children, is also a
matter of integral and collective security. The silence
around these crimes is as appalling as the crimes
themselves. Women activists risk their lives to bring
cases to justice. There is an urgent need to establish
a direct line of communication between indigenous
and Afro-descendant authorities and representatives
of women’s organizations in all mechanisms of the
8/104

27/10/2017

Comprehensive System for Truth, Coexistence,
Reparations and Non-Repetition to ensure that these
cases are prioritized, the perpetrators are brought to
justice and survivors provided with life-saving medical
and psychosocial services.
Finally, it is crucial that the framework plan for the
implementation of the peace accord include specific
goals and indicators designed to measure the progress
and outcomes of policies, programmes and reforms
in a manner corresponding to the needs, values and
rights of indigenous and Afro-descendant peoples.
It is critical that the Colombian Government and its
implementation commission accept and integrate
the ethnic perspectives and indicators, including
specific gender ethnic indicators, developed and
provided to them by indigenous and Afro-descendant
organizations earlier this month. Political will on these
indicators is needed, and they must be included in the
legal framework of the peace accord. They will help
effectively transform the wartime conditions that are
hampering the well-being, social development and
collective security of indigenous and Afro-descendant
women and our communities.
For Afro-descendant women in Colombia and
indigenous women leaders worldwide, ensuring our
collective security also means that the principles of free,
prior and informed consent and consultation; autonomy;
cultural integrity and meaningful participation are
respected, and that our rights, as enshrined in national
and international human rights standards, are fully
promoted and protected.
Peace in Colombia and elsewhere is not simply a
matter of ending war and violence but also of addressing
collectively the root causes of conflict, including
social, gender and racial injustice, and promoting the
well-being of all peoples, of all races and religions. It
is key to support the efforts of local women activists to
demilitarize and disarm all our societies and to stem
the flow of small arms, as set out in the Arms Trade
Treaty and other legal instruments.
It is the responsibility of all actors, including the
Security Council, the United Nations system, regional
and subregional organizations and, importantly,
Member States, to fulfil their obligations. The women
and peace and security agenda, if implemented and
financially resourced, can be a path to peace in my
country and around the world, with gender equality,
women’s empowerment and the protection of women’s
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

rights playing a central role in conflict prevention and
the creation of a sustainable peace.

Ghana and Mali at the Pearson Peacekeeping Centre,
whose closure in 2013 I bitterly deplore.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. MinaRojas for her briefing and her commitment.

How many resolutions, studies, meetings of
independent high-level groups and groups of experts
must there be before we do away with that abyssmal
and unacceptable figure of 9 per cent of women
participating in some 30 major negotiations over the
past 25 years? I ask myself: What are we afraid of?
Being more effective? It has been shown that women’s
participation increases by 20 per cent the probability
of reaching a peace agreement that will last at least
two years, and by 35 per cent the chances of reaching a
peace agreement that will last 15 years.

I now give the floor to Ms. Jean.
Ms. Jean (spoke in French): At the outset, I should
like to commend France for its initiative to convene
today’s high-level open debate. I am particularly
grateful to you, Sir, for inviting me here to reiterate,
for the second time, the crucial importance of the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000), of 31 October 2000, as well as resolutions that
have complemented it year after year.
Seventeen years ago, we agreed to turn obvious
truths into words. Seventeen years ago, we agreed to
recognize the importance of women’s participation,
on an equal footing with men, in the areas of crisis
prevention, mediation and the maintenance and
strengthening of peace and security.
Let us start by recognizing that women did not wait
for the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) to translate
these truths into action. We saw it in Liberia. Ms. Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf was one of those women who stood
up to the warlords and mediated between the warring
parties. We saw it in Bosnia. Within communities,
women are always the first to seek reconciliation and
return. We saw it in Rwanda. Women who had been
physically harmed took the lead in reconciliation and
reconstruction efforts at the local and national levels.
In Mali, as everywhere else, when women get to the
bargaining table, their influence is real and they achieve
noteworthy results.
I am also thinking of the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement of April 2012, which was written by four
women who had initially not been invited to speak.
However, faced with their insistance and the value and
content of their proposals, they ended up being admitted
to the negotiating table — yes, admitted without having
been officially invited.
Those are just a few examples among many that
speak to the real capacity of women and all the forceful
actions they take every day that contribute to peace and
security and that are wrongly overlooked. And that is
without counting the achievements of women engaged
in peacekeeping operations. I remember listening with
the greatest admiration to cohorts of women trained in

We — international organizations, States and
Governments, together with civil society — must commit
ourselves resolutely to identifying and mobilizing
women in a more systematic and coordinated way to
sit at all negotiating tables and lead or take part in
dialogues and national processes. That is also one of
the central recommendations of the Abidjan seminar
on the promotion of women’s participation in peace
processes in Francophone Africa, which we organized
almost a year ago, in partnership with UN-Women and
the Francophone Network for Gender Equality. Our
countries, our networks are full of remarkable women.
Let us mobilize them.
What are we waiting for to put an end to the
derisory and unacceptable figure of 3 per cent of
women participating as military personnel of United
Nations missions? What are we afraid of? Being
more productive? It has been shown that the presence
of women in those sectors contributes to improving
security forces and increasing the credibility of missions,
especially in their dealings with the population. Women
inspire confidence.
The Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
(OIF) holds fast to the commitment, undertaken at the
Francophonie Summit in Dakar of 2014, to investing in
women and young people, who are the vectors of peace
and development actors. Our organization, which has
been involved for more than 15 years in strengthening
the French-speaking contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, is also mobilizing on the
ground in order to encourage the participation of
female staff in missions and to train security forces in
women’s rights.
I will insist in a few days on all of these points
at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial in Vancouver,

17-349629/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

Canada. OIF will once again sensitize its members to
that problem at the meeting that we are organizing in
the framework of the Boutros-Ghali Observatory in
late November in Paris, in partnership with the United
Nations. I do not want to see us forget the rule of law
dimension, because the banalization of excessive State
violence against citizens, the climate of impunity and
the persistence of areas of lawlessness also affect the
women and peace and security agenda.
It is clear that we need to do more. We must do
more for women’s economic and social integration,
because peace, stability and security also depend on
shared and inclusive economic development. That is
the message that I will bring in five days to Bucharest,
where the World Forum of Francophone Women will
be held under the the theme, “Creation, innovation,
entrepreneurship, growth and development: Women
make their mark!”
We also must do more to fund women and peace
and security. What is the point of pleading our case if
the sums granted to fragile States to address issues of
equality between women and men still represent only
6 per cent of the total aid package and only 2 per cent of
aid reserved for peace and security, not to mention the
funding rate for local women’s organizations, including
women’s rights organizations, which could be described
as miniscule?
We must do more to guarantee the full recognition
of all forms of discrimination and crimes against
women, which are crimes against humanity. We must do
more to end impunity. How can one imagine genuinely
recognizing the role of women as vectors of peace while
leaving unpunished those who trample their bodies and
dehumanize them? Year after year, resolution after
resolution, we agree to put into words the horrors that
are inflicted on women by men, even more cruelly and
more systematically in times of hostilities, conflicts
and war. It is primarily women who are targeted when
men decide to annihilate a people or a nation. The
abduction and rape of women, girls and little girls have
become weapons of mass destruction and their bellies
have become battlefields.
I cannot forget the tears of the seven year-old girl,
her mother and all the women tortured by militiamen
in the Goma region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where I visited in 2010. And what is happening
these days? We see massacres in Kasai province and
10/104

27/10/2017

hear stories of mutilated women, some of whom them
pregnant, who are found disemboweled. It is unbearable.
I am thinking about what happened to women in
the neighbouring countries of Rwanda and Burundi. I
am thinking of the thousands of refugee women in the
Niger, on the border with Nigeria, 70 per cent of whom
have fallen prey to Boko Haram and been subject to
the most horrendous attacks. Lest we think that it is
merely a question of Africa, I would say that it is not.
Barbarism and inhumanity know no borders, And when
there are reports of sexual abuse by United Nations
personnel, the facts are equally damning. The men in
this Chamber today are commended for not looking the
other way and for resolutely supporting us.
Today’s meeting provides us with an opportunity
to affirm a real desire to act together, to continue to
act and to do more. Let us take up the challenge of
ever-increasing consultation and synergy of efforts.
This is what we decided, the four women leading,
respectively, OIF, the Ibero-American General
Secretariat, the Commonwealth and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, which comprise 167
States and Governments, or 61 per cent of the world’s
population. This strategic alliance also exists to serve
the women and peace and security agenda, because
nothing without women is or ever will be possible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Jean
for her briefing and for her commitment.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Vice-Prime Minister for European and
Euro-Atlantic Integration of Ukraine.
Ms. Klympush-Tsintsadze (Ukraine): First of
all, I would like to thank the delegation of France for
scheduling this traditional Security Council debate
on the issue of women and peace and security. I
would also like to express my gratitude to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his clear commitment
to the women and peace and security agenda, and to
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing and for her tireless
efforts to ensure that this agenda is kept in focus for the
whole world.
Earlier this year, both the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director paid visits to my country.
My delegation greatly appreciates their tireless
commitment to women’s rights and empowerment, and
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

we pay tribute to their continued efforts and support for
Ukraine in its pursuit of peace and security. I am glad
to report that two important initiatives were launched
in Ukraine during these visits: “The Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women in Action” and “Gender Equality at the Centre of
the Reforms”. These two initiatives were made possible
by the financial contributions of the Governments of
Canada and Sweden, which we highly appreciate.
War and conflicts are devastating communities
across the world today. In recent years, we have also
seen widespread targeting of women and girls in
conflict zones. Since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the women and peace and security agenda
unfortunately remains relevant and critical in the face
of rising violence, extremism and deadly conflicts.
Seven Security Council resolutions have been adopted,
recognizing and outlining that conflict affects women
and men differently and that women have critical roles
to play in peace and security processes and institutions.
Ukraine strongly believes that the Security
Council should continuously reinforce the importance
of implementing existing women and peace and
security resolutions and overcoming the gaps identified
in the 2015 global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as in the policy brief
entitled “Mapping women, peace and security in
the Security Council: 2016”. Admittedly, in 2017 the
Council has improved inclusion of women, peace and
security provisions on all relevant agenda items. In
this context, we reiterate our support for the Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security, which
has promoted gender mainstreaming in the work of the
Security Council.
Law enforcement, security forces and peacekeeping
missions mandated to protect civilians must do a better
job of seeking out and listening to the needs of women
and giving priority to their participation and protection.
The international community must pay sufficient
attention to providing and delivering the necessary
protection for women in conflict-affected areas, in
parallel with ensuring meaningful participation by
women, so as to ensure complementarity between
both pillars. The deployment of senior gender advisers
and senior women’s protection advisers is therefore
critical so as to ensure that missions have sufficient
gender expertise, authority and capacity to address
those objectives.

S/PV. 8079

A growing body of evidence had shown that
perhaps the greatest but most under-used tool for
building peace is the meaningful inclusion of women.
That is one of the highlights of the global study’s
findings. The participation of women at the peace
table improves the negotiation process, contributes to
a more comprehensive peace agreement and bolsters
the prospect of sustainable peace. It gives an important
window of opportunity for setting an agenda for
sustainable peace that includes the needs of an oftexcluded half of the population.
While examples of women’s involvement in
community-based
peacebuilding
abound,
their
participation in peace processes continues to be limited.
This is a problem not only for the 1325 (2000) agenda
and its advocates but also for peacemakers and all
those who seek peace. That is why the topic of today’s
discussion put forward by the delegation of France is of
great importance.
Ukraine recognizes the importance of equal and
full participation of women in all activities for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. I am proud to say that in the past
two years, during which Ukraine has been a member of
the Security Council, resolution 1325 (2000) has been
our great and long-standing daily priority. I would like
to take this opportunity to share some improvements
that my country has made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), specifically with regard to its
pillars on participation and protection, as well as to
highlight the challenges that remain, unfortunately, to
be addressed.
In 2016, the Government of Ukraine adopted its
national action plan for implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) for 2016-2020. Through implementation of
the plan we have been working to bring about greater
participation of women in decision-making in the areas
of national security and defence and peacemaking,
and to ensure the protection of women and girls and
prevention and response to gender-based violence.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is also
a constant feature of our annual national cooperation
programmes with NATO. Experience and best practices
of NATO countries are examined and included so as
to promote enhanced gender culture in the national
security sector in Ukraine. Moreover, this year our
Government has taken the decision to bring gender
equality to the highest levels of the Cabinet of Ministers
of the country. Indeed, it was given the highest priority

17-3496211/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

when a Government Commissioner post on gender
equality was established.
The Government has also developed the State
target programme on recovery and peacebuilding in
eastern regions of Ukraine, which integrates a gender
perspective in all of its pillars. Our Government
integrates women, peace and security in ongoing
security and defence reform. With the support of UNWomen, we have just accomplished a comprehensive
gender-impact assessment of the security sector
and will soon adopt a multi-year gender-equality
strategy for security and defence. These efforts aim
to comprehensively integrate gender-equality and
women’s rights perspectives in all areas of security and
defence reform.
Over the past two years, Ukraine has achieved
progress in improving its recruitment policies, which
resulted in a steady increase of the number of women
working in the security and defence sector. Yes, the
numbers are still not ideal. However, women already
make up 10.6 per cent of the armed forces of Ukraine,
6.2 per cent of the national guard, 17.3 per cent of the
national police and 24 per cent of the State border
guard service. Currently, more than 10,000 women
serve in official combat positions in Ukraine. The
numbers continue to grow as a result of Government
action to repeal discriminatory legal provisions, which
previously impeded female military service.
While still a minority, Ukrainian women do play
a prominent role in the peacebuilding process. The
President of Ukraine has appointed a woman to a
position in charge of the process of peaceful settlement
in the Donbas region. There are also two women in
Minsk working groups dealing with humanitarian and
political issues. Building peace in my country requires
women’s participation and influence, including in the
Minsk processes. It also requires action to stop the
attacks against women and make sure that women will
not be attacked with impunity. We will continue to work
towards the development of a full range of judicial and
non-judicial measures and institutional reform, in line
with international standards.
As long as foreign aggression continues, peace and
security will unfortunately remain a far-fetched and
almost unattainable notion for the majority of women
in the territory of Ukraine. Women will continue to
lack protection, live in fear, have almost no recourse
to justice, remain economically disadvantaged and live
12/104

27/10/2017

with limited freedom. The situation in Ukraine and
the suffering as a result of Russian aggression show
the importance of striking a balance between the two
main pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda: protection and participation. We believe that
the Security Council must prioritize those two pillars.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine and its
temporary occupation of part of Ukrainian territory
has resulted in widespread human rights violations,
including sexual and gender-based violence. According
to the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, since the beginning of the
aggression 32,252 conflict-related casualties have been
recorded, including 2,505 civilians killed. A direct
consequence of the Russian aggression against Ukraine
has been the displacement of individuals and families,
with 1.7 million internally displaced persons registered
countrywide. Of those, older persons make up 78 per
cent, women 58 per cent and children 8 per cent.
Regrettably, impunity for the human rights
violations and abuses committed in the context of the
Russian aggression against Ukraine, not least with
regard to sexual violence, prevails. That is partly due
to the fact that the conflict is ongoing and that a part of
Ukraine’s territory remains under the control of illegal
armed groups, which are supported and managed by
the Russian Federation. While there is still much to
do, Ukraine has managed to make significant progress
towards the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
I would like to finish my statement with a quote
from the French philosopher and Nobel Prize winner
Albert Camus: “Peace is the only battle worth waging”.
I am confident that it is our primary task to protect and
secure our fragile world in its entirety. I thank you,
Mr. President, for your able leadership of today’s debate.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I have come here directly
from a visit to Herat and Kabul, in Afghanistan. I met
with women and girls in the midst of conflict, who are
struggling to make ends meet and keep their families
safe. They face a constant risk of sexual violence. While
talking to those women, I wondered what the women
and peace and security agenda is doing for them.
Well, it should ensure that the women I met — for
instance, those who work in the security sector — have
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

more female colleagues and can work without the
threat of harassment. It should ensure that the female
mediators that Sweden has provided training for can
have a real role and work free from the shadow of
death threats. It should also have ensured that the girl I
met — who is 18 years old, was married away at 13 and
already has five children — could have perhaps had 10
more years to grow as a person, get an education and
realize her dreams in life.
The oppression of women is a global disease. We
see how women all over the world are systematically
underrepresented in decision-making, receive fewer
resources and lack fundamental rights in a number
of areas. Sexual violence as a weapon of war is a
horrendous manifestation of the oppression of women.
I got to see that up close when, as some members of the
Council might recall, I was appointed the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict some years ago. I often say that
it was a role that left me with a heavier heart, but also
with higher hope for the future, thanks to all the women
I met who did not want to be seen as victims alone, but
as actors, citizens and humans with full rights.
What I have come to realize was that we make three
mistakes when we look at this issue. We tend to view it
as inevitable, unspeakable and as a lesser crime. I had
that job back in 2010 and 2011, when resolution 1325
(2000) celebrated its 10-year anniversary. Today, that
resolution and seven more have existed for 17 years,
and we are unfortunately still far from eradicating
this horrendous practice. It saddens me, but it also
strengthens my resolve.
In order to achieve real results for the women
and peace and security agenda, we need to work
systematically, as we have already heard. In that regard
I thank all the briefers. We need to have a gender
perspective to all aspects of peacebuilding. Therefore,
let me point to three important aspects.
My first point, and this is also what everyone in
this Chamber can help in, concerns data and analysis,
because we can do much more about the situation on
the ground if we have and use disaggregated data on
women and men. As an example, that could concern
statistics on education, internally displaced people or
the number of women and men employed in the police
force. Once we have the data, we need to look at it
carefully before drawing conclusions. Reporting should
have an integrated gender perspective that feeds into the

S/PV. 8079

Secretary-General’s recommendations and conclusions.
Women’s civil society organizations — which are often
at the front line — give valuable input. Sweden stands
ready to work with the United Nations to enhance data
collection and the analysis of gender-disaggregated data.
My second point concerns expertise. Many reports
have highlighted how gender experts contribute to
the overall success of United Nations missions. I am
worried that budget cuts and mainstreamed mandates
could result in cuts in essential gender expertise in
United Nations missions. That would mean that we
risk leaving out half of the population in our critical
work on the protection of civilians or strengthening the
rule of law. We must all do better to train and provide
women to United Nations peace missions.
Thirdly, women’s organizations and networks
receive a disproportionately small amount of
development funding. We have heard that already,
thanks to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka. That must change.
Whether in the public, private or non-governmental
organization spheres, there are networks of active
women who are actors for peace and security. We
should support women’s organizations and networks
and enable them to participate fully at the local, national
and international levels.
When Sweden joined the Security Council, we set
out two overarching priorities: conflict prevention, and
women and peace and security. In all our work in the
Council, we have sought to operationalize the agenda
on women and peace and security. I am sure the Council
has heard our excellent Ambassador, Olof Skoog, ask
time after time where the women are, or whether we
can put more language on women’s participation into
mandates, and so on. We do that, for instance, through
ensuring the inclusion of gender reporting in mission
mandates and adding criteria for listing sexual and
gender-based violence in sanctions regimes. We will
continue that work with commitment, not just on a day
like this but on every other day as well.
It gives me hope that the new United Nations
leadership places gender at the centre of its diplomacy
for peace. It also gives me hope to read the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/861), which points out that
meaningful participation by women has a demonstrable
impact on the sustainability and effectiveness of peace
processes, economic development and social prosperity.
There is momentum for women’s participation in peace
processes. We should seize that momentum and place

17-3496213/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

women’s full enjoyment of their rights at the core of
international peace and security. This is not a women’s
issue. It is an issue of peace and security, essential to a
successful response to the many crises on the Council’s
agenda. The frameworks and tools are all in place. It is
up to us to make it happen.
We know what is needed: political space, active
civil-society organizations, constant capacity-building.
And we have examples. For instance, in Afghanistan,
where the restructured High Peace Council has 13 female
and 39 male members, Sweden has supported local
female leaders in building their capacity to participate
in mediation and dialogue processes. In Somalia, the
political will shown by the National Leadership Forum
ensured a quota for women in Parliament, despite
resistance to their participation. In Colombia, as we
have heard, women’s organizations paved the way for
their inclusion in the peace process.
True change can be achieved only with strong and
courageous political leadership. Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed set an example through the
joint United Nations-African Union high-level mission
to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which focused on women and peace and security and
development. We should build on that good example
and use that methodology in future country visits.
Gender equality makes societies more peaceful. Or,
as I like to put it, more women, more peace. We, the
Security Council, must show leadership, not only today
but across the country-specific files and in all aspects
of our work.
Let us remember Dag Hammarskjöld’s words: “No
peace which is not peace for all, no rest until all has
been fulfilled.”
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all our briefers and visiting Ministers for their
remarks. I am particularly grateful that we have had
the opportunity to hear a voice from civil society in
this Chamber today, something that is even more vital
at a time when so many such voices are being ignored,
threatened or silenced around the world. That is great,
and it is also great that so many people are attending the
debate here today, but in the spirit of trying to improve
still further how we do things here, I would like to
make a few points frankly.
We meet in this format once a year and repeat
what we already know — that we need more women at
the negotiating table, that peace deals stand a greater
14/104

27/10/2017

chance of succeeding with women taking part, that we
must turn our words into action. And yet, year after
year, session after session, Secretary-General’s report
after report, the actual implementation of this agenda
still falls way too short. We have had resolution after
resolution — eight of them since resolution 1325
(2000) — and yet the promise of that first historic text
still remains unfulfilled.
So I encourage everyone speaking later today to be
specific about what his or her country has been doing
since we last met in this format to make the women
and peace and security agenda a reality — and then,
ideally, to commit to doing even more. This year, the
United Kingdom has worked to increase women’s
participation in conflict resolution in some of the most
fragile countries in the world: Somalia, Syria, Yemen
and Afghanistan. We have helped women in parliament,
civil society, the military and business to increase their
voice, influence and participation, and we will keep
doing so next year.
But we also know that the agenda on women and
peace and security is about more than work in individual
countries. So many of the dangers that women face
in conflict are shared ones that are found in every
conflict, such as sexual violence and the stigmatization
of survivors of such horrific crimes. And since they are
shared challenges, we must all share in the response
if we are to affect international change. That is why
the United Kingdom has championed the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict; why we launched the global
principles on stigma in the General Assembly this year;
why we are running 23 projects in conflict and postconflict countries to support survivors, end stigma and
deliver justice; and why we have contributed $2 million
to the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund. I urge
others to contribute, too.
Turning to peacekeeping, this year United Kingdom
troops on large-scale overseas missions, whether for
the United Nations or anyone else, are now receiving
predeployment training on preventing sexual violence
and on the women and peace and security agenda more
broadly. Alongside our Bangladeshi and Canadian
partners, we will be launching a new global network
of military gender champions at the 2017 United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference
in Vancouver next month. We strongly support the
Secretary-General’s commitment to gender parity
and his efforts to increase the number of women in
peacekeeping. However, the women and peace and
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

security agenda is about far more than numbers. We are
concerned, frankly, about the fact that the Secretariat
is deprioritizing gender advisers in United Nations
missions, and we urge the United Nations to reinstate
accountability through its compacts with United
Nations leaders.
In the United Kingdom this year, Baroness Hale
became the first woman ever to head our Supreme
Court, which makes it the first time in our history
that we have had women as our Head of State, Head of
Government, and head of the most senior court in the
land. This year we also appointed our first ever special
envoy for gender equality, putting that issue at the heart
of our foreign policy. But despite such historic steps,
we have more to do. That is why next year we will be
launching the United Kingdom’s fourth national action
plan, building on progress made, lessons learned and
our discussions with civil society and focus countries.
My final point is that there is more that all of us
around this table can do — both internally, in the
missions and ministries that we lead, and externally,
in the Security Council and around the United Nations.
Internally, I commend to the Council the gender compact
for the United Kingdom Mission that I launched this
year. I encourage all to read it, steal its good ideas and
apply them in their own missions. And outside our
missions, we must practice every day what we preach
in the Security Council. It is easy to talk about women
and peace and security when that is the subject on our
agenda, as it is today, but the challenge is to talk about
it when our agenda is Syria or Somalia or South Sudan.
We can all do better on that, and I encourage everyone
to come together to do so.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
the French presidency of the Council for convening
today’s open debate on the issue of women and peace
and security. We also wish to thank the Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti; the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Secretary-General
of the International Organization of La Francophonie,
Ms. Michaëlle Jean; and the civil society representative
from Colombia, Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas. For Bolivia,
it is encouraging that the Chamber is full of civil
society representatives.
We would also like to welcome the Ministers here
with us in this meeting, in particular the Minister for

S/PV. 8079

Foreign Affairs of Sweden, and to tell her that the
words of Ambassador Olof Skoog resonate beyond this
Chamber. During the Council’s recent to visit to the
Sahel region, we heard inspiring words from women
leaders, who reminded us that part of their platform and
one of their tools in their fight are the resolutions that
the Council adopts, with the language we debate within
these walls.
Eighteen years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
underscores the fundamental link between respect for
gender equality and international peace and security.
Since then, the United Nations has undertaken
significant efforts and has made great strides in the
implementation of the Council’s resolutions with a view
to effectively incorporating the gender perspective and
ensuring the participation of women in peace processes.
However, in spite of those efforts, the implementation
of the agenda on women and peace and security
continues to pose challenges that require political
will and leadership from States, in addition to the
active participation of regional organizations and the
cooperation of the international community as a whole.
First, it is important to have information on the
situation of women and girls in all conflict zones.
While there are generalities, each country has its
own reality and different challenges to tackle. That is
why we must have data disaggregated by gender and
other relevant criteria that allow us to systematize
information and improve upon our assessments of
strengths and weaknesses. That would make a better
approach possible, so that the mandates of United
Nations missions could address the needs of women
and girls. In that regard, we welcome the initiative of
Norway, Colombia and Namibia to develop an index on
women and peace and security.
In that vein, taking stock of the implementation of
the agenda in each country will make it possible to see
in which areas we need to strengthen the participation
of women. We must build capacities for monitoring and
assessment in order to ensure the implementation of
the agenda, with the guidance of the United Nations
and other specialized organizations, at the request of
the parties.
As we stated a few months ago in this Chamber,
we must secure a meaningful role for women in the
processes of prevention, negotiation, mediation and
resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. The creation

17-3496215/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

of societies that promote gender equality not only
bolsters economic development, but also ensures that
peace processes are inclusive and sustainable. To that
end, we believe that encouraging the political and
economic empowerment of women is key, in addition
to ensuring access to justice and education. Moreover,
we cannot deny that the fight against impunity through
accountability for crimes of sexual violence contributes
to the healing processes necessary for sustainable peace.

place gender equality and women’s empowerment
among their primary goals.

Like our colleague from the United Kingdom, I will
try to address a few specific issues, related to Bolivia’s
experience. Since the promulgation of the new political
State Constitution in 2009, Bolivia has developed
and implemented legislation for building an equitable
society with equal opportunities for women, while
placing emphasis on their political empowerment. The
electoral system law established parity and alternation
on the candidate lists for representative seats, which
makes Bolivia the second country in the world with
greater representation of women in parliament. In
Bolivia more than 50 per cent of elected positions are
held by women, not just in Parliament but in other
elected bodies. Furthermore, in the economic sphere,
the community-renewal agrarian reform law not only
ensures the participation of women in the healing
processes and distribution of land; it prioritizes the
right of women to own land, thereby promoting their
economic empowerment.

Lastly, we commend the work of the United
Nations and leadership of the Secretary-General. The
Organization has a sizeable system directed at the
global objectives of gender equality and implementation
of the agenda on women and peace and security. It is
essential that all of its agencies and offices dedicated to
this issue work in a coordinated fashion.

Those topics are closely related to inequality. Ten
years ago, when we spoke of women, especially of
indigenous women, we were speaking of poverty. That
issue is linked to inequality, not just within countries
but around the world. I believe it is worthwhile to recall
that eight men have the same wealth as 360 million
people, and that is one of the causes of conflict. In my
country, 10 years ago 38 per cent of the population was
living in abject poverty. Ten years later, that 38 per
cent has been reduced to 16 per cent. What is the key
to that success? It is, without a doubt, the recovery of
strategic resources and the State’s fulfilment of its role
in wealth redistribution.
The United Nations must maintain a close
relationship with regional organizations to implement
this agenda. For example, working with the African
Union has been very important in being able to
implement the programme on women and peace and
security in the African continent and to strengthen
existing mechanisms. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063
16/104

An example that we would like to highlight is the
political leadership that Nigeria showed by establishing
a national plan of action on women and peace and security
in its fight against the terrorist group Boko Haram. We
emphasize that that initiative has encouraged countries
in the region to develop similar measures.

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation welcomes the convening of this open debate
on the topic of women and peace and security, 17 years
after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which
marked the first milestone of truly taking into account
the issue of women in peace efforts. It is a topic that
the Security Council has elevated to the front ranks
of priority so as to better fulfil its primary mission of
conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance with
Charter of the United Nations.
The acuteness and multidimensional scope of
the issue are clear in the statements that we have just
heard. On that note, I would like to thank the briefers:
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General; Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Michaëlle Jean,
Secretary General of the International Organization
of La Francophonie; and Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas, civil
society representative.
This is a good opportunity for my delegation to
reiterate that Senegal, like the other African countries
and organizations, remains firmly convinced that, for
the maintenance of international peace and security to
be effective and lasting, we cannot overlook the role
and invaluable contribution of women, who are the
main victims of all kinds of violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence. The simple, mathematical
reality should compel us to ensure that the majority of
the world’s population, comprised of women, is more
included and empowered so as to stabilize the world
and bring about lasting prosperity.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

From the fourthWorld Conference on Women
in Beijing to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, there is unanimous
agreement that countries and human communities
are more peaceful and prosperous when women enjoy
the same rights and opportunities as men. Persistent
insecurity and inequality in the social, political,
economic and even environmental spheres negatively
affect women, and thus hinder gender equality and
women’s empowerment. Women’s specific experiences
and lives in times of conflict and in times of peace,
nor their skills, are still not sufficiently taken into
account in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
reconciliation, reconstruction and peacebuilding.
I hope that today’s debate will contribute to other
stages in the effective integration of women’s rights
and gender equality in public policy and in the minds
of all individuals of every social status and every
cultural affiliation. It is in that respect that I welcome
the 2017 report of the Secretary General (S/2017/861),
whose recommendations call for greater commitment,
particularly in the five key areas — women’s effective
participation in peace efforts, the protection of women’s
fundamental rights during and after conflicts, planning
with accountability for results, strengthening gender
architecture, and the funding of priority programmes
based on the women and peace and security agenda.
Nevertheless, the balance sheet is still mixed,
despite the considerable progress made here and there,
as there are still significant challenges in many areas,
including participation in mediation and the deployment
of women in Blue Helmets.
Fortunately, the establishment of structures such
as the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, the Women and Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network, the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund in order to bolster active regional
and national mechanisms, lends renewed hope to the
idea that the international community could achieve
gender equality in its efforts to build lasting peace in
the world.
Africa is the impetus behind resolution 1325
(2000), which was a resolution of Namibia. The
continent is prey to several conflicts, but it participates
in the implementation of this agenda through several
operational mechanisms and legal instruments
conducive to policies that could lead to the effective
contribution of women in the maintenance of peace

S/PV. 8079

and security. Those include the Maputo Protocol to
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa; the 2004 Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa; the African
Decade for Women, initiated by the Women, Gender and
Development Directorate of the African Union; and the
appointment by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission of a Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security — all of which led to the creation of the African
Women Leaders Network. I take this opportunity to
reiterate the full support of the Government of Senegal
and to pay tribute to those brave women who, through
their actions, are contributing significantly to the
development of public policies, including those related
to the quest for peace.
At the subregional level, Senegal, alongside the
other member countries of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), has adopted the
Dakar Declaration on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). It has thereby committed decisively
to strengthening the role of women, especially in
mediation, the promotion of a culture of peace and
the facilitation of early warning systems. As a result,
a number of initiatives have been taken, such as the
establishment of a gender unit within the executive
secretariat of ECOWAS, the establishment of a gender
development centre, the adoption of a strategic gender
plan and the drafting of a gender policy.
At the national level, Senegal has integrated all
international, regional and subregional instruments into
its legal arsenal and internal institutional architecture,
in that ensuring the right conditions for the full
implementation of the international commitments it has
undertaken regarding the rights of women and girls. In
that spirit, the Government of Senegal has adopted and
implemented a sectoral gender strategy, including the
institutionalization of gender in Senegalese defence and
security force interventions. As a result, 113 Senegalese
women are currently deployed in peacekeeping
missions. Senegal’s resolute commitment is a natural
extension of its gender policy, which has already led
to the adoption of a law on full gender parity in all
elected and partially elected posts at both the national
and local levels.
Like the Government, Senegalese civil society
organizations remain very active in advocating for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by building
the capacities of women and girls in the field of peace
and security.

17-3496217/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

As successful and proactive as those strategies,
policies and measures of integration and empowerment
of women have been, many challenges still remain.
Therefore, we must strengthen cooperation among States
if we are to effectively implement national action plans
developed to ensure the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In that connection, I would like to draw
attention to the specifics of the Sahelo-Saharan region,
where we see alarming trends in violent extremism and
terrorism and transnational organized crime, along
with concomitant trafficking — the primary victims of
which are women and children.
We must promote synergistic action among the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
including the various entities on the ground. For
example, the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, created by Council resolution 2242
(2015), and the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security
Council on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa would benefit from improved coordination in
order to identify and share lessons learned and best
practices in the integration of the women and peace and
security agenda into conflict prevention policies.
I would like to conclude by endorsing the statement
of Secretary-General António Guterres regarding the
participation of women in peace processes,
“[a]t this time, the setting up of inclusive processes,
with effective participation of women,should be the
rule, no longer the exception.”
What better way to help women and girls around the
world — by restoring the dignity that has been stripped
from them.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
thank the French presidency for having organized this
important debate. I would also like to extend heartfelt
thanks to all of our briefers for their important,
exhaustive and passionate contributions.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women and peace and security agenda has become
an essential pillar and a necessary tool in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
humanitarian action. The statements delivered today
clearly attest to the fact that the women and peace
and security discourse — namely, the announcement
of women’s participation in leadership in peace and
security processes — is also proving to be an important
18/104

27/10/2017

entry point for fostering dialogue with countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
The 2015 global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) recognized that the meaningful
participation of women is crucial to the operational
effectiveness, success and sustainability of peace and
security processes. The evidence of that is increasingly
solid and undeniable, as shown by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report on women and peace and
security (S/2017/861). Nonetheless, the perspective
and voices of women, including at the grassroots level,
often go unheard, since they are still rarely included
in peace negotiations. The exclusion of women from
those processes directly and negatively impacts the
sustainability of peace agreements, as well as the
quality of democracy, the development of inclusive
societies and respect for human rights.
And still, in many countries around the world,
women continue to be sexually exploited, trafficked,
subjected to female genital mutilation and forced
marriages. We warmly welcome the gender parity
strategy recently launched by the Secretary-General,
as we believe that the United Nations has to lead by
example and be a standard-setting Organization.
Unfortunately, according to some studies, at the current
rate, it will take around 170 years to achieve gender
parity worldwide. This is why we welcome your call,
Mr. President, to Member States at this year’s open
debate to present concrete actions and share best
practices aimed at closing implementation gaps and
accelerating progress. We encourage the adoption of
this as a common practice at future open debates.
In our view, the implementation of the whole women
and peace and security agenda is closely linked to the
strengthening of women’s meaningful participation in
the life of their communities, in particular throughout
the peace process cycle. Let me provide some
concrete examples.
First, in line with the Secretary-General’s
commitment to women’s leadership and gender
equality as a vital element of his prevention agenda,
I am very proud to announce that the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network was launched yesterday in
Rome. The aim of the Network is twofold: prevention
and mediation, on the one hand, and capacity-building
on the other.
In the Mediterranean region issues of migration
combine with human trafficking, transnational
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

organized crime, increasing violent extremism,
refugees and humanitarian emergencies. In such a
context, women can help countries prevent conflicts
and strengthen national reconciliation processes by
ensuring a gendered and inclusive perspective on issues
of security, justice and governance, which are often the
root causes of violent conflicts. The Network is also a
concrete way for women to acquire and develop further
capacity and expertise to successfully contribute to
mediation efforts as official United Nations mediators
or mediation experts.
The launch was possible thanks to the fact that,
for the first time, our national action plan on women,
peace and security was granted a financial contribution
enhanced by the Italian Parliament. We encourage
all Member States to properly finance their national
action plans, since the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda demands change,
and no real change is possible without the necessary
financial resources.
Secondly, Italy believes that women’s empowerment,
gender equality and the protection of women’s
rights are intrinsic to sustainable development and
conflict prevention. Therefore, to step up efforts
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, in 2017 my country has committed
approximately $10 million to supporting a number of
projects led by UN-Women in Africa, the Middle East
and Central America in the areas of both women’s
empowerment and engagement in peace and security
processes. That reflects our belief that the efforts to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are
mutually reinforcing.
Thirdly, and finally, we encourage the United
Nations to use in a more consistent way the women and
peace and security discourse with countries in conflict
and post-conflict situations. In that regard, we welcome
the joint high-level mission conducted by the United
Nations with the African Union last July in Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which had
a strong women and peace and security angle focused
on women’s meaningful participation in peace, security
and development. We encourage the United Nations
to continue along this path and to organize similar
missions in other countries by working in synergy with
regional and subregional organizations and initiatives,
such as women mediators’ networks.

S/PV. 8079

I want to stress that when we talk about women’s
participation it is not only a question of numbers, it is
a question of ensuring their meaningful participation
in conflict prevention, mediation and preventive
diplomacy processes. The meaningful participation of
women is indisputably an accelerator for peace that will
lead to higher peace dividends in dispute settlements.
And if we really do care about peace, making full use
of their potential is a smart thing to do.
Allow me to conclude by recalling three pivotal
moments that we experienced this year in the Security
Council. One was the Arria Formula meeting we
organized two weeks ago, co-hosted with France,
Sweden and Uruguay, on school attacks. We also recall
the incredible participation of Joy Bishara in that
event and the message of pride and bravery that she
conveyed to all of us. I also want to recall the Council’s
two missions in Africa, one in the Lake Chad basin
and the other, as was remembered by the Ambassador
of Bolivia, some weeks ago in the Sahel region. The
meeting that we had with the female members of
parliament and representatives of civil society and
in the refugee camps was by far the most important
meeting that we had in that mission.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for having
briefed us on the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda (S/2017/861). I also thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka;
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
La Francophonie, Ms. Michaëlle Jean; and our terrific
civil society briefer from Colombia, Ms. Charo MinaRojas, for their important perspectives.
Bhimrao Ambedkar, the esteemed Indian jurist and
social activis,t once said,
“I measure the progress of a community by the
degree of progress which women have achieved.”
So as we engage in this debate today, I think we
should keep Mr. Ambedkar’s simple but important idea
in mind.
The role of women in maintaining international
peace and security is more critical than ever, but we
must continue to move from rhetoric to reality when it
comes to fully implementing the women and peace and
security agenda. Today’s debate should remind us all
of the collective work that is still required to see more

17-3496219/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

women gain positions of leadership in Government and
civil society and seats at the negotiating table. As the
Secretary-General’s report makes clear, we have so
much more to do to achieve inclusivity.
For our part, the United States remains committed
to advancing the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Earlier this month the United States took a
major legislative step to advance the women and peace
and security agenda. On 6 October, the United States
Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017 was signed
into law. That reflects a growing body of evidence
confirming that the inclusion of women in peace
processes helps reduce conflict and advance stability
over the long term. That Act, for example, requires my
Government to develop a comprehensive strategy to
expand women’s participation in security operations.
It also reflects the now indisputable fact that when
women are involved in efforts to bring about peace and
security, the results are more sustainable.
We are taking other important steps to advance
this agenda, particularly through women’s economic
empowerment. We know that women’s full participation
in the economy not only leads to national growth and
prosperity, it also bolsters stability for all. That is why
the United States has helped spearhead the Women
Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative, which already has
$340 million in donor commitments and will support
women entrepreneurs in developing countries by
increasing their access to finance, markets, technology
and networks — everything they need to start and grow
a business.
I would like to turn now to the Secretary-General’s
report. First, we were disheartened to learn that the
number of women participating in United Nations
co-led peace processes has decreased. Research shows
that the participation in a peace negotiation by women
in civil society groups makes the resulting agreement
64 per cent less likely to fail and 35 per cent more likely
to endure at least 15 years. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to addressing this, but I must
underscore that we all need to do more to improve
women’s meaningful participation in peace processes.
In that connection, we welcome the development of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, and
we hope it will find effective ways to achieve equal
representation of women in mediation.
We cannot talk about the involvement of women in
peace processes without applauding one recent example:
20/104

27/10/2017

Colombia. In large part because of the inclusion of
women in Colombia’s peace negotiations — women
like Ms. Mina-Rojas — Colombia’s peace agreement
includes more than 100 gender-specific provisions.
Therefore, when women effectively influence a
peace process, it is more likely that an agreement
will be reached, implemented and sustained, and we
are confident that Colombia will continue to be an
important example of that.
Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment to improving impact evaluation of genderinclusion efforts. Whether on corporate boards, in
Government or in post-conflict zones, we know that
gender parity makes teams more effective and makes
women more empowered. We look forward to results
being included in next year’s annual report.
Thirdly, we welcome increased attention on the
nexus between violent extremism and women and
peace and security. In our view, women continue to be
an underutilized and undertapped resource in the fight
against violent extremism. Women are of course local
peacebuilders and grass-roots civil society activists.
They are in touch with their communities and should
therefore be seen also as a first line of defence in
detecting radicalization in their communities. My
country is dedicating increased focus and resources to
understanding the variety of roles that women play in
this space, including how women can play more vital
roles in preventing terrorist ideologies from taking root.
We are grateful that there are women defying
terrorist ideologies across the globe, often putting their
own lives at risk in doing so. For example, when the
Taliban attacked Kunduz in 2015 and again in 2016,
each time they tried to kill Ms. Sediqa Sherzai, a brave
journalist who runs Radio Roshani in Afghanistan.
Ms. Sherzai leads discussion programmes and callin shows, and she urges women to assert their rights
to an education and to lead as vital voices in their
communities. Courageous women activists like
Ms. Sherzai are making a difference, and thanks to the
women and peace and security agenda at the United
Nations, we are hopeful that those gains will continue.
The United States remains fully committed to the
robust implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
strong commitment to this issue, and we look forward
to continuing to partner with the United Nations and
other Member State to advance those goals.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
valuable briefing, and I also thank the other briefers.
Over the past two decades, the experience of the
Security Council has demonstrated that women’s
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding
maximizes the benefits of achieving and sustaining
peace, as well as preventing relapses into conflict.
The recommendations of the 2015 Global Study on
the Implementation of Security Council Resolution
1325 are of the utmost importance. However, they
remain a dead letter and have not been implemented.
In the context of the follow-up of implementing the
recommendations of the global study, we would like to
stress the following points.
First, Egypt values and supports the new United
Nations system-wide strategy for gender parity. We
believe that the strategy is an integral part of the
reform of the Organization. We stress the importance
of ensuring women’s effective participation and
leadership, reinforcing gender-based knowledge and
providing the required funding for promoting gender
equality and the women and peace and security agenda.
Second, we support visits by United Nations
officials, focusing solely on women and peace and
security, to conflict and post-conflict areas, such as
the visit headed by Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Ms Mohammed briefed the Council on
the visit during Egypt’s presidency last August (see
S/PV.8022). In that regard, we stress that the scope of the
women and peace and security agenda should be limited
to countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Third, we take note of the Secretary General’s
intention to focus his report (S/2017/861) on the
participation of women in peace operations. Egypt
calls for going beyond merely evaluating the level of
participation to developing concrete recommendations
aimed at ensuring a more effective participation of
women. In that connection, Egypt seeks to increase the
number of female peacekeepers as it deploys more Blue
Helmets to peacekeeping missions.
Fourth, it is not enough to only adopt action plans
on women and peace and security, as such plans and
their commitments need to be adequately funded.
Egypt therefore believes that it is critical to assist States
by building their capacity in that area.

S/PV. 8079

Fifth, we are concerned that there has been a
setback in the meaningful participation of women, as
detailed in the Secretary-General’s report, despite the
existing legal and institutional framework to enable
such participation.
Sixth, the suffering of women and girls is
exacerbated by terrorism in conflict areas. Furthermore,
women continue to suffer under occupation.
Seventh, we advocate the need to strictly adhere
to the delivery of the women and peace and security
mandate. Any deviation from the mandate to other
topics would undermine the agenda’s purpose and
implementation. We must strike a balance between the
two key pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda, namely, protection and participation.
We must consider the specific cultural and social
character of every country when implementing
the agenda so as to increase the participation of
women in conflict and post-conflict areas. There
must be co-payment mechanisms in place involving
donors and implementing entities so as to ensure the
sustainability and effectiveness of the agenda. All
of that must be carried out while at the same time
stressing national ownership and joint implementation
with national authorities.
Egypt spares no effort to assist in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. With regard to combating sexual exploitation
and abuse, in response to the Secretary General’s zerotolerance policy, we have introduced an intensive and
comprehensive training module on awareness related to
sexual exploitation and abuse into the predeployment
training of our peacekeeping troops. Furthermore, the
Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding has published a
manual entitled “Prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse in peacekeeping operations”, to be used by
Egyptian peacekeeping troops. The manual is available
to all troop-contributing countries, and it has been
translated into English and French.
With regard to training programmes, the Cairo
Center and Egypt’s National Council for Women, in
partnership with the Crisis Management Center Finland,
organize basic training courses on the role of women
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Participants have
included members of the military and the police, as well
as civilians from numerous Arab and African States.
In the near future, the Center will collaborate with its

17-3496221/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

counterparts in other countries. Moreover, the Center
has developed a first-of-its-kind training manual in the
Arab region on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) as it relates to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
in the Arab world.
We call for renewed political and ethical
commitment to empowering women in post-conflict
areas and countries. Women are a main pillar in
the process of the transformation from conflict to
development, and from conflict-torn societies to sound
ones, capable of achieving sustained peace.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia) (spoke in French): We
thank the French presidency for organizing today’s
open debate. We also thank the briefers for sharing their
thoughts and perspectives on the question of women
and peace and security.
(spoke in English)
Ethiopia welcomes the positive developments that
have taken place over the years in advancing the women
and peace and security agenda since the adoption of
the Security Council’s groundbreaking resolution 1325
(2000), particularly in ensuring the participation and
representation of women in political processes. We
also welcome the initiatives and measures taken by
the Secretary-General and the broader United Nations
system aimed at advancing the women and peace
and security agenda through a renewed commitment
to gender equality and women’s representation and
improving gender mainstreaming in United Nations
planning, programming, resource mobilization and
rapid deployment. We also welcome the work of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and her team of
experts for their efforts to strengthen national capacities
to address sexual violence.
We note with serious concern the challenges
identified in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861) in relation to the issues of gender
inequality, of ensuring women’s participatio, and of
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, as
well as the unprecedented increase in the number of
women who participate in violent extremist and terrorist
groups, including as foreign terrorist fighters. We also
recognize that much more needs to be done to address
sexual exploitation and abuse, based on substantiated
evidence. Taking into account both the progress that
has been made and the continuing challenges regarding
the women and peace and security agenda, we would
22/104

27/10/2017

like to highlight a few points that focus on the best
way to integrate an original approach into the broader
women and peace and security discussion, based on our
experience in Africa.
In the past few years Africa has registered
significant progress in advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, both at the continental
and subregional levels. As indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, a number of African countries have
adopted national action plans based on resolution
1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security. The African Union,
along with subregional organizations such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, has also
adopted gender policies. In our view, those policies,
coupled with other legal instruments, could provide a
very good basis for coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union in facilitating greater
implementation and enhancing the advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa.
Among other things, such coordination could focus
on ensuring the active participation of women and
women’s groups in peace processes, conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding activities, as well
as on promoting and protecting the human rights of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations. One
way of enhancing such cooperation could be through
missions such as the recent joint United Nations-African
Union high-level solidarity mission to Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, led by the Deputy
Secretary-General in July. Mechanisms to utilize the
good offices of the Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace
and Security could also be explored with the aim of
advancing the women and peace and security agenda at
the continental level.
We believe it is also important to further strengthen
support in the African Union or at subregional levels
for initiatives and frameworks such as those aimed
at ensuring women’s participation and leadership
as observers or in advisory roles in peace processes,
in mediation and election observer missions or in
countering violent extremism. It is in that context that,
while we welcome the focus of the next annual report
of the Secretary-General on the quality of participation
and representation of women in peace processes, we
encourage the Secretary-General to include in the
report regional approaches adopted by the United
Nations to advance the women and peace and security
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

agenda, with a particular focus on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union.

Security Council to promote controversial concepts and
approaches that do not have broad international support.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of addressing systemic challenges to
women’s access to political and economic spaces in order
to ensure prosperous and peaceful societies. That will
require a renewed commitment to building partnerships
with various stakeholders, particularly regional and
subregional organizations, the States concerned,
development agencies, civil-society organizations,
women experts and groups and peace and security
partners within the women and peace and security
agenda. I would therefore like to affirm Ethiopia’s
commitment to working towards this objective.

We firmly believe that there is significant potential
for women’s participation in various aspects of resolving
armed conflicts and post-conflict reconstruction, and
that the direct participation of women in preventing
armed conflicts and in post-conflict reconstruction is
a major requisite for eliminating violence against them.
Women have a special role to play in United Nations
peacekeeping. As far as Russia’s contribution in that
area is concerned, we have ensured a 15 per cent
female presence in our peacekeeping efforts. We also
train women police officers in United Nations certified
training centres, and we also plan to do the same for
women soldiers by the end of the year.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank the French
presidency for organizing today’s meeting. We are
grateful to the briefers for their statements and
helpful information.
In the time that has passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) considerable success has been
achieved in enhancing the role of women in preventing
and resolving armed conflicts as well as in postconflict rebuilding. Unfortunately, the same cannot
be said about another, no less important, task, which
is ensuring the appropriate protection of women in the
course of conflicts. In spite of the many efforts that have
been made, women continue to fall victim to various
forms of violence, losing their lives or their health
during conflicts. We have been shocked by the barbaric
acts and atrocities that terrorist groups have committed
against women. As we consider the subject of the women
and peace and security agenda, we therefore believe it
is particularly important to focus specifically on issues
directly related to the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security.
With regard to other associated topics — such
as ensuring gender equality, expanding rights and
opportunities for women and upholding women’s human
rights — there are specialized organizations and
mechanisms in place for dealing with them. As we
see it, the way that the topic of women and peace and
security is discussed is increasingly straying from
its basic framework. We are seeing a similar trend in
the approaches used in preparing the thematic report
of the Secretary-General. We also want to note once
again that it is inappropriate to use the platform of the

The Security Council’s regular debates on women
and peace and security enable us to take stock of the
progress made in improving the protection of women
in conditions of armed conflict and ensuring their full
and effective participation in efforts to prevent and
resolve crises. We believe it is important to ensure that
our efforts to develop comprehensive approaches in this
area do not lead us to ignore the specifics of particular
conflict situations, or to the inclusion of gender aspects
in the work of the United Nations becoming an end in
itself. We should also take this kind of differentiated
approach to the mandates given to United Nations
departments and structures regarding the incorporation
of gender issues into their activities. They have their own
clear remits, and for most of them issues related women
and peace and security are not a defining priority but
just one of a number of factors within the framework of
their activities related to preventing and settling armed
conflicts and dealing with post-conflict situations. Let
us also not forget that the primary responsibility for
protecting women at every stage of an armed conflict
rests with Governments and that measures undertaken
by United Nations entities and civil society should be
aimed at supporting and complementing the efforts
of States.
I want to say a few words in connection with the
statement made by the delegation of Ukraine. There was
no mention in that statement today of Ms. Savchenko.
Perhaps not everyone here recalls how for several years,
at every Security Council meeting on women’s issues,
the Ukrainian delegation would sound the alarm about
the fate of Nadiya Savchenko, who was presented as
a national heroine. It may be that not everyone knows
that after her return to Ukraine, Ms. Savchenko soon

17-3496223/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

became an extremely vocal critic of the policies of the
Kyiv regime, after which the Ukrainian authorities’
attitude to her cooled markedly and she fell into
disgrace, partly because she urged for launching
negotiations in Donetsk and Luhansk with the aim of
restoring peace and tried to promote that. That clearly
exemplifies the Ukrainian authorities’ approach to the
issue of women’s participation in resolving conflicts.
That is a clear illustration of the point of the
Ukrainian delegation’s anti-Russian statements. Today
we were told once again about how women have
suffered as a result of the conflict in south-eastern
Ukraine. That is unfortunately true. And the people
responsible for it are the Kyiv authorities, who in 2014
launched military action against their own people.
Besides that, the conflict has been accompanied by
terrible crimes committed by the Ukrainian armed
forces against women. Anyone interested can find the
relevant information in the reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for example. The residents of the Donbas region,
including the elderly, have suffered greatly from
Kyiv’s unmerciful economic and financial blockade.
In contrast, Russia has been consistently providing
the region with humanitarian assistance. We have
instituted an open-door policy for Ukrainian refugees,
51 per cent of whom are women and girls. Anyone
who ends up on Russian territory after suffering in the
armed conflict in Ukraine is offered essential social
assistance and access to education and health care, and
women and children get special attention because of
their particular vulnerability.
In conclusion, we would like to say that our
country has a unique history with regard to equality
between men and women. Decisions on that topic were
taken as long ago as the early years of the twentieth
century. Today women’s participation in preventing and
resolving conflicts and ensuring sustainable peace is
becoming ever more important. That item is also high
on the Security Council’s agenda, and deservedly so.
We intend to continue contributing to discussions on
various United Nations platforms on ways to ensure
meaningful improvements in the protection of women
and their rights and ensuring their effective participation
in peace processes.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
grateful for the briefings by Ms. Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General; Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women; and Ms. Jean,
24/104

27/10/2017

Secretary-General of the International Organization
of La Francophonie. We also listened attentively to the
statement by the representative of civil society.
Women are an important force behind human
progress, and their cause and that of human development
are closely linked. Since the Council’s adoption of the
first-ever resolution on women and peace and security,
resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has built a strong framework for fostering a greater
role for women in peace and security and has achieved
important results and positive progress.
At the same time, we must recognize the increasing
challenges and complexities of the international security
landscape, in which we see regional conflicts come and
go like a game of whack-a-mole. More often than not,
women bear the brunt of those conflicts and suffer the
most. Much remains to be done by the international
community to protect the rights of women in situations
of conflict. Further effort needs to be made by the
international community.
First, we must intensify our efforts to prevent and
suppress armed conflicts. China supports the efforts of
the Security Council, within the limits of its mandate
under the Charter of the United Nations, to actively
encourage Member States at the political level to settle
their disputes through dialogue and consultation,
and to continue to play a greater role in preventing
conflict and maintaining peace, thereby providing
a solid foundation for the protection of women. The
international community should embrace the concepts
of peaceful development and win-win cooperation,
heed the voices and aspirations of women at all stages
of the peace process and ensure women’s effective
participation in those processes so as to take advantage
of their unique role.
Secondly, we must resolutely combat violations
of women’s rights in conflict and work diligently to
protect women’s legitimate rights and interests. The
international community should prioritize leadership
on the part of host countries, assist them in the full
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions,
pay special attention to the needs of vulnerable groups,
such as women, and focus on ending sexual violence
in armed conflict. The international community should
respond to the threat of terrorism appropriately, work
constructively to explore effective ways to promote
international cooperation on counter-terrorism and
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

take comprehensive measures to protect women from
terrorist and extremist forces.
Thirdly, we must sharpen the focus on protecting
women’s rights and interests during post-conflict
reconstruction.
The
international
community,
with an eye to a broader horizon and a longer view,
should provide development assistance and technical
support to efforts to achieve gender equality and
women’s empowerment in developing countries, with
the goal of eliminating the root causes of conflict
and fundamentally safeguarding women’s rights
and interests. We should actively help the countries
concerned, promote economic and social development
and ensure that the dividends of development benefit
the entire population, including women, while women’s
groups and civil society should be guided to enable
them to play a catalytic role to that end.
Last but not least, we must ensure that United
Nations agencies exploit their respective expertise and
strength and work together with all parties in synergy.
The Council has adopted a series of resolutions on
women and peace and security that embody consensus
and should therefore be effectively implemented. The
relevant United Nations bodies, including the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and UN-Women, should improve their
coordination of their respective mandates and cooperate
fully with regional and subregional organizations in
areas such as the exchange of experience, training,
in-country capacity-building and financing, so that
existing mechanisms can be fully utilized, their
potential exploited and their effectiveness enhanced.
China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community to continue pursuing the goals
of women and peace and security and to make greater
efforts to promote greater development of the global
women’s cause.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would first like to thank the
presidency of France for convening today’s meeting on a
very important topic. I am also grateful to all the briefers
for their very insightful and powerful statements.
Despite the fact that 17 years have passed since the
Security Council’s adoption of its landmark resolution
1325 (2000), the normative framework has still not been
fully put in place. Exactly two years ago, in October
2015, some 100 countries announced their commitment
to promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
We were one of them, of course. At the time, Japan

S/PV. 8079

made a number of commitments that included, first,
our determination to steadily implement our national
action plan and ensure its effective monitoring. The
second was increasing our financial support to UNWomen and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The third was investing in developing human resources
and the education of displaced women. We like to think
that Japan has faithfully fulfilled those promises.
This year we completed the first evaluation
report on our national action plan, and are steadily
implementing its commitments. Our cooperation with
UN-Women is growing. In 2016, Japan became its
second-largest contributor, with those contributions
largely directed at efforts to support human-resource
development and education for displaced women in the
Middle East and Africa. We also continue to be one
of the top donors to the team of experts of the Office
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we affirm our ongoing
support for their work.
According to the World Bank, as many as 90 per
cent of conflicts between 2000 to 2009 were relapses.
Women’s meaningful participation and leadership
are key to preventing conflict, sustaining peace and
avoiding relapses into conflict. Today I will focus
on the areas of peace negotiations and peacekeeping
missions, in which Japan has been actively involved
and has some expertise. While the reality represented
by the reported figures is a stark one for both areas, we
strongly believe in their potential to drive the women
and peace and security agenda significantly forward.
Past experience has shown that women’s effective
participation and influence in the peace negotiation
process are closely linked to the eventual achievement
of sustained peace. In that regard, I commend the
efforts of the regional networks of women mediators
in the African, Nordic and Mediterranean regions, a
subject that the representative of Italy already touched
on. Japan is ready to work to apply this positive trend
to other regions, including Asia. Training is central to
our efforts. For example, Japan supported UN-Women’s
technical training on peacebuilding, mediation and
conflict prevention for 230 women through the Peace
Support Training Centre in Kenya in 2016, which
significantly changed the mindset of the whole
community, including its male leaders, and promoted
women’s participation in traditionally male-dominated

17-3496225/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

local peacebuilding committees. It genuinely helped to
mitigate tensions between communities.
Making a peacekeeping mission as genderresponsive as possible is directly linked to its success.
It is key to the consolidation of peace on the ground.
The United Nations system-wide strategy on gender
parity is an excellent guide and, needless to say, we
must ensure its full implementation. Pooling and
training mission staff are crucial. We were pleased to
join the collective effort to support the Department of
Field Support’s senior women talent pipeline project.
In that connection, we will hold an outreach seminar
for the project in Tokyo this very weekend, inviting
potential senior women candidates. Improving the
gender-responsiveness of peacekeeping missions
will contribute significantly to eliminating sexual
exploitation and abuses by peacekeeping personnel.
Finally, in the wake of UN-Women’s HeForShe
Champion movement, we should note the importance
of mobilizing men’s active engagement in efforts
to establish gender parity and the equality and
empowerment of women, which of course includes the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Japan will continue to work with members of
the Council and the United Nations to promote that
agenda further.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the French
presidency for putting the spotlight on the women
and peace and security agenda, and the SecretaryGeneral for his astute recommendations. We would
like to express our warm appreciation to Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngcuka and her team for their
leadership and groundbreaking work on the issue. We
also thank Ms. Ribeiro Viotti, Ms. Jean, and Ms. MinaRojas, the representative of civil society, for their
insightful briefings.
The women and peace and security agenda, as
first outlined in resolution 1325 (2000), should be
increasingly used as an important tool for conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as a source of
transformational change across all three pillars of the
United Nations. Providing support to newly created
United Nations mechanisms — such as the Council’s
new Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security; the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund;
the Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network and the Peacebuilding Commission’s gender
strategy — will further accelerate the implementation
26/104

27/10/2017

of this agenda. Council resolutions and presidential
statements should make increasing use of the language
of the women and peace and security agenda in order to
bring a new paradigm into the thinking of the Council,
the United Nations system, Member States and
police- and troop-contributing countries. Kazakhstan
is committed to continuing the excellent practice of
inviting representatives from women’s organizations to
brief the Council. We must still persist with efforts to
bridge the gap between spoken commitments and actual
action, especially when the participation of women is
still lacking, in times of peace as well as conflict.
A more proactive role for women in preventing
and resolving conflicts is a priority for Kazakhstan.
We should diligently support the Secretary-General’s
reforms focused on keeping gender at the centre
of prevention efforts and a firm commitment to
gender parity at the highest levels across the United
Nations, as well as supporting his work to reform
the Organization’s peace and security architecture.
That requires improving the collaboration between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women, both in the field and at Headquarters,
as well as on the new United Nations initiatives
aimed at doubling the number of women in military
and police contingents by 2020. All peacekeeping
operations should have strong mandates on women
and peace and security, with gender specialists in the
areas of the rule of law; human rights; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; internally displaced
people; refugee returnees; rehabilitation; livelihood
services and trauma counselling. We need stronger and
more systematic gender mainstreaming to help prevent
violent extremism and asymmetric conflict situations.
Funding for areas related to the women and peace
and security agenda, especially in protracted conflicts,
remains a concern. We must provide the necessary
funds to ensure that missions have sufficient expertise,
authority and capacity. Part of that funding gap can
be overcome by expanding reforms and improving the
streamlining and coordination of strategies through the
United Nations system and its collaboration with other
partners. Global processes are much more effective
when they are firmly established on the ground and
when each Member State and region plays its role.
In support of multilateral efforts, Kazakhstan has
begun the process of integrating all four pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda into its national
legislation, including formulating new, strong pro17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

women policies. Commitments on women and peace
and security have been included in the Republic of
Kazakhstan’s family and gender policy for the period
from 2016 to 2030, with the goal of ensuring women’s
engagement in policy- and decision-making in all
spheres of national governance and gender-equality
training for the armed and security forces, as well as
women’s deployment in peacekeeping operations.
Zero tolerance for gender-based violence is a
definitive part of our national policy, inspired by
resolution 1325 (2000). Throughout the world, the
perpetrators of such violence must be brought to
justice, and that justice must be transformative.
Sustainable Development Goal 5 focuses on women, but
investments in women are also critical to truly fulfilling
the other 16 Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the Secretary-General’s new
agenda for peace. Women and young people are central
to the entire cycle, from conflict prevention to conflict
resolution and from peacebuilding to development.
Both groups should be seen as important links in the
security-development nexus.
We welcome the fact that the Peacebuilding
Fund has surpassed its 15 per cent target again this
year, and we are focused on achieving the target of
earmarking 15 per cent of our official development
assistance for gender mainstreaming. We applaud the
Swedish delegation and Foreign Minister Wallström for
highlighting the case of Afghanistan in her statement.
We, too, are focusing on Afghanistan through our
KazAid programme, with a multidimensional approach
based on conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
recovery, reintegration and humanitarian assistance.
Last year, in cooperation with Japan and the United
Nations Development Programme, Kazakhstan
launched a project to promote gender equality in
Afghanistan, including by providing policy support
and capacity development. National efforts must be
reinforced by regional and subregional commitments to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, which is what Kazakhstan
has been attempting to accomplish in Central Asia
through the United Nations Women Multi-Country
Office in Almaty.
In that context, we believe that the first-ever
African Union-United Nations joint mission to African
countries on women and peace and security, led by
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed in
July, which did so much to create awareness, should

S/PV. 8079

become a regular practice. We commend regional
organizations for implementing the women and peace
and security agenda in their regions, and we especially
commend the African Union for its progressive gender
mainstreaming within the African Peace and Security
Architecture. We acknowledge civil society’s important
role in improving women’s access to leadership and
participation in peace processes, and we encourage all
Member States to strengthen their engagement with
civil society organizations, including women and youth
groups. Kazakhstan is committed to continuing the
good practice of inviting representatives from women’s
organizations to brief the Council.
Lastly, enhanced data collection and reporting are
also very important for the success of the women and
peace and security agenda. We see stagnation in certain
indicators and therefore call for enhanced gender
analysis of countries’ situations. We need expanded and
more timely and accurate national gender-disaggregated
data and progress reports on the implementation and
monitoring of those commitments.
Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing support to the
women and peace and security agenda, with the goal
of seeing all societies develop new possibilities and
potential for human well-being hrough the empowerment
of women and girls. Today Ambassador Fodé Seck of
Senegal mentioned that women are a majority of the
world population. In that regard, I would like to read a
short extract from a poem by a famous Kazakh writer,
Mukaghali Makatayev.
“Today women are a majority of the population.
We need to support that strength because women
mean beauty. Let us add beauty to our planet”.
I would like to conclude by saying that only women,
in their wisdom, beauty and leadership, can save our
fragile world.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank France for organizing today’s debate on an
issue on which, as has already been said, much remains
to be done. We also grateful for the participation of and
statements by Chef de Cabinet Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti; Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women; Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas, of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security;
and Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary General of the
International Organization of La Francophonie.

17-3496227/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

The women and peace and security agenda will
require our persistent attention if it is to achieve real
and tangible progress. In that regard, we would like to
highlight the periodic work of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, and we align ourselves
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Canada on its behalf. We would also like to highlight
the efforts of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, which helps to maintain a
systematic approach to the subject on the Security
Council’s agenda. We particularly appreciate the
momentum generated by the Secretary-General for the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Uruguay welcomes other initiatives that are
helping to achieve the agenda’s objectives, such as that
of Spain in establishing a network of national focal
points for women and peace and security, as well as
the efforts of the team of experts from the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict to strengthen national
capacities for investigating and prosecuting crimes and
protecting victims and witnesses. Gender equality and
the empowerment of women are essential conditions for
conflict prevention and peacekeeping and key factors
in achieving the goals set by the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Let us be clear. In Uruguay, when we talk about the
empowerment of women, we are talking about creating
and ensuring the conditions that women need to exercise
their most basic rights to full, individual freedom,
without the artificial constraints that relegate them to
second-class status. That means the freedom to choose
their way of life; to choose how, where and with whom
to live their life; and to make decisions for themselves
and by themselves on their education, their work and
their bodies. In short, we are talking about the freedom
to be masters of their own destiny. An empowered
woman is a vital instrument for transforming our
societies’ egalitarian development.
It is the responsibility of States to safeguard
women’s rights and ensure gender equality, as well
as the inclusion and non-discriminatory treatment
of women regardless of race, religion, age, sexual
orientation, gender identity or any other status.
However, it is also the responsibility of organized civil
society to be vigilant about their countries’ conduct in
that regard. States should also work to improve women’s
participation in mediating, preventing and resolving
28/104

27/10/2017

conflicts, as outlined in resolution 1325 (2000). They
have a proven ability to approach, negotiate, understand
and empathize in such situations.
Uruguay can attest to all of that. The increase in
the numbers of female personnel in the peacekeeping
operations in which our country participates, which
today is still only a modest 7 per cent of the total, has
nevertheless been an enriching element for the quality
of the contingent and the results obtained. In particular,
in missions such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we can attest to the effective role that women
have played in building trust in local communities
for all the reasons I just mentioned, and even more
so among those who have been victims of any kind of
sexual violence.
Regrettably, the horrors of gender-based sexual
violence continue to constitute one of the most
devastating effects of armed conflict around the world.
We must take effective measures to eradicate that
scourge, but we must also put an end to impunity and
restore the dignity of the victims of such crimes. In that
regard, we have to rethink our collective approach in
order to focus on the victims and survivors, who should
receive comprehensive assistance that can ensure that
they are able to fully recover from such violations and
reintegrate into their societies.
States should maximize their efforts on both
the national and international levels to ensure that
the perpetrators of these crimes are prosecuted. The
International Criminal Court plays a key role in that
regard by judging crimes that have been recognized
by the Rome Statute as war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including those that may constitute crimes
of genocide. Consequently, it is the responsibility of
the Security Council to ensure that crimes of sexual
violence are referred to the Court and that such cases
are continuously monitored.
Similarly, we must ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers are not part of the problem. In that
connection, we welcome recent initiatives by the
Secretary-General such as the proposal of a voluntary
pact with troop-contributing countries against sexual
exploitation and abuse, to which Uruguay has adhered;
the establishment of a women’s leadership circle, of
which Uruguay is honoured to be a member; and the
appointment of an advocate for the rights of victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Uruguay stresses the importance of carefully
educating personnel involved in peace missions in
relation to issues of gender and sexual violence in
conflicts. In the specific case of my country, prior to
deployment, all personnel must undergo a training
course on human rights, international humanitarian
law, gender issues, child protection and sexual abuse
and exploitation, as well as sign a statement in which
they agree to comply with the standards of conduct.
The gender perspective must be part of the entire
peacekeeping planning process, as well as at the time
of review and when it comes to reducing the number
of deployed personnel. On this point, the recent cuts
to the gender and human rights components of various
mandates of certain peace missions are of concern.
We welcome the fact that, since 2000, the agenda
on women and peace and security has acquired
considerable normative momentum. We also highlight
the work done by the bodies established under various
human rights instruments with regard to the agenda in
their oversight role. I would like to reiterate the need
to join forces in order to implement transformative
and large-scale initiatives that will ensure that issues
related to the women and peace and security agenda
are systemically integrated in approaches to prevention
and peacekeeping.
Uruguay reaffirms its commitment to the agenda
on women and peace and security and to continue
working with the United Nations and all Member States
for its full and effective implementation.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of France.
I warmly thank the Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Ribeiro Viotti; the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka; Ms. MinaRojas; and the Secretary General of the International
Organization of La Francophonie, Ms Michaëlle Jean,
for their very enlightening briefings.
I would like to pay particular tribute to the vital role
played by civil society in promoting and implementing
this very important agenda, on whose behalf Ms. MinaRojas delivered a strong and committed message today.
I take this opportunity to reiterate France’s support
for the initiatives of organizations that campaign for
respecting and promoting women’s rights in the field.
Those initiatives must not be hindered, but instead
robustly supported and encouraged.

S/PV. 8079

I also welcome the presence and commitment of the
Secretary General of the International Organization of
La Francophonie, Ms. Michaëlle Jean, to this agenda.
The efforts of the countries of La Francophonie indeed
symbolize a strong and important message. I would like
to say another word of support, together with Germany,
for the determination of the African Union and Ghana
to establish a network of African women leaders. We
also welcome Italy’s initiative to build a network of
women mediators in the Mediterranean, which was
launched yesterday in Rome.
I turn first to the issue of our collective commitment
with regard to the practical implementation of this
agenda and the participation of women, before briefly
presenting the efforts undertaken by France on a daily
basis to that end.
We simply cannot resolve crises without ensuring
the protection and participation of women. Women must
be protected — that is essential — but they must also
be fully involved in conflict prevention and resolution.
That must be a genuine common priority not only in our
words but also in our actions to ensure both equality
and efficiency. The participation of women in political
processes and in conflict prevention and resolution
remains grossly inadequate: from 1992 to 2011, 4 per
cent of peace agreement signatories and fewer than
10 per cent of negotiators participating in peace talks
were women. The report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2017/861) refers
clearly to this state of affairs and underscores the fact
that some areas, such as disarmament, are still closed
off to women. That shows just how much we must
change the breadth of the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. We must move from
words to actions. We are not talking about a peripheral
issue; we are talking about a pivotal matter that should
lie at the heart of the daily work of the United Nations.
The Security Council has adopted eight ambitious
resolutions on this subject; however, it is quite clear that
their implementation remains woefully insufficient.
Progress has certainly been noted, particularly within
the Council: three-quarters of resolutions take the
women and peace and security agenda into account
and an informal group of experts has been set up.
A network of national focal points has also been
established. But now Governments must embrace their
responsibility and develop national, and even regional,
plans and implement them. In short, it is time to take
practical action.

17-3496229/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

It is also necessary to set aside space to implement
a global, frequent and responsible evaluation of
the initiatives we carry out. We need to step up our
analysis conflicts against the backdrop of gender,
including through an exchange of best practices.
Measuring progress will also be important, as it will
present a challenge for years to come. We are well
aware of the fact that — and this has been said, but it
bears repeating — when women participate in peace
processes, the lasting success of peace agreements over
a period of at least two years increases by 20 per cent,
and the likelihood of an agreement remaining in place
for at least 15 years increases by 25 per cent. Once
again, therefore, that is an obligation that is not just a
matter of equality but of efficiency. The United Nations
itself must be exemplary in that regard, and we welcome
the establishment by the Secretary-General of a pool of
female talent for access to leadership positions.
France is committed to staying at the forefront of
the international community’s efforts to implement the
women and peace and security agenda. I would now
like to briefly present our national action plan for the
implementation of this agenda. First, however, allow
me to recall the fact that our parity law has undeniably
enabled France to achieve decisive progress in women’t
representation in the political life of my country. The
French Government has achieved parity, as has the
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
here in New York.
More specifically, France is implementing its second
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which covers the period 2015-2018. It is built on five
pillars: participation; protection, which during conflict
means primarily protection against violence, but also
more broadly protection for the rights of women; the
fight against impunity; prevention, especially through
raising awareness of violence against women; and
promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
For each of those pillars we are implementing initiatives
at the national, multilateral and concrete cooperation
levels. Allow me to briefly mention a few examples.
First of all, France is taking action against
impunity when crimes are committed against women,
including to enable women’s access to justice. To that
end, we fully support the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse.
In the same spirit, the President of the French Republic,
Mr. Emmanuel Macron, joined the circle of leaders
at the high-level segment of the General Assembly.
30/104

27/10/2017

Along the same lines, the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, signed the
pact between the United Nations and Member States.
In that regard, we commend the recent appointment by
the Secretary-General of an advocate for the rights of
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Our efforts are also ongoing daily on the ground.
For instance, we continue to support humanitarian
programmes aimed at assisting women affected by the
consequences of the crises in Afghanistan; the Central
African Republic; Lebanon, as a result of the Syrian
crisis; and Nigeria. We are also undertaking numerous
projects to protect women from human trafficking, as
a priority.
We must also more implement more coherently
the women and peace and security agenda and
the Sustainable Development Goals. Our official
development assistance already has fully incorporated
the gender dimension, and the number of projects with
a direct impact on the lives of women is rising as well.
France has also undertaken a comprehensive effort and
set specific goals to increase women’s participation in
its armed forces. Appointments have risen significantly,
and women’s representation has virtually doubled since
1998 to 15 per cent of overall troops today, which, of
course, is not fully sufficient, but progress continues to
be made. The armed forces, including peacekeepingoperation contingents, must also be made more aware
of gender issues, and to that end gender advisers’
functions, as has been mentioned, must be sustained
within these operations.
Lastly, our national action plan dovetails closely
with the European Union’s efforts, and here I am
thinking in particular of initiatives to address the
situation of women in Afghanistan and Syria and of the
recent joint initiative between the United Nations and
the European Union, known as the Spotlight Initiative,
which will make possible specific responses to violence
against women.
France can be counted on to continue to do
everything in its power to advance this agenda, which
is at the very heart of the activities and values of the
United Nations. Our vision is that of living in a world in
which women are no longer victims of violence but can
take their rightful place in conflict settlement and in
the political, economic and social life of their countries.
This is an imperative for equality and effectiveness.
Women are the key to lasting peace and security.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.

The representative of Ukraine has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.

Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I thank you for having convened this open
debate, almost 17 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I should
like also to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; Michaëlle Jean, of the
International Organization of la Francophonie; and
Charo Mina-Rojas, Colombia’s National Coordinator
of Advocacy and Outreach for the Black Communities’
Process, for their contributions.

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): To be fully consistent
with the agenda for today’s meeting, let me once again
quote from the statement made by Ukraine’s Vice-Prime
Minister, which was probably lost in translation for
some delegations.
Women make up 58 per cent, or almost 1 million, of
the 1.7 million internally displaced persons in Ukraine.
This is all an undisputed direct consequence of the
Russian aggression against Ukraine, aggression that has
been recognized worldwide, including by the General
Assembly, which unequivocally qualified the Russian
Federation as an occupying Power in my country.
As such, and if Russia is so concerned about the fate
of women in the territories it occupies in my country, it
should stop sending troops, weapons and ammunition
to eastern Ukraine. Until that happens, Russia is not in
a position to lecture others on a situation it intentionally
created and continues to stir up.
As for the so-called humanitarian assistance
provided by Russia to Ukraine, I just wonder who is to
thank for that — probably its proxies in Donbas, since,
for example, the last so-called humanitarian convoy
contained at least two modern Russian tanks and a full
load of ammunition for them. Nice example indeed.
Finally, there are hundreds of Ukrainian prisoners
in Russian captivity. We are doing everything in our
power to get them out of Russian prisons, irrespective
of their gender or political views. Once free from
captivity, some of them carry out, in a completely free
manner, an active political life and occupy high-profile
political posts, including in the Parliament.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind speakers that they are requested to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
This is the customary statement. Dedications with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the text in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform all
concerned that we will be carrying on this open debate
right through the lunch hour, as have a large number
of speakers.

This meeting represents an opportunity to share
best practices and the challenges encountered in the
implementation of this agenda, but above all, in the face
of new challenges, to revitalize the discussion and take
effective action ensuring the participation and leadership
of women in peace and peacekeeping processes.
Our process, which put an end to the conflict, was
characterized by an active and major participation of
women. During the negotiation phase, we were at the
table, I myself as negotiator, and in the negotiating
team more broadly. In addition, the work of the
sub-commission on gender was a cross-cutting presence
throughout the entire final agreement, as recognized in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/861), which
states that the percentage of signed peace agreements
containing gender-specific provisions increased only
because the Colombian peace agreement contained
more than 100 such provisions.
Close to one year after the signing of the
agreement, Columbia remains committed to ensuring
the participation of women in the implementation of the
peace agenda. We have major challenges and goals in
this phase, and the role of women is vital in this respect.
To this end, we have created the institutions necessary
to implement the agreement, including a specialized
gender unit made up of seven women leaders of
organizations of rural women, victims of armed conflict
and civil-society organizations. They will help us to
achieve the transformations to which the agreement is
directed so as to offer women, especially rural women,
better living conditions, which will translate into their
empowerment and economic autonomy, as well as
the creation of work spaces in decent conditions, in
a framework of equality, so as to break the cycles of
violence that violate the rights of women. We are also

17-3496231/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

working to incorporate a gender focus in the framework
for the implementation of the agreement.
As important as is the presence of women during
negotiations, it will be equally important in the
implementation process. The participation in the
peacebuilding phase, which will take us several years,
is tangible in the composition of the institutions created
for the purpose of transitional justice, whose members
were elected in September. In the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, 28 of the 51 judges are women, including the
President, and eight are Afro-descendants or indigenous
people. In addition, a woman was elected Director of
the Search Unit for Missing Person.
Colombia recognizes the need to ensure
accountability for crimes of sexual violence committed
in the framework of conflict. That is why the final
agreement provides that such crimes cannot be subject
to amnesty. In addition, the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace plans to create an investigation unit with a special
team for cases of sexual violence.
I wish also to highlight the fact that the first special
political mission agreed by the Security Council was the
one with the largest ever number of women — almost
20 per cent of observers. We hope that the second will
maintain or even surpass those levels.
We believe that our process, with its advantages
and drawbacks, can be one of the references for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in a way that
contributes to achieving tangible results, the realization
of projects and the development of joint initiatives, and
so that lessons learned can be used to advantage in other
contexts. The past years have shown us that committed
work brings about significant progress and tangible
results that have a positive impact on the realities of
women, but they are, of course, not enough.
As Ms. Mina-Rojas said at the beginning of today’s
debate, the peace process has not only put an end to war
and violence, it has also helped us deal together with the
roots of the conflict. That is what we aim to do with the
Agreement; that is the challenge we face from now on
in terms of its implementation. We need the unwavering
commitment of States, as well as the effective work of
the entire United Nations system, in particular of the
Security Council, to ensure genuine participation by
women, and thereby contribute to achieving the just
and equitable societies that we all desire.
32/104

27/10/2017

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Gender, Child and Family of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Safou (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President, I
would like to welcome the accession of your country,
France, to the presidency of the Security Council and
to congratulate you for the great skill with which you
have led the work of the Council during this month of
October. I would also like to thank you for convening
today’s open debate on women and peace and security,
a theme that reflects the tragedy that many women
around the world endure, particularly certain women in
the eastern and the central parts of my country.
I pay well-earned tribute to His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General, for his
assiduous efforts aimed at seeking peace in my country.
I also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for the
support UN-Women has given to the women of the
Democratic Republic of Congo. I also welcome the
presence of Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary General of
the International Organization of La Francophonie.
My country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has been affected by many years of armed
conflict, with nefarious repercussions, particularly for
women and children, has made a firm commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. This debate affords us
an opportunity to briefly outline the efforts undertaken
by my Government to address this situation — and to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) — which we have
done by adopting a plan of action plan with 10 priority
thrusts in 2013.
The plan of action is currently under participatory
and inclusive review with significant collaboration
from civil society at both the national and international
levels, in particular with the participation of the Cordaid
Foundation, Diakonia Sweden and UN-Women. The
Government has undertaken an assessment of the
current plan of action so as to identify its strengths
and weaknesses and to collect statistical data from
10 provinces, while awaiting data from the remaining
provinces, with a view to reaching more women at the
local level.
It is worth noting that the implementation of
the national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has led in gender-mainstreaming
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, as well as
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

capacity-building for women leaders in negotiation
and mediation in terms of influencing decision-making
in times of crisis and post-conflict periods in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. More than 500 women
leaders and prominent local individuals have seen
their capacities strengthened in the areas of conflict
resolution and notions of gender. That has enabled them
to contribute to the peaceful resolution of conflicts in
provinces mired in ethnic conflict.
It should be noted that the Democratic Republic
of Congo has undertaken a review of our national
strategy to combat sexual and gender-based violence,
adopted an armed forces action plan and signed the
joint compact between the Government and the United
Nations on the fight against sexual violence in conflict.
Through the compact, our Government has reaffirmed
its commitment to shoring up a zero-tolerance policy
for crimes of sexual violence and to adopting measures
to fight impunity by initiating proceedings against
perpetrators. Along those lines, from July to December
2014, 135 judicial sentences were handed down,
punishing high-level military and police officers, and in
2016 the military justice system rendered 111 decisions
against perpetrators of sexual violence.
At the security level, I would like to commend the
determination of the Head of State, Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange, to implement the relevant provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), in particular by the promotion to
rank and raising to high-level positions of nine women
army brigadier generals and a number of female senior
officers. It is worth mentioning the appointment of 20
women to active duty in the battalion of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo, which
operated in the Central African Republic in connection
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
I cannot conclude without noting that my country
rightly appreciates the support given to it by the United
Nations and the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Kofler (Germany): At the outset, I want to
point out that Germany aligns itself with the statements
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union
and the representative of Canada, the latter of whom
will be speaking on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security.

S/PV. 8079

But let me first of all thank France for hosting
today’s open debate, and especially for putting a
renewed focus on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
I would also like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their insightful briefings. I thank
Ms. Mina-Rojas for speaking about the participation of
women in the Colombian peace process. We also greatly
appreciate Ms. Jean’s provision of practical examples
of women’s leadership. It is very much welcomed that
the International Organization of La Francophonie is
participating in this debate.
Today’s debate places a much welcome focus on
concerting action and commitments. I would like to
put forward four specific ideas on how we can step up
implementation of the agenda of resolution 1325 (2000).
First, we need to support practical initiatives to
translate the rhetoric about women’s participation in
peace processes into action. As the Executive Director
of UN-Women mentioned — and I want to thank her for
it — Germany has decided to back the African Union
in developing a network of African women leaders
that provides women leaders from across the continent
with a platform for exchange with respect to their
experiences. The network, launched in June in New
York, and is already producing results. Women leaders
from across Africa are starting to share experiences
about their respective activities and initiatives through
the network. Its next meeting will take place in Addis
Ababa next spring.
Germany fully backs the initiative led by Ghana
and the African Union to establish a Group of Friends
of the African Women Leaders Network in New York.
The network needs our political support, and the
Group can play an important role in that regard. We
also welcome the fact that, under the leadership of
the Deputy Secretary-General and the African Union
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, several
women leaders conducted their first joint African
Union-United Nations solidarity mission this summer,
to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that more such solidarity missions will follow
in future.
Secondly, we need to continue the international
discussion on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda between the annual open
debates. Spain has set up a network of capital-level

17-3496233/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

focal points on women, peace and security, and it is
encouraging to see that more than 60 countries from all
regions have appointed focal points. Germany will take
over the chairmanship of the network in 2018, followed
by Namibia in 2019, and we will host its next meeting,
in Berlin, next spring. We hope that many delegations
will be able to send a focal point to Berlin and use the
opportunity to continue today’s discussion.
The Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security of the Security Council has become an
indispensable tool here in New York in keeping the
Council’s attention on women and peace and security
between the open debates. It has alreay looked into
four specific situations in 2017. We commend Sweden,
Uruguay and the United Kingdom for their work in
leading that Group and encourage it to continue its
approach of looking at individual situations more than
once, thereby following up on implementation.
Thirdly, we can do better in linking up the
implementation of the Security Council’s agenda on
women and peace and security with other agendas,
most important the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, but also the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. This
year, Germany adopted its second-generation national
action plan for the period 2017-2020, and we have tried
to emphasize some of the interlinkages. For instance,
in line with the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women general
recommendation No.30, our new action plan further
strengthens the qualitative involvement of civil society
organizations. Civil society representatives have
strongly contributed to our second action plan, and
we have created new consultation mechanisms for our
engagement with civil society.
Finally, we need to take specific action to prioritize
the implementation of the women and peace and
security in United Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
missions need to have the necessary human-rights and
gender expertise. Having gender expertise integrated
into all mission components is not only nice to have,
but is at the core of mandate-implementation and
lasting peace and security. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General’s initiative to launch a United
Nations senior women talent pipeline.
However, as Member States, we must also do
more to inform, motivate and nominate women for
peacekeeping missions. Germany recently awarded five
34/104

27/10/2017

female peacekeepers for their outstanding service in
peace operations. Their contributions to the success of
those missions are essential, whether as the captain of
the German frigate training the Lebanese Armed Forces
as part of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, or as the military officer overseeing
reconnaissance in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali or as human
resource officers in Colombia. We also provide
gender-sensitive and gender-specific training to third
countries, for instance in Accra, and support United
Nations police in their work to implement resolution
1325 (2000).
The Security Council’s women and peace and
security agenda remains a priority for Germany in the
United Nations. The Council can count on Germany’s
support in putting the rhetoric on women and peace and
security into action.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala.
Ms. Jovel Polanco (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a privilege to participate as Minister for Foreign
Affairs in today’s debate on such an important topic,
and it is a happy coincidence that I am here today. I am
the second woman to have been Minister for Foreign
Affairs in the history of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, which illustrates how things are changing
in Guatemala.
In recent years, we have seen that the significant
participation of women quantifiably strengthens
protection efforts, accelerates economic recovery,
furthers peacebuilding efforts and leads to sustainable
peace. That is why, every year, the Security Council
continues to pave the way for reducing the vulnerability
of women and girls. All of that is based on the core
premise of resolution 1325 (2000), which once again
convinces us that, without security for women and
girls, we cannot achieve lasting peace. Today, through
this debate, we are providing added value to ensure
the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Guatemala fully supports the importance that the
Secretary-General assigns to conflict prevention and
early warning, which is the stage to which we must pay
particular attention in order to prevent human rights
violations of the most vulnerable — women, girls,
children and adolescents.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Of particular concern is the fact that sexual violence
continues to be used as an instrument of war to terrorize
populations. We cannot allow it to be used to generate
income through trafficking and sexual slavery, much
less allow women and girls to be used as objects. We
therefore strongly condemn all of those heinous acts,
because, apart from constituting a clear violation of
international law and international humanitarian law, it
is a denial of human dignity. For that reason, we believe
that it is of paramount importance to make progress in
the fight against impunity, improve women’s access
to justice and strengthen the institutions of the justice
system in the light of those atrocious crimes, both at the
national and international levels.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has brought about important
changes in the world, which has allowed us to recognize
that the equality and empowerment of women and
girls are critical for international peace and security.
Together with the other seven resolutions that have been
adopted by the Security Council on women and peace,
they constitute powerful tools for the full exercise of
women’s rights, their access to justice and their equal
participation in all decision-making, both in conflict
and post-conflict situations and peaceful scenarios,
which has led to substantive changes for consolidating
the rule of law.
National action plans for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) constitute a powerful tool for advancing
women’s rights. In order to initiate, monitor and
comply with international commitments for the search
of international peace and security in gender issues,
Guatemala has had a national action plan in place since
July, which is one more achievement for the country
in protecting the rights of women in conflict and postconflict situations.
Another important aspect is the role that women play
in peacekeeping operations. Guatemala participates by
deploying contingents in areas of armed conflicts, and
therefore acknowledges the contribution of resolution
1325 (2000) in laying the foundations to incorporate a
gender perspective into field missions.
Finally, my delegation believes it is necessary
that joint efforts continue among States and the
United Nations to support measures that increase the
participation of women in peace processes, including in
the contexts of peacekeeping and peace consolidation
at all levels. Nowadays, inclusive processes should be
the rule, not the exception.

S/PV. 8079

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama): I have the honour of
speaking today on behalf of the members of the Human
Security Network, a cross-regional network made up
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Panama.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that promotes the integration of a human security
approach into policies and programmes at the regional,
national and international levels.
Seventeen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and two years after the global review
of its implementation, this open debate is needed to
focus on the concrete implementation of the normative
framework. Through the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015), the Security Council once again reaffirmed
its commitment to the agenda and to the need to
coordinate responses and accelerate implementation.
We particularly welcome the work of the Council’s
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security as an important tool to ensure that the agenda
receives adequate attention in the Council’s work. The
Human Security Network calls upon Member States,
United Nations entities and regional and subregional
organizations to support other Member States in their
efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and all
subsequent resolutions.
There is a need for greater recognition and
support of women’s full and effective participation
in all stages of conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconciliation processes, so that peace agreements can
be more effective. Women can, and must, play a key
role in conflict prevention and resolution and in the
construction and decision-making of sustainable peace
processes. We welcome the United Nations Trust Fund
for Human Security programmes that have supported
women as agents of change in achieving and sustaining
peace. We call for greater application of the human
security approach to advance inclusive prevention
and peacebuilding efforts. Since our debate last year
(see S/PV.7793), a number of important developments
and events have taken place within the United Nations
that have helped ensure the advancement of this
important agenda.
First, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment and his strategy on gender parity

17-3496235/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

to reach 50/50. We also welcome the launch of
Spotlight — a European Union-United Nations
initiative aimed at combating violence against women
by supporting women’s empowerment.
Secondly, the High-level Political Forum thematic
review of Sustainable Development Goal 5, on achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls, saw the integration of the gender-responsive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We welcome that ongoing process.
Thirdly, the recent high-level meeting on the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and
the adoption of the political declaration demonstrated
a renewed commitment to the protection of victims
of forced labour, sexual servitude and other forms of
exploitation and abuse, which target the weakest and
most vulnerable — women and girls, but also boys.
We cannot turn a blind eye to the violence exerted
by extremist groups, which infringe upon the rights,
dignity and integrity of their lives.
The Network expresses its profound concern about
the impact of forced displacement on women and girls.
Addressing that matter calls for the involvement of
women in the design and implementation of humanitarian
action and early recovery measures. That should also
take into account the increasing need for sustained
donor support to host countries and communities, so
that they can appropriately support women’s resilience.
Doing so will strengthen the humanitarian development
nexus and improve coordination with peacebuilding
and the protection of human rights.
We also call for greater efforts to promote and
respect the human rights of women and girls, as well
as to strengthen all efforts to effectively address
gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence. For too, long sexual violence has
been committed on a systematic and widespread scale
as crimes against humanity and it has been used as a
weapon of war. Women and girls are today targets of
sexual and gender-based violence at an alarming rate.
We stress the importance of fighting impunity and
ensuring accountability under national or international
jurisdictions. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative of convening a high-level meeting
on combating sexual exploitation and abuse, which
served as a visible demonstration of the solidarity
of the international community in condemning and
36/104

27/10/2017

combating that scourge, while placing the rights and
dignity of victims at the forefront of collective efforts.
In conclusion, women’s empowerment and
meaningful participation are a cornerstone of any
prevention and protection response. The economic,
political and social empowerment of women and girls
reduces their vulnerability and enhances their ability
to protect themselves and exercise their rights. We
must ensure that women’s and girls’ interests are
fully respected and systematically integrated into all
peace processes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We reiterate our strong
support for the women and peace and security agenda.
The adoption of eight resolutions on the topic by the
Securit Council reflects the important progress we
have made in this area. However, we are still very far
from achieving the goals we set for ourselves, and have
to tackle a significant gap between decisions on paper
and the reality on the ground.
The data in the latest report (S/2017/861) of
the Secretary-General point to significant barriers
in women’s meaningful participation in mediation
processes. The full participation of women in
mediation is essential to achieving sustainable peace.
Root causes to conflicts cannot be fully addressed, and
societal traumas cannot be overcome, when half of the
population is excluded from peace processes. In addition,
women often shoulder a large share of responsibility
in communities during conflict and recovery, which
makes their participation even more important.
Access to justice is a crucial component of
peaceful, just and inclusive societies, as reflected in
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16. But structural
inequalities, poverty and discrimination often hinder
women’s access to justice and security, as well as
transitional justice processes. Gender-responsive legal
and judicial systems are fundamental for building and
sustaining resilient societies. Liechtenstein is proud to
be a member of the pathfinders for peaceful, just and
inclusive societies, which lead on the implementation
of SDG 16 and provide a basis for exchange of best
practices in that area.
The latest report (S/2017/249) of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence documents
19 situations, involving 46 parties to conflict, of
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

committing or instigating patterns of rape and other
forms of sexual violence. While women and girls are
particularly vulnerable to becoming victims of such
violence in conflict situations, men and boys are also
targeted. It is well documented that, among other
purposes, armed forces or groups, including groups
involved in violent extremism, recruit both girls and
boys for sexual purposes. Moreover, men and boys
often represent the majority of detainees during armed
conflict and are highly vulnerable to sexual violence.
A prevailing culture of silence and harmful stereotypes
oftens prevent male victims from coming forward,
which further reduces the prospects for accountability.
Transitional justice mechanisms often adopt
a gender-binary interpretation of sexual violence,
identifying women as victims and men as perpetrators.
As a consequence, male survivors face limited or no
access to important reparations and psychosocial
and medical services. At the same time, stereotyping
women as victims can hinder them in fully using their
potential to live life in dignity.
Sexual and gender-based violence can constitute
crimes against humanity and war crimes and, in
specific circumstances, elements of genocide. Those
are the core crimes under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which is the centrepiece
of our common fight against impunity for serious crimes
under international law. The most efficient protection
against conflict-related sexual violence is ensuring that
it does not happen in the first place.
Liechtenstein commends the Secretary-General
for his focus on prevention and would like to recall
that 114 States have signed the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
on Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes — pledging to
support timely and decisive action to prevent and end
such crimes. We call on the remaining States to join
the code of conduct, and thereby help ensure that the
Council delivers on its mandate to protect civilians
from mass atrocities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency for
having convened this meeting in order to take stock of
the achievements made and prospects for the holistic
and full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The

S/PV. 8079

resolution is indubitably a cornerstone in many regards,
by acknowledging the critical role of women in the
promotion of the culture of peace and resilience within
our societies and the critical nature of their participation
in drafting and implementing post-conflict strategies.
Successively adopted resolutions by the Security
Council and the General Assembly contributed to
further fine-tuning the prospects provided by the main
resolution, in terms of women’s leadership during
peacebuilding processes and the assured added-value
provided by civil society actors and others on the whole.
There is no need to recall the devastating
repercussions of war and conflict on people, especially
on the most vulnerable. Unfortunately, we see that on
virtually a daily basis. Women and children are the
principal victims. Despite the progress that has been
achieved since 2000, which has been reflected in an
active participation in peace movements and a growing
role in post-conflict rebuilding, women remain
essentially absent in negotiations and institutions
for peacebuilding. That consistently hampers the
process of conflict resolution. In our view, women’s
involvement remains critical. Over the long-term,
that will make possible a gender balance in public
institutions and with regard to legal reform. That was
an observation made in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/861). Tunisia thanks him for the quality of the
assessment and recommendations contained therein. In
particular, we welcome the initiative to assess how well
women are represented in peace processes, as part of
the reform project. We welcome that initiative because
that approach recognizes the important role played
by women in mediation, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding efforts. In addition, my
delegation would like to recognize the efforts undertaken
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, in connection with the prevention
of violent extremism. Nothing highlights the validity
of the gender approach as much as the development
of measures aimed at combating radicalization, or
rehabilitating or reintegrating women returning from
conflict zones.
My country’s delegation also welcomes the
publication of the Secretary-General’s strategy on gender
parity at the United Nations. The recommendations
developed are not solely focused on management
issues, but also promote the need to revisit the role of
women in peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we
support the call made by the Secretary-General to the

17-3496237/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

members of the Security Council to continue to pay
special attention to women’s issues in the area of peace
and security when “new crises arise, others worsen or
when the Council focuses on counter-terrorism or the
deployment of contingents”.
Turning again to Tunisia, the Code of Personal
Status was adopted in 1956 and was indeed the
foundation of modern Tunisia, perhaps even more so
than the country’s first Constitution, which was adopted
in 1959. That illustrates the importance of women’s
empowerment in developing a modern citizenshipbased policy for Tunisian society since the establishment
of the first Republic of Tunisia. That reform momentum
was reflected in the new 2014 Constitution, which
guarantees and protects women’s rights. It should be
recalled that women were on the front lines during the
fight for democracy. They continue to be change agents
for long-term stability.
In line with resolution 1325 (2000), the Tunisian
Parliament recently unanimously adopted a historic
law to eliminate all violence against women. That text
is the outcome of the joint efforts of the Government
and human rights organizations and associations. It is
important to adhere to international instruments and
standards in the area of violence against women, and,
for the first time, to recognize threats posed to women’s
economic rights as gender-based violence against
women. Tunisia has underscored that the adoption of
that law was complemented by the establishment of
a committee made up of renowned intellectuals and
academics, tasked with studying the issue of individual
freedoms and equality in all areas. Those new
approaches only serve to underscore the irreversible
nature of our efforts to eliminate all forms of genderbased violence.
One of the goals of the annual debate on the women
and peace and security agenda is to assess the progress
made in the various countries in developing national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000). My delegation
would like point out that a three-year project undertaken
under the auspices of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs
and the Ministry of Social Affairs, with the support
of UN-Women and other partners, is under way. That
project, which is participatory in nature and involves
various Tunisian stakeholders, aims to implement
a national action plan for Tunisia on the women and
peace and security agenda.
38/104

27/10/2017

According to the poet Louis Aragon, the future of
men is women. To that end, a catalyst for resilience and
development is required in the societal model to ensure
that peace is maintained and progress visible and
measurable. It reflects the vital nature of everyone’s
commitment to promoting the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): As Chair of the MIKTA
Group for 2017, Turkey has the honour to deliver the
following statement on behalf of the MIKTA countries,
namely, Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia.
At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s open debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2017/861).
The MIKTA countries welcome the continued
attention paid to the women and peace and security
agenda at the Security Council. We recognize the
key role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding. We underscore
the importance of their equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts in the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. We also believe in the
need to increase the role of women in decision-making
on conflict prevention and resolution.
In that regard, let me note that all MIKTA countries
are members of the Group of Friends for Gender Parity.
The MIKTA countries believe that achieving gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls are
critical to conflict prevention, as well as the broader
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
That is also key for the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
We consider resolution 1325 (2000) to be an
important milestone for addressing the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls. Successive Security
Council resolutions have also contributed to the
establishment of a sound, normative framework in that
regard. We attach importance to ensuring collaboration
and coordination through the United Nations system in
the implementation of those resolutions and continue
to encourage more women to participate in the
United Nations peacekeeping process and missions.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Despite the progress achieved so far, we still face
daunting challenges. Women and girls continue to be
disproportionately affected by the impact of conflicts
around the world. In that context, we are alarmed by the
targeting of women and girls by gender-based violence,
in particular rape and other forms of sexual abuse,
in situations of conflict. Such appalling acts deserve
to be condemned. The MIKTA countries also attach
importance to the efforts to improve the United Nations
system-wide approach to preventing and responding to
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Massive forced displacements caused by the
devastating effects of conflicts continue to be a
source of grave concern. Women and girls face severe
consequences in humanitarian crisis situations. The
MIKTA countries are committed to promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls. It is
imperative to develop gender-responsive humanitarian
polices that ensure that women and girls have access
to basic services, including health and education.
It was encouraging to see that gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls emerged as an
overarching theme of the commitments made at the first
World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul last year.
It is important to transform such commitments into
action. It is also crucial to redouble our efforts to prevent
women and girls from becoming victims of human
trafficking in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
can achieve meaningful progress on that front only
through coordinated and consolidated measures.
At a time when the causes and effects of conflicts
easily spread across borders, regional and international
coordination and cooperation remain important
tools in addressing the challenges we face. With that
understanding, MIKTA, as a cross-regional group
of countries on different continents, underscores its
readiness to contribute to international efforts for taking
forward the women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Allow me to read out an
abridged version of my statement.
First of all, I thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for convening this annual debate on
women and peace and security. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2017/861), and
the briefers for their updates and insights.

S/PV. 8079

From the days of the Council’s inception and the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), in 2000, Nepal has
been a proactive supporter of the cause of women and
peace and security. I am pleased to inform the Council
about how far Nepal has come. In 2011, Nepal adopted
a national action plan to implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008). The Ministry of Peace and
Reconstruction coordinates the plan’s implementation,
while its oversight is ensured by a high-level
steering committee co-chaired by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and Peace and Reconstruction, with
members drawn from relevant ministries and civil
society organizations.
Nepal has made explicit efforts to localize its
national action plan, with localization guidelines in
place since 2013. With the mandatory provision of
33 per cent women’s representation in local peace
committees, Nepal’s national action plan has been an
example of a transparent, inclusive and participatory
process, with the close involvement of conflict victims
and civil society organizations. This example has been
well shared with countries in the region and outside.
The success of the first national action plan has led
us to the soon-to-be-adopted second national action
plan, which focuses on sexual violence, particularly
during conflict.
Eager to catch up with the global average of gender
parity in current deployment, Nepal is committed
to progressively attaining the United Nations goal of
15 per cent females in peacekeeping operations, and
has employed inclusive policies to encourage more
females to join the national security forces. In the spirit
of moving from zero tolerance to zero cases, Nepal
has endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians and signed the Secretary-General’s
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Nations
policies on sexual exploitation and abuse and the
protection of human rights are fully incorporated in the
predeployment training courses for our peacekeepers.
Through its own experiences as a United Nations
peacekeeping and civilian protection partner since 1958
and as the sixth largest troop- and police-contributing
country on the one hand, and as a country emerging
from its own armed conflict, on the other, Nepal has
come to believe that women’s increased role in the
national context significantly complements the United
Nations aspiration of women playing a greater role at
the global level.

17-3496239/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

In Nepal’s case, women’s increased representation
in legislative and Government bodies and State
institutions since 2007 has directly contributed to
fostering good governance and inclusive societies.
The mandatory 33 per cent representation of women,
guaranteed under the new constitution for both federal
and provincial-level legislatures, will qualitatively
enhance the empowerment and ownership of women
in all walks of national life. Already, Nepal has seen
women in the positions of Head of State, Speaker of
the Legislature-Parliament and Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court at the same time. The National Women’s
Commission is now an independent and powerful
constitutional body with an overall mandate to monitor
and safeguard the rights and interests of women.

Human Security Network, and would like to make
some additional comments and remarks in its
national capacity.

The recent local level elections, where women have
secured nearly half of the leadership positions — beyond
the constitutional guarantee of 40 per cent — is
expected to generate further multiplier effects to ensure
the maximum inclusion and participation of women
in leadership positions, legislation, and governance.
Moreover, there is a 33 per cent quota for certain
positions in Government services, including in security
forces. The gender responsive budget, introduced
in 2006 has now reached over 35 per cent of the
total budget.

Since we believe that it is imperative to eliminate
barriers to gender equality and to ensure the
meaningful participation of women, we are continuing
to support different projects in that regard, including by
contributing funds to support the NATO/Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council Policy for the implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on Women, Peace and Security. We have, for example,
requested that Slovenia’s financial contribution in 2017,
which amounts to €500,000 for the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, be used for projects that
focus on the advancement of female members in the
Afghan forces.

In conclusion, Nepal believes that the meaningful
engagement of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, as well as in sustaining peace and securing
the implementation of Council resolutions, has greatly
complemented our own efforts. Our national experience
suggests that the peace process would not be complete
without the full, equal and effective participation
of women. As a country emerging from a successful
domestic peace process, Nepal stands ready to share its
experience and lessons learned through the constructive
engagement of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict restructuring
and rebuilding — all gearing towards the timely
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Kuret (Slovenia): Let me begin by sincerely
thanking France for organizing this open debate and the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2017/861).
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union
and by representative of Panama on behalf of the
40/104

The review of Slovenia’s first national action plan
showed our contribution to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security
at different levels, especially in the international and
regional organization, and through the participation in
international operations and missions. We have also
helped to promote the implementation of the resolution
in the region of the Western Balkans. More than 20
projects have been carried out in cooperation with civil
society to empower women in Africa, the Middle East
and Afghanistan.

At the national level, important achievements have
been made in education and training on the women and
peace and security agenda, which were systematically
introduced throughout the Slovene armed forces. In
2015, a permanent position of gender adviser within
the General Staff of the Slovene armed forces was
established, as was a network of gender advisers. We
are happy to report that in 2016, almost 10 per cent
of military staff and more than 20 per cent of police
personnel deployed to international operations and
missions were women. Moreover, this spring, Slovenia
gladly answered to the United Nations call to appoint
women in command positions by contributing the first
woman contingent commander to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
But events in the international community also
demand activities outside of the action plan. In that
regard, Slovenia has gained important experience in
integrating the gender perspective into the management
of migration movements, and shared its knowledge in
the region. Cooperation and partnership with different
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

stakeholders are crucial to the realization of that
agenda on the ground. Therefore, we gladly participate
in different networks, such as the global Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network
and the recently established Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network.

substantive meeting in Alicante and its follow-up in
New York. We look forward to Germany and Namibia
chairing the Focal Points Network in 2018 and 2019,
respectively. Furthermore, we wish to highlight
regional initiatives which can multiply efforts towards
more effective implementation.

As we speak of women’s equal and meaningful
participation and leadership in peace-related activities,
let me add that the political participation of women
in Slovenia is excellent. Half of the Government is
comprised of women, including both the Minister of
Defence and the Minister of the Interior. I am also
very pleased that yesterday’s first released index on
women, peace and security placed Slovenia in fourth
place. That is why we believe that the integration of the
gender perspective into peace and security is not just a
women’s issue; it concerns men, too.

The Group welcomes the Secretary-General’s
leadership on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace and notes that the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda directly
contributes to these objectives. Indeed, we know that
gender-based violence and the repression of women’s
human rights is correlated with the outbreak of
conflict We also know that women’s participation has
a positive impact on the credibility and durability of
peace agreements. Therefore, it is all the more essential
to include gender considerations and the meaningful
participation of women in early warning, mediation and
conflict resolution efforts, as well as the mainstreaming
of gender-specific language and the human rights of
women in peace agreements. A greater role for women
also needs to be ensured in post-conflict peacebuilding
and economic recovery.

Let me conclude by noting that we should also
encourage men’s participation and leadership in the
promotion of gender equality. I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General’s
action in both regards.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I am pleased to speak first on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, an informal network of 51 interested Member
States chaired by Canada, representing all five regional
groups of the United Nations. I will then make brief
remarks in my national capacity.
On the seventeenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the Group reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Council’s work on this
important agenda. Despite an increasingly robust
normative framework on women, peace, and security,
we emphasize that real, tangible progress lies in
implementation. In that regard, much remains to be
done. We applaud the countries that have established
or renewed national action plans in the past year. We
reiterate that such plans must be coupled with sufficient
resources to deliver results. Such implementation will
also directly contribute to the realization of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, agreed to by all
Member States.
We wish to thank Spain for its initiative to
establish the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network and for organizing the first

This approach should also apply to the Security
Council’s work in preventing and addressing conflict. In
this regard, we welcome the ongoing work undertaken
by the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security to facilitate a more systematic approach
to the Council’s agenda, including in resolutions,
statements, reporting and visits to the field, as well as
regular input from civil society. Indeed, we recognize
the importance of engaging with and supporting civil
society in delivering real impact on this agenda.
The Group highlights the need to further the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in United Nations peacekeeping, both in terms
of women’s participation and gender expertise and
mainstreaming into doctrine and all planning documents.
Women play an indispensable role in peacekeeping and
their participation at all levels is key to the operational
effectiveness of missions. We must therefore redouble
efforts and engage in new and creative thinking to
resolve persistent gaps and structural barriers to female
participation and leadership. Separately, peacekeeping
operations need to be equipped with appropriate
gender-responsive conflict analysis and expertise. We
are deeply concerned that cutting, downgrading and
underresourcing gender advisors and women protection

17-3496241/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

advisors positions may cripple the ability of peace
operations to fulfil these critical tasks.
We must also ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers themselves are not part of the problem
and condemn cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
We welcome recent initiatives by the SecretaryGeneral, including the conclusion of the sexual
exploitation and abuse voluntary compact with Member
States, the establishment of a Circle of Leadership and
the appointment of a sexual exploitation and abuse
victims’ rights advocate. Still much more needs to be
done to tackle this scourge, ensure accountability and
fundamentally reconfigure our collective approach to
make it victim centred.
Unfortunately, sexual violence also remains
prevalent in situations of armed conflict worldwide.
The Group condemns in the strongest terms such acts,
which constitute a grave violation and abuse of human
rights and international humanitarian law, and raise
barriers to the full achievement of gender equality,
peace and development. To end impunity, perpetrators
must be brought to justice, and victims and survivors
must be assisted in a comprehensive manner in order
to fully recover from these violations and be able to
reintegrate in their societies.
We are also appalled by acts of sexual violence,
including rape, child, early and forced marriage and
enslavement, including those committed by terrorist
groups, such as Da’esh. In this regard, we welcome
the recent adoption of resolution 2379 (2017), on
accountability for the acts committed by Da’esh
in Iraq. It is our hope that this is the first step in a
process to ensure more comprehensive accountability.
We highlight the importance of including specific
expertise on gender and sexual violence to ensure
the documentation of sexual violence as part of these
efforts, as well as a focus on reducing stigma associated
with survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
Indeed, a gendered approach is critical to facing new
and emerging challenges, such as violent extremism.
We support the engagement of women’s leadership and
the incorporation of a gender lens into the development
of strategies to prevent and address violent extremism,
and recognize Women’s Alliance for Security
Leadership as a dynamic network of independent
women-led organizations that are locally rooted and
globally connected. Such an approach recognizes the
role of women in developing resilience, the impact of
42/104

27/10/2017

violent extremism on women and the reality of women
joining violent extremist groups. We also welcome the
establishment of the Group of Friends of Preventing
Violent Extremism, co-chaired by Jordan and Norway,
which stresses the need for full participation of women
and youth in efforts to prevent violent extremism.
To conclude the Group of Friends statement, we
believe in the transformational potential of the women
and peace and security agenda. We remain committed
to working with the United Nations and all Member
States for its full realization.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to make a few additional remarks in my
national capacity.
There is no doubt that progress has been made in
implementing the women and peace and security agenda,
however, it has been slow and many challenges remain.
We must consider doing things differently and we must
challenge ourselves to move beyond incrementalism.
Canada is committed to finding opportunities to
create and support transformative solutions for gender
equality in conflict situations. We will defend women’s
voices and human rights. We will challenge narratives
that undermine women’s ability to contribute, lead and
shape solutions. We will collaborate with civil society,
Member States and the United Nations to reinvigorate
the implementation of this important agenda. Finally,
we will continue to demonstrate our commitment to
transparent and regular reporting on the progress made
in the implementation of our national action plan on
women and peace and security, which is currently
being finalized, to ensure that we are making progress.
In the context of our feminist foreign policy, Canada
is taking concrete actions to advance the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
(spoke in English)
We recognize that women are key actors in conflict
prevention and resolution and peacebuilding. Peace
and security is one of the cornerstones of Canada’s
Feminist International Assistance Policy, which puts
gender equality at the centre of international assistance
programming. In support of this policy, Canada will
dedicate $150 million over five years to support local
organizations that advance women’s rights in developing
and fragile States. Last year, Canada also provided
$1.5 million to the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund, which supports women’s organizations working
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

on the front lines of conflict prevention and resolution.
We strongly urge others to support this Fund to ensure
that women’s and girls’ voices are heard.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

We know that by failing to mainstream gender
perspectives in peace operations, we will fail to
effectively respond to the needs and interests of local
women and girls. At the United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Conference, which Canada
will be pleased to host in Vancouver om November,
mainstreaming gender into our discussions and
reflections is of the utmost importance. We are
challenging the panellists and participants to suggest
and present innovative solutions to integrating gender
perspectives in peacekeeping. Canada continues to
demonstrate its commitment to supporting women’s
participation in peace operations. We are working
to increase the proportion of Canadian women
peacekeepers, including police officers deployed to
peace operations, and have been at the forefront of a
United Nations training initiative aimed at increasing
the number of women police officers deployed.

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my gratitude to France for organizing
today’s debate, and thank the briefers.

Canada is also a strong advocate for the full
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. Our Prime
Minister recently joined the Secretary-General’s Circle
of Leadership and signed the voluntary compact on
eliminating sexual exploitation and abuse. We are
also providing funding to the Office of the Special
Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and to the Trust
Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, and we strongly encourage all Member States to
do the same.
The question of accountability resonates strongly
for Canada. Under our first national action plan,
Canada submitted five annual progress reports on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Parliament, which helped to take stock of
the progress achieved and record lessons learned. The
progress reports also allowed us to identify shortfalls
and highlight emerging good practices, all of which have
been useful in the development of the second action plan.
We wish to thank civil society and national indigenous
organizations, which provided invaluable input into
this action plan, which will be launched shortly. We
look forward to collaborating with our domestic and
international partners in its implementation.

The growing body of evidence shows that women’s
participation in peace and reconciliation processes and
their implementation have contributed to increased
chances of success for the sustainability of peace and
security arrangements in various parts of the world. As
a result of foreign intervention and military invasions,
as well as foreign occupation combined with an upsurge
of violent extremism and terrorism, women and girls
in many parts of the Middle East are witnessing the
collapse of their hopes for a better future. At the
same time, sadly in many conflicts, especially in the
Middle East, women have been and continue to be
the primary victims of large-scale and often systemic
sexual violence.
Acts committed by terrorist groups, particularly
Boko Haram, Da’esh and Al-Shabaab, demonstrate
the most extreme forms of such violence, which
particularly targets women and children. There are
thousands of confirmed cases in which sexual violence
has been used as a tactic of terrorism and employed by
terrorist groups in places, such as Iraq, Syria, Somalia,
Nigeria and Mali, to advance their military, economic
and ideological ends.
It would be naive to assume that, based on the
physical disappearance of Da’esh in Iraq and Syria,
its heinous activities and atrocities directed against
innocent civilians, especially women and children,
might cease. Indeed, they have integrated those dreadful
practices into their takfiri ideology — a destructive
ideology of hate an exclusion enforced through a
complex system of networking throughout the world.
The international community needs first and foremost
to concentrate on combating such a vicious ideology
and those who propagate it.
At the same time, we cannot neglect the very
significant dynamic generated by interventionist
policies and occupation, as well as attempts at regime
change that have prepared the optimal breeding
ground for terrorist and extremist groups to grow and
function. Experience in our region clearly shows that,
following every instance of aggression and foreign
intervention, there is a vacuum resulting in instability,

17-3496243/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

which is effectively exploited by those groups that have
committed the most serious crimes against innocent
civilians, especially women and children, who are the
most vulnerable part of the fabric of society. A failedState situation and post-aggression environment give
them a free hand to organize themselves and propagate
their ideology. Unfortunately, the Security Council
normally does not discuss the role of those who bear
the primary responsibility for such scenarios by having
created the breeding ground for terrorists. For obvious
reasons, it prefers to discuss the symptoms and not
the causes.
Iranian women are an integral part of a vibrant
Iranian society. Their outstanding role in advancing
development, peace and humanitarian causes in
society is incontestable. They are active participants
in political life and elections as both candidates and
voters. Education has been the centrepiece of our
efforts to empower women and girls over the past
four decades. It is therefore not surprising that the
number of women who study medicine and science in
Iran is now double that of men. The role of the private
sector, including microenterprise and cooperatives
for women’s economic empowerment, has increased
substantively in Iran.
It noteworthy that our national achievements are
being made against the backdrop of the most hostile,
unilateral and coercive sanctions against Iranians. Such
inhuman and indiscriminate sanctions imposed by the
United States under dubious pretexts are in flagrant
violation of the basic economic and social rights of all
women and girls, as well as their right to development,
and undermines the constructive role that Iranian civil
society and women can play therein.
I hope that this open debate will contribute to
ongoing efforts to integrate the women and peace and
security agenda into conflict prevention.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Komárek (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
We would like to thank to French presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his valuable report (S/2017/861)
on women and peace and security, as well as for his
44/104

27/10/2017

strong commitment to implementing the agenda in
terms of women’s participation in the work of the entire
Organization, including its security pillar.
The Czech Republic supports the special focus of
the Secretary-General on the meaningful participation
of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction
so as to establish sustained peace in conflict-affected
countries. The Czech Republic is happy to recognize
that the women and peace and security agenda has
gained increased attention from the United Nations
Member States since its adoption as resolution 1325
(2000) by the Security Council in 2000. The number
of national action plans for implementing the women
and peace and security agenda is increasing, as is the
number of related projects.
On the other hand, it is a less encouraging fact that
national action plans relating to the agenda have been
adopted by only 68 of the 193 United Nations Member
States, and that the vast majority of projects are small,
short-term and underfinanced. As the global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) concluded
in 2015, one of the key obstacles to implementing the
women and peace and security commitments has been
the lack of financing.
The Czech Republic adopted its national action
plan on women and peace and security in January
2017. The plan contains concrete, measurable tasks. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Sweden
and Austria for sharing their national experiences in
helping us establish the Czech national action plan. The
Czech Ministry of Defence adopted its own action plan
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015. Based on
its successful specialized projects, the Czech Republic
became the lead nation of a programme dedicated to
training Jordanian female soldiers in the disposal of
explosive ordnance. Gender mainstreaming belongs
to the cross-cutting principles of the transition and
promotion programme of the Czech Republic. The aim
of the programme is to promote democratic principles
in countries in transition, for example by encouraging
women’s participation in decision-making.
In the framework of development cooperation and
humanitarian aid, the Czech Republic has implemented
a number of projects totalling $6 million in 2016, with
a strong focus on gender equality and/or women’s
empowerment, including projects aimed at preventing
sexual violence and abuse of women and girls. Those
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

projects were implemented in Georgia, Serbia, Kosovo,
Syria, the Central African Republic and Afghanistan.
Women, however, are still underrepresented in the
decision-making positions in the Czech Republic,
including in diplomatic posts. Therefore, an action plan
for a balanced representation of women and men in
decision-making positions for the period 2016-2018 was
adopted by the Czech Government in July 2016.
The Czech Republic is supporting global gender
activities, including activities in the framework of the
women and peace and security agenda of UN-Women,
through regular voluntary financial contributions.
Let me assure you, Madam President, that the
Czech Republic remains strongly committed to the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
and international levels.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.
While hope is growing in some regions, new crises
are emerging elsewhere. Persistent and recurring
suffering as a result of war calls us to action. There is
fear and distress, persons are displaced, and educations
and livelihoods are lost. Women’s and girls’ rights are
targeted and their security compromised even before
a conflict erupts. Experience has taught us that there
is no sustainable peace without the participation of
women. We will not succeed unless our approach is
gender-responsive.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/861), but we also have concerns about the
decrease in women’s participation in mediation after
years of steady progress, the decline in requests for
and inclusion of gender expertise, and the decline in
gender-sensitivity in peace agreements. Hard-won
gains must be sustained. It is up to us to see that they
are. A global Women, Peace and Security Index was
launched yesterday. It combines data on women’s
inclusion, access to justice and security. It can help
us target interventions more effectively. We are doing
better normatively, but also in implementation. What is
needed is more strategic and consistent implementation.
Overall, women have become more influential in
peace processes, at the negotiating table and as part of
parallel initiatives. Colombia and Syria are noteworthy,

S/PV. 8079

but important strides have also been made in countries
like Yemen and the Philippines. We are including civil
society more systematically. We commend the efforts
of UN-Women, the Department for Political Affairs,
and committed Special Envoys.
The question remains: Are we learning from
one process to the next? Various groups of friends,
including the new Group of Friends on Countering and
Preventing Violent Extremism, give attention to the
participation of women and the roles of young women
and men. The Women Mediators Networks make it
possible for those involved to share experiences. The
National Focal Points Initiative is helpful. The Nordic
countries have joined forces for women and peace and
security. Nordic-Baltic coordinators will meet annually
to improve coordination and the implementation of
national action plans in our region.
However, more is required if we are to effectively
learn from our successes and failures alike. The NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security provides
essential information. The Global Solutions Exchange
platform shares insights that we need. Yet our approach
to women and peace and security is often too generic
and lacks contextual analysis and points of action. The
Security Council’s informal group of experts is an
important step in the right direction.
Gender is recognized to be about men and
masculinity as well. Men can be victims of sexual
violence too. That women can play a destructive role in
conflict is no longer ignored, yet stereotypes persist and
influence our work. The powerful leadership of women
in mediation is now better understood and promoted,
but women are often ignored when a process moves
to the national or international level. Women human
rights defenders often remain unprotected, abuses
underreported, and our response inadequate.
Sexual violence is firmly on the agenda. We
recognize the work of the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
and her Team of Experts, and the call to action to end
sexual violence in conflict. Women and men in United
Nations operations are more systematically trained
to be gender-responsive. Yet sexual violence remains
endemic in many conflicts. We welcome the new
handbook on the prevention and handling of sexual
violence in conflict that is being developed for use in
United Nations peace operations.

17-3496245/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

More women are being deployed as leaders as well.
Major General Kristin Lund was recently appointed
Head of Mission and Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization in the Middle
East. Women leaders are sought after. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s leadership and the new strategy
on gender parity. However, he needs our help. Member
States are nominating seven men for each woman. We
have many best practices and positive developments
to showcase, but far too often they remain isolated
initiatives that are not followed up consistently and
systematically. Our job is to ensure that best practices
become mainstream practice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you and France, Madam, for
your efforts during your presidency of the Security
Council this month and for organizing this meeting. We
wish you every success in your endeavour.
Allow me also to thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his report (S/2017/861). We welcome
his recommendations. We stress the importance of
ensuring the full and genuine participation of women
in peace and security efforts and the need to provide
regular and necessary financing for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
also welcome the Secretary-General’s strategy on
gender parity.
We meet today to assess our efforts as an
international community — not only our ability
to solve conflicts, but also our ability to empower
women effectively and increase their participation in
peace negotiations, conflict prevention efforts and
humanitarian relief action, as well as in the prevention
of extremist ideologies and terrorism. Jordan attaches
great importance to women’s empowerment at all
levels because they play a major role in promoting
sustainable peace.
At the national level, we have achieved progress
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Indeed, our draft national plan has
been submitted to the Cabinet and will be ratified
soon, launching the effective implementation of the
agenda in cooperation with civil society organizations
and all governmental and military entities. We have
estimated the cost of the national plan and allocated
a quality, flexible and realistic budget to it. We stress
46/104

27/10/2017

the importance of capacity-building and providing
financial resources and technical support. That will
help provide the necessary financial resources.
Successive Jordanian Governments have attached
importance to and prioritized women’s rights and
empowerment. They have focused on increasing
women’s participation in economic, social and political
life. We recently achieved great progress in introducing
legislative reforms and improving administrative and
political frameworks to end all forms of discrimination
against women and promote gender equality. The
participation of women has been improved at all levels
over the past decade in Jordan, rising to 15.4 per cent
in the Senate and House of Representatives; 18.5 per
cent in the judiciary; 35.5 per cent in political parties;
37.8 per cent in municipal councils; 21 per cent in trade
unions; and 19.9 per cent in the diplomatic corps.
Despite these achievements we continue to face
social and political challenges to women’s empowerment
and gender equality, and we continue to address
these challenges. Building on that, Jordan continuously
reviews its legislation to empower women and ensure
their access to decision-making posts and increase their
political participation in elected councils. We have also
enacted rules and legislation to protect them against
violence and discrimination. Most importantly, in 2007
we adopted flexible work rules that benefit all female
workers and business-owners in the private sector,
especially those with family responsibilities. We have
also adopted a law against domestic violence to protect
and rehabilitate women. Our Parliament has also deleted
article 308 of the Penal Code, which granted impunity
to rapists by allowing them to marry their victims.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is an
opportunity to make a quantum leap in the participatory
development process to include a gender perspective in
all national development agendas. As the context of the
Jordan 2025 document and the Executive Development
Programme 2016-2019, we adopted a set of policies to
empower women in the sectors of health, education,
ending poverty, social protection and employment,
and on their participation in the labour force and in
social and political life. We also promoted women’s
empowerment during the voluntary national review
of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development
Goals in July in New York, especially with respect to
Goal 5, on gender equality.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Recently, in New York, Jordan and Norway, with
the participation of 40 States, also launched the Group
of Friends on Countering and Preventing Violent
Extremism. The Group focuses on the importance of
empowering women and young people to fight violent
extremism and promote the ability of local women to
prevent conflict, respond to crises and emergencies,
and build sustainable peace. It focuses on the need
to link education to social and human sciences,
communications and media in order to build promising
generations that will work for peace. We note the major
role played by Jordan in following up on the youth,
peace and security agenda during our membership of
the Security Council in 2014 and 2015 and the adoption
of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security.
Jordan is a pioneer at the regional and international
levels. We provide international peace and security
expertise by taking part in peacekeeping and deploying
peacekeepers, and by participating in dialogue and
mediation for peace. We also support the policy of
zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
are also increasing women’s participation in police
departments. Recently, we sent women police officers
to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and
expect to send female peacekeepers to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
This highlights the great importance we attach to the
contribution of women and the promotion of their roles
in peacekeeping operations. We stress the need for the
United Nations to move from peacekeeping to conflict
prevention. We must work together to address the root
causes of conflict and to prevent them. In fact, women
play a major, important and effective part in that.
We are providing a variety of services to Syrian
refugees. We offer basic education and health services
to women and men refugees in post-conflict and crisis
situations. Some 50 per cent of refugees are women and
53 per cent are young people under 18 years. We have
opened schools in refugee camps and facilitated the
inclusion of student refugees even when they lacked the
necessary documentation. Our public schools have been
working double shifts to service these students. We are
also providing gender-responsive services, including
psychosocial support and legal and medical services.
We are facilitating secure access to these services for
the most exposed and vulnerable women and girls,
especially in refugee camps and host families.
With regard to human trafficking, we have launched
the Al-Karama Centre, which protects victims of all

S/PV. 8079

nationalities. Our Government is supporting small
enterprises, led by women within refugee camps and
in Jordanian society. We are facilitating their work
in the Jordanian labour market by giving them work
permits. The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund,
which was established after the 2015 high-level review
of the women and peace and security agenda, is also
providing vital support for Syrian women refugees. It
empowers them economically, protects their rights and
fights sexual violence.
I would like to the need for the international
community to alleviate the suffering of Palestinian
women and girls under the yoke of Israeli occupation,
especially in Israeli prisons. We must provide them
with all their legitimate rights, including the right to
live in dignity.
Women play an effective and principal role in
building peace. There can be no peace in societies
without the serious and genuine participation of women.
We cannot achieve the 2030 Agenda or sustainable
peace without empowering women and girls, without
gender equality, and without ending all forms of
violence against them. We will continue to work at the
national, regional and international levels to support
the women and peace and security agenda to provide a
better future for women and girls without delay.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I should like to thank France for
organizing this debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2017/861) on the subject, as well as his Chef
de Cabinet, the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
la Francophonie and Ms. Mina-Rojas for their briefings.
Many positive steps have been taken to implement
the eight resolutions on women and peace and security.
Despite these efforts, however, women remain a
minority in peace and security negotiations and in
peacekeeping operations. The challenge is to fully
implement the resolutions of the Council, including the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000).
Protection and independence are inextricable
dimensions of the women and peace and security
agenda. At the international level, this requires
women’s participation and respect for their rights in

17-3496247/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

the formulation and implementation of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
in peace negotiations, in peacekeeping initiatives and
in humanitarian interventions.
Complex humanitarian crises spawned by conflicts
shed light on the plight of women and girls who are
subject to various forms of sexual violence and forced
to flee their homes and communities. They become
refugees and displaced persons. In this context, we
must pay particular attention to women and girls within
the most vulnerable groups.
The importance of increasing the presence of
women in peacekeeping operations is indisputable.
It would be unthinkable to establish a peacekeeping
operation without deploying gender-equality advisers,
incorporating a protection of women mandate, or
training Blue Helmets in the prevention of and the
fight against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.
We commend the Secretariat for the measures it has
proposed to reach the target of 15 per cent goal for
female officers among senior officers and military
observers within peacekeeping operations. Brazil
also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
initiatives to promote a new, victim-centred approach
to preventing and countering sexual exploitation and
abuse perpetrated by those serving under the United
Nations flag or a United Nations mandate.
Brazil had the honour of participating in the second
meeting of the National Focal Points Network that
addresses issues on women and peace and security,
in addition to the recent general debate of the General
Assembly. With its first national action plan, which has
been in place since March, Brazil now has an important
tool to measure its progress on the women and peace
and security agenda.
We have already made significant progress. For
instance, the Brazilian army has admitted women
to its military schools, the skills development
programme on women and peace and security has been
integrated in the establishment of the Sergio Vieira
de Mello Peacekeeping Operations Joint Center and
that programme has now been incorporated into the
curriculum of our School of Diplomacy. We are also
striving to increase the number of female candidates for
posts in Brazilian civilian and military peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We sincerely
hope that the national action plan will continue to
produce encouraging results and that the women and
48/104

27/10/2017

peace and security agenda will continue to flourish
within the United Nations system as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to ther representative of Mexico.
Ms. Jaquez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to France for convening this important annual
debate, which offers us a very good opportunity to
evaluate the progress and challenges of the agenda on
women and peace and security.
Mexico aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Turkey on behalf of the
group made up of Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of
Korea, Turkey and Australia.
It has been 17 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which represented indisputable progress
in the way in which we understand the disproportionate
consequences of armed conflicts on women and girls,
as well as the way in which we conceive women’s
participation in the reconstruction of societies and
promoting the gender dimensions of peace processes.
Today we confirm that women are a central piece
in attaining sustainable peace. Women are key to
preventing conflict and maintaining inclusive societies
with a healthy social fabric. Women and girls, who
represent more than half the world’s population, have
a central role to play in the prevention of conflict and
building peace. Mexico fully agrees with the findings of
the Secretary-General in his report (see S/2017/861). The
effective and cross-cutting application of that agenda
throughout the system contributes to implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, preventing
conflicts and achieving sustainable peace. We support
the Secretary-General’s commitment to integrate the
gender equality component as a central part of his
approach to conflict prevention, as well as the United
Nations management reform initiatives.
Mexico is convinced that the international
community must continue to promote a greater presence
of women in peace negotiations, more female candidates
for high-level positions in political and peacekeeping
operations, the establishment of gender agendas for
those negotiations and the design of peacebuilding
processes with a gender perspective.
At the national level, Mexico supports and
encourages the full participation of women in all areas
of public life. There is no doubt that gender equality
and the empowerment of women are necessary to
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

achieve societies that are more peaceful, fair, equitable
and inclusive. The participation and empowerment of
women allows us to strengthen sustainable peace.
Through its bodies and agencies the Government
of Mexico promotes equitable representation of women
in all sectors and levels. The participation and the
involvement of a pluralistic civil society, including
feminist organizations and defenders of women’s
rights, are essential to guarantee the fulfilment of those
commitments and advance our agenda on the progress
and empowerment of women and girls.
The eight resolutions adopted by the Security
Council in this area have contributed to strengthening
the norms of this agenda, but the challenge lies in
achieving its effective, coherent and cross-cutting
application throughout the Organization’s system in
order to eliminate the marginalization of women that
still exists in decision-making on peace and security.
The Security Council must continue to promote efforts
to mainstream that agenda in its work, particularly in
other thematic agendas, as well as including gender and
women’s protection advisers in peace operations.
In line with my country’s commitment to make
progress in the fulfilment of this agenda, Mexico
deployed, in 2016, the first four Mexican military women
to United Nations peace operations. We will continue
to expand the participation of female personnel in the
near future. Likewise, given the escalation of violence
currently occurring on the international scene — and
in recognizing that crises are not neutral from the
gender perspective and that armed conflicts affect
particularly women and girls — Mexico joined the
Secretary-General’s initiative on the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse committed by United Nations personnel on
the ground.
Sustainable peace has a woman’s face. Let us
make the necessary efforts to empower women and
girls, and pay special attention to the women in those
societies with deep problems in which conflicts can be
unleashed. Let us invest in women and girls as essential
promoters of peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Marinaki: It is an honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. I would like to express our appreciation

S/PV. 8079

to France, during its presidency of the Security Council,
for organizing this open debate. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia; align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union’s approach is built on the
foundations of human rights, peace and security,
development and gender equality. In that context,
promoting the agenda on women and peace and security
is essential to realizing our shared global ambitions for
conflict prevention, sustaining peace and sustainable
development. We welcome the first report SecretaryGeneral Guterres on women and peace and security
(see S/2017/861), and we fully support his commitment
to place gender at the centre of the United Nations
prevention platform. A few weeks ago, the European
Union and the United Nations launched the historic
Spotlight Initiative. With a European Union funding
commitment of €500 million, the Spotlight Initiative
intends to intensify and better target the efforts of the
European Union and the United Nations to eliminate
violence worldwide against women and girls.
In June, the European Union took over from Sweden
the leadership of the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies, a global
initiative to make sure that all humanitarian actors work
together to prevent and mitigate gender-based violence.
Also in June, the European Union signed the Council
of Europe’s Istanbul Convention. With that signature,
we committed to further strengthen the existing legal
framework and capacity to eliminate all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls,
including domestic violence.
The European Union further highlights the
resilience of our zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have revised the standards
of behaviour for our civilian and military missions and
operations, and we support the efforts of SecretaryGeneral Guterres in that regard. One thing that
connects the Spotlight Initiative, our leadership on the
Call to Action and our implementation of the agenda on
women and peace and security is our firm belief that
preventing sexual and gender-based violence is critical
to conflict prevention. Conflict prevention is a keystone
of our Global Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy
and of our new European Consensus on Development.

17-3496249/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

The full and effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remains a priority for
the European Union. Eighteen of our member States
have already adopted a national action plan on women
and peace and security, further complemented by an
implementation framework at a European Union-wide
level. In line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the European Union’s Gender Action
Plan 2016-2020, we are devoting €6.5 billion every
year to external projects on development that address
gender equality and women’s empowerment as either
a principal or a significant objective, with the aim of
carrying out more than 85 per cent of those projects in
the next year.
The European Union strategy for resilience-building,
adopted last June, directs us to consider the gender
perspective in all our activities to support partner
countries in becoming more resilient to today’s global
challenges. We remain committed to substantially
increasing women’s participation in all aspects of peace
and security, including women’s political participation
and leadership and their important role in the fight
against radicalization and violent extremism.
The European Union and its member States have
progressed towards better gender balance in our
diplomatic services and our field missions, including
in leadership positions. In our external action, we
have continued to work for women’s full and active
participation in conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding. In Afghanistan, we have helped female
members of the High Peace Council to play an active and
critical role in the peace agreement implementation. We
have also engaged in working alongside and supporting
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board of United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, while in Uganda we
have closely engaged with the Women Situation Room,
a mechanism fully operated by and for women to
contain election-related violence and enable women’s
political participation.
Turning to mediation, the European Union
continues its active involvement in mediation,
facilitation and dialogue processes. Our mediation
support team has been engaged in over 40 dialogues
and mediation efforts worldwide. More recently, we
have supported the training of Libyan women peace
activists in negotiation and mediation skills.
We appreciate the important work done in the
framework of the African Network of Women in
50/104

27/10/2017

Conflict Prevention and Peace Mediation and on
the initiative on mediation in the Mediterranean.
We have actively engaged with the Nordic Women
Peace Mediators’ Network and we are looking
forward to closely interacting with the newly created
Mediterranean Women Mediators’ Network, which
was launched yesterday in Rome. The European Union
remains ready to contribute to better synergies and
collaboration between all those networks. We fully
support the United Nations network of women and
peace and security focal points. We will also continue
to promote the crucial role of women mediators at the
grassroots level.
Let me recall the strong European Union support
to the ambitious United Nations reform agenda of the
Secretary-General Guterres. Promoting gender parity
in the Organization, as part of the reform effort,
must go hand in hand with gender analysis and the
integration of a gender perspective across all activities
of the United Nations.
The full participation of women and the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda should be a guiding principle for reforming the
peace and security pillar. Achieving gender equality
and ensuring the recruitment, promotion and retention
of women, in particular at senior levels and in United
Nations operations, will be critical. That requires
sustainable budgetary and human resources dedicated to
women and peace and security, including the systematic
recruitment and appropriate integration of gender
advisers as a standard part of the senior management of
all United Nations operations and teams.
Just as women and peace and security represent a
global agenda, the European Union has pursued global
partnerships and collaborations in that regard. Our
engagement and close cooperation with civil society
organizations will remain at the core of our efforts.
We reaffirm our determination to further develop our
strategic partnership with the United Nations and to
further strengthen our close cooperation with partner
countries and multilateral partners. We recently stepped
up our engagement in the initiative for the acceleration
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
regional level.
In conclusion, the United Nations can continue to
rely on the European Union as its staunchest supporter in
promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

around the world and in pioneering together our efforts
on the women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia welcomes the
Security Council’s decision to once again discuss the
issue of women and peace and security as a standing
agenda item. We are encouraged by the overwhelming
support shown by Member States as evidenced in the
large number of participants.
My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
We would like to reiterate that Namibia, as the
initiator of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, remains committed to its implementation.
We look forward to a time when women’s contributions
to peace processes are valued and respected equally.
In Namibia, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) falls within the national gender policy
framework, which includes a cluster on gender,
peacebuilding, conflict resolution and natural disaster
management. Its overarching objective is to increase and
strengthen women’s participation in conflict resolution,
promote women’s contribution to peacebuilding and
involve women in natural disaster management, an
emerging issue that resolution 1325 (2000) overlooked.
The reviewed gender policy is complemented by other
national policies aimed at mainstreaming gender and
holding discussions on placing women on par with men,
including in the Affirmative Action Act, the Inheritance
Act and the Communal Land Act, among others.
Those policies have ensured that Namibia has
been deploying women to all peacekeeping missions
and has had to date one of the largest female police
contingents at the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Sudan. We also had a
women police contingent in Liberia. When one of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
countries, Lesotho, faced a political impasse last year,
the SADC police contingent to that country was led
by a Namibian woman who had previously served in
Darfur. In addition, Namibia has seconded a woman
to the Office of the African Union Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security.
It is our belief that the significant presence of
women peacekeepers in conflict and post-conflict

S/PV. 8079

areas has an added advantage of creating safer spaces
for girls and women who have suffered sexual violence.
Studies conducted by the United Nations on support for
resolution 1325 (2000) have demonstrated that female
soldiers often face different cultural restrictions than
their male counterparts and are able to gain information
from women and children. That ability to gain the
trust of local populations should be considered a vital
component of any peacekeeping operation.
The challenges to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) are many, and include a lack of awareness
of the agenda, a lack of political will, compounded by
entrenched biases not to promote women to positions
of power, and a lack of capacity-building and financing
for the agenda. Another challenge is simply cultural
and traditional norms that serve to promote men to
positions of power, while questioning the ability of
women to lead, particularly in traditionally male fields
such as the police, defence services and peacekeeping.
Since those traditional norms are pushed by both
women and men, we must encourage a culture in which
both men and women believe it is vital to support the
rise of women to positions of leadership.
The inclusion of women in early-warning,
mediation and conflict resolution efforts are key to
ensuring a successful peace and security agenda.
Gender-specific provisions also need to be included in
peace agreements. Much progress is still to be made in
that, as in 2016 only half of peace agreements adopted
contained gender-specific provisions.
We must also do more to prevent and condemn sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations. The
role of peacekeepers is to protect civilians, not cause
more harm or distress. In that regard, Namibia signed
the voluntary compact against sexual exploitation and
abuse, during the General Assembly high-level week
in September, and we encourage others to do the same.
Namibia urges Member States to commit
to nominating women for top-level positions in
international and regional peace and security
organizations. At the African Union, the Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, has
been raising this matter in many forums. We encourage
other regional and subregional organizations to
nominate women, peace and security envoys. We urge
troop- and police-contributing countries to identify
and deploy female military experts in peacekeeping
missions. Finally, we demand greater consideration

17-3496251/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

of the women and peace and security agenda in the
working procedures of the Security Council, both
country-specific and thematic.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French) I thank the President for organizing this
open debate.
Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to deliver the following remarks in my
national capacity.
In July, we adopted our third national action
plan regarding women and peace and security. The
new plan, which covers the period of 2017 to 2021,
encompasses numerous courses of action that should
contribute to improving the status of women in areas
of conflict, pre-conflict and post-conflict. Ensuring
the implementation of such an ambitious plan during
this period requires necessary follow-up. To that end,
frequent consultations among the Belgian departments
concerned, as well as with external actors, including
civil society and local women’s organizations, is
critical. An annual report regarding progress achieved
will be submitted to Parliament.
Incorporating the gender perspective in peace
and security initiatives is among the pillars of our
policy. In that regard, concrete initiatives include
promoting the incorporation of the gender perspective
at the Peacebuilding Commission in developing new
integrated peacebuilding strategies as well as in the
semi-annual reviews of strategic frameworks. As a
member of the Peacebuilding Commission, we are
pleased that the Commission now has at its disposal
a mechanism that can better incorporate the women
peace and security agenda, thanks to gender-based
focal points.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/861)
rightly mentions the importance of improving technical
capacity-building in the area of gender equality as a
key strategy for incorporating and bolstering gender
equality in conflict prevention initiatives being
carried out by the United Nations. This technical
competency is also of great importance in peacekeeping
operations — and all the more crucial when mandates
are revised, contingent levels are reduced or when the
financing of peacekeeping operations diminishes. In
52/104

27/10/2017

the event, it is critical that gender adviser posts not
be affected.
A number of studies reflect the fact that
women’s participation heightens the effectiveness of
humanitarian assistance, the credibility and quality
of peacekeeping, as well as heightening the speed of
economic recovery in post-conflict situations and
the sustainability of peace agreements. The role of
women — for example, in security sector reform — is
often underestimated. A greater presence of women
within reformed, mixed security forces strengthens the
link between the State and citizens. It contributes to a
more peaceful relationship between security forces and
civilians, with the view to a lasting end to a crisis.
Women are a force for peace, and it is therefore
critical for women to be able to fully play their
role as political actors in the service of peace and
conflict prevention. Belgium seeks to contribute to
this empowerment of women, including in the realm
of mediation. In that regard, here in new York next
April, we will convene a seminar on the role of women
in mediation in Africa, so as to identify ways so to
strengthen their involvement.
To conclude, I would like to note that, as a candidate
for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council,
Belgium expects and hopes to continue to actively
engage in the women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for your leadership
to sustain commitment on this issue.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Turkey on behalf of the group
made up of Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia.
We also express our deep appreciation to all
the briefers for their comprehensive insights on this
agenda item.
Resolution 1325 (2000) underlines the significance
of women’s role in our efforts to achieve peace. We
have heard the countless stories of many women
and girls who showed courage and determination in
working against all odds to ensure that peace prevails.
It would be unfortunate if their bravery and vision went
unrealized. The international community has given its
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

continuous support to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Nevertheless, women remain largely
objects of exploitation in conflict, not to mention the fact
that the complex challenges that women face in conflict
and preventing conflict are compounded by social
and economic inequalities, as well as environmental
degradation. Those challenges certainly undermine the
spirit of resolution 1325 (2000). It also means that we
are still a long way from realizing a just, peaceful and
prosperous world. I would like to take this opportunity
to share some of Indonesia’s thoughts and experiences.
First, with regard to fostering an environment for
peace and stability, solutions should focus on building
institutions that encourage the habit of dialogue,
consensus, inclusivity, respect, integrity, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and non-use of force. Only
by uniting our energy — women and men, boys and
girls — can we strengthen our efforts for common
causes. At the same time, it is also significant to
acknowledge and foster the crucial role of women and
families in the prevention of conflicts that may lead to
radicalism and extremism.
Secondly, we must develop an ecosystem that
stimulates prosperity. Member States adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in 2015, which is
a comprehensive and integrated blueprint to synergize
development with peace, enabling women to participate
in peacebuilding through the economy.
Thirdly, we must foster cooperation to develop
and strengthen the ecosystem for peace, stability and
prosperity. To that end, it is important that we have a
strong global institution, namely, the United Nations,
along with peacebuilding and peacekeeping mechanisms,
which should continuously be strengthened.
Indonesia stands ready to mediate conflicts and
to contribute to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Currently we have nearly 3,000 troops on the ground
in nine peacekeeping missions. By 2019, we aim
to have 4,000 troops, with an increased number of
female peacekeepers.
As part of our commitment to advancing the
2030 Agenda, Indonesia has also been sharing our
best practices and experiences in empowering women
in leadership through South-South and triangular
cooperation. More than 2,000 participants from least
developed and developing countries have benefited
from the programme. At the same time, we continue to
underscore the importance of meeting the international

S/PV. 8079

commitments under the means of implementation of the
2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals.
To conclude, I would like to reconfirm our
commitment to working with all Member States as a
true partner for world peace, a partner in advancing
strong institutions, linking peace and development as
well as strengthening cooperation as vital elements that
we believe will deter the forces that devalue human life,
including the lives of women.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain,
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I wish to thank you for having
convened this debate.
(spoke in Spanish)
Again, in my native language, I express my thanks
to you, Madam.
When Spain was on the Security Council for two
years, one of our major priorities was the women and
peace and security agenda. However, now that we are
no longer on the Security Council, I can state with
assurance that one of Spain’s highest priorities during
the seventy-second and later sessions of the General
Assembly will continue to be the women and peace and
security agenda.
I believe that in order to make progress on this
agenda and ensure its proper implementation, three
things are necessary.
The first is leadership, the leadership of those
around this table, the leadership of members of the
General Assembly, and the leadership of our capitals.
Secondly, we need to strengthen the institutional
architecture. This is something on which we are
currently working in the United Nations, but we are
very far from having reached our goal.
Thirdly, we need to move from the general
to the specific by adopting national plans for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Spain has already adopted its second one.
I will now make four specific proposals that I have
discussed with my very effective adviser, Victoria
Ortega Gutiérrez, who is sitting behind me, who has
been the very soul of Spain’s work, so to speak, on this
agenda item.

17-3496253/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

The first proposal touches on an issue that makes
me the proudest of our tenure on the Council: the
creation of the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, established under resolution 2242
(2015). The Group, which meets on a near-monthly
basis and which is currently being presided over, in
an outstanding manner, by Uruguay and Sweden,
receives a tremendous amount of information from
all peacekeeping operations. What I propose we do is
that we rise to the challenge of moving from simple
information-gathering to a process in which the
members of the Council can translate what they have
heard into specific actions aimed at making progress
on this agenda.
The second proposal refers to the debates held
here, in the Security Council Chamber. Spain, when
it was a member of the Council, had suggested that
in debates on country-specific situations, in that case
on Liberia, civil society be invited to address issues
related to women and peace and security. We were able
to achieve this, even though there was some resistance.
I think that Sweden has taken up that baton. I wish to
propose to the members of the Council that with respect
to the participation of civil society in Security Council
debates on a given country, members of civil society,
when advisable because of circumstances, should be
invited to describe the situation on the ground.
The third proposal relates to sanctions. The Security
Council has a large number of sanctions committees, over
which which I was fortunate enough to preside. Those
committees have so-called listing criteria. I believe
that today, at a time when, unfortunately, violence in
conflict is one of the major evils besetting humankind,
a truly shameful one, we should consider making the
perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict the potential
subject of sanctions by the relevant committees. This
would represent an important advance.
The fourth proposal relates to the Women, Peace
and Security Focal Points Network. I do not know if
members will recall that it held its first meeting in
Alicante, Spain, in which I had the good fortune to be able
to participate along with a large number of delegations
and high-level Secretariat staff. The second round was
held recently in September, organized by Germany,
Namibia and Spain. It really was very successful.
I shall now make two concrete proposals in
this respect.
54/104

27/10/2017

First, Germany has offered to host it in 2018, and
Namibia in 2019. This covers some parts of the world,
but I would really like a Latin American country to put
forward its candidature to host the meeting in 2021,
or perhaps an Asian country. I think it is important
to ensure predictability in the holding of these
important meetings.
The second proposal relates to the fact that the
Network currently has 63 friends. It seems to me that
given the importance of the women and peace and
security agenda in the United Nations, 63 is a relatively
low number. It is true that we began only in 2015, but
I believe that we need to set slightly more aggressive
benchmarks. I would be pleased if these 63 focal
points increased to 80 in Germany. Let us break the
barrier of 100 in Namibia, and let us after that achieve
numbers that represent near-universality in terms of the
Members of the United Nations.
I would say by way of conclusion that we are all
following attentively the very complex process of United
Nations reform, which I acknowledge can be difficult.
My fear is that this reform process will affect the three
fundamental pillars and that the women and peace and
security agenda will not have the place it should in the
new United Nations structure. All committed States
must work to ensure that the remaining States and
the Secretariat clearly understand the need to create a
robust institutional architecture in the Organization so
that we can continue making progress on this front.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): My delegation fully
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the observer of the European Union.
We wish to thank you, Madam President, as well
as France for taking the leadership in organizing this
annual debate on women and peace and security. It
is indeed crucial that the Security Council continue
to systematically and consistently advance a holistic
women and peace and security agenda in its work and
decision-making, and we certainly do not take it for
granted that 17 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we still have points to focus on. Indeed, we
need to redouble our efforts to ensure that the resolution
and our work really matter and that it is implemented
in a manner that makes a difference for the people on
the ground. I would like to thank the Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

for her briefing, and the other briefers for their very
insightful, very practical and extremely interesting
contributions to today’s debate. In particular, I would
like to acknowledge the significance of UN-Women and
the importance that this entity plays in making sure that
there is stronger engagement with the Member States,
and with the Security Council in particular.

levels of decision-making to ending impunity for
gender-based violence. Moreover, gender-responsive
and protective environments for women remain lacking,
and women, peace and security efforts continue to be
unpredictably undervalued and underfunded. These are
areas where we believe we need to further enhance our
concerted efforts.

Furthermore, we would like to commend the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/861), but, more
important, for his strong commitment and leadership
related not only to the issue of gender parity but also
specifically to the women and peace and security agenda,
pursuant to the recommendations and commitments
made at the 2015 high-level review, in the global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
in resolution 2242 (2015). We welcome and strongly
support the Secretary-General’s vision of peace and
security grounded in long-term conflict prevention,
inclusivity and gender equality, as well as his victimcentred approach to preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse. I would add that we were very happy to see
that the Secretary-General decided to spend United
Nations Day with people on the ground, in particular
in the Central African Republic, where these issues
are perhaps more important than in other parts of the
world. That focus is certainly very much appreciated.

We are of the view that four of the themes of the
women and peace and security agenda — participation,
conflict prevention, protection, and relief and
recovery — need accelerated attention and action by the
United Nations and its Member States. I should also like
to highlight other critical areas, such as disarmament,
efforts to create greater space for women’s civil-society
organizations and the need for stronger information and
analyses on women, peace and security. The current
refugee challenges create specific environments for
women, and further action is necessary to address
women’s lives in those conditions. Last but not least, it
is of the utmost importance that we collectively make
progress on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDGs 5 and 16,
while recognizing gender equality and peaceful, just
and inclusive societies as global development priorities.

I would like to welcome the practical innovations
at the level of the Security Council, such as the
convening of experts in the Informal Expert Group and
the inclusion of women civil-society representatives
in country-specific briefings. At the margins of the
general debate of the General Assembly, new initiatives
on gender parity and conflict prevention were launched
in which my country also participated. The second
meeting of the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network took place in September with an
important focus on conflict prevention, the security
sector and its integration in national action plans and
national strategies on women, peace and security. Also,
the heads of the armed forces of approximately 100
Member States met at the United Nations this year to
discuss the issue of increasing the number of female
peacekeepers and integrating the gender perspective.
As the French delegation stated in its concept note
(S/2017/889, annex), despite the substantial efforts
undertaken to implement the women and peace and
security agenda and the progress that has been made
in the past 17 years, critical challenges remain, ranging
from increasing the number of women at the highest

Slovakia is currently in the process of drawing up
its national action plan on women, peace and security.
Meanwhile, the Government continues to promote
all national efforts aimed at strengthening the role
of women in society through the national genderequality strategy for the period 2014-2019 and the
gender-equality action plan. In addition, the Ministry
of Defence has approved its own gender-equality plan,
with its implementation under the responsibility of the
general staff of the armed forces and with sustained,
allocated funding.
As one of the Chairs of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform (SSR), Slovakia wishes to
re-emphasize that this particular aspect — security-sector
reform — is essential to post-conflict peacebuilding
and to creating the conditions needed for reconstruction
and development. At present, the United Nations
supports a rapidly expanding range of field missions
aimed at assisting national and regional efforts in SSR,
particularly at the sector-wide level.
Resolution 2151 (2014), on security-sector reform,
underscored the importance of women’s equal and
effective participation and full involvement in all
stages of the security-sector reform process. I wish to

17-3496255/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

stress that gender-sensitive security-sector reform is
key to developing security-sector institutions that are
non-discriminatory, representative of the population
and capable of effectively responding to the specific
security needs of diverse groups. A United Nations
approach to SSR must be gender-sensitive throughout
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation phases.
Security-sector reform must also include the
reform of recruitment processes and improvement in
the delivery of security services so as to address and
prevent sexual and gender-based violence. There is a
need for sharper focus on developing gender-sensitive
SSR strategies and achieving tangible results in the
field. With that aim in mind, my country is planning to
host a workshop in New York in early 2018 specifically
dedicated to the issue of gender in relation to the
SSR strategies.
In conclusion, the United Nations is facing
unprecedented challenges to global peace and security.
Civilians, most of all women and girls, are paying the
highest price in the face of systematic violence and
oppression. We all need to redouble our efforts to deliver
changes on the ground in favour of women and girls, in
particular in societies in conflict-affected areas.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s open debate,
which is highlighting the responsibility that States have
in ensuring the full and meaningful participation and
leadership of women in all efforts to maintain peace
and security, including those to prevent conflicts.
The Security Council has adopted eight resolutions
on the subject since 2000. Despite the progress and good
practices that have been developed in the past 17 years,
there are still barriers to the effective implementation
of this agenda. Peru is convinced that the participation
of women is essential for the resolution of conflicts
and the maintenance of peace and for peacebuilding,
since they offer different perspectives that enrich peace
negotiations. As the Secretary-General has pointed
out in his latest report on this subject (S/2017/861),
improving women’s access to meaningful leadership
and their participation in peace efforts begins with
active collaboration with civil-society organizations,
especially organizations run by women.
56/104

27/10/2017

Accordingly, we are pleased to see the trend of
systematically incorporating a gender perspective in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, as well as the
incorporation of women as actors in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, and the importance of providing
specialized training on the protection, special needs
and human rights of women and girls in situations
of conflict. That is why my country has been increasing
the participation of female personnel in each of the six
peace missions to which we contribute.
Peru has also carried out other measures to
implement the women and peace and security agenda,
such as the creation of a registry of displaced persons,
which has allowed for the adoption of measures to
protect the rights of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
Similarly, in 2005, a comprehensive reparations
programme for victims of violence that occurred
between 1980 and 2000 was established. The Ministry
for Defence has also created an internal committee for
gender equality, with the objective of coordinating,
articulating and overseeing the incorporation of the
gender perspective into policies and institutional
management of the defence sector, including the
peacekeeping missions in which Peru participates.
Peru strongly believes that the women and peace
and security agenda should be a central element of
the process to reform United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we will work hard to make that possible.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council
as of 2018, we commit to making further progress in
gender equality in peacekeeping operations, and in all
areas related to that agenda, especially through our
participation in the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, which we will co-Chair with
Sweden as of 2018.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank France for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security, on the occasion of the seventeenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which
Argentina supported as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council in 2000.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Argentina aligns itself with the statement made
by the delegation of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Women and Peace and Security.
I would also especially like to welcome the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2017/861),
which
shares with Member States his views on the central
role of women in conflict prevention and sets out his
commitments to implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. Argentina shares and supports
the Secretary-General’s vision for reforming the
Organization with a coordinated, robust and holistic
approach to prevention that is based on gender equality.
From the beginning, Argentina has embraced the new
emphasis given by the Secretary-General to conflict
prevention and the development of the concept of
sustainable peace, or upholding peace, a narrative in
which women and young people play a fundamental role.
In that regard, we would like to emphasize that
achieving sustainable peace will be facilitated by
increasing the participation of women as stakeholders in
all stages of the peace process, in particular as military,
police and civilian personnel in the Organization’s
peacekeeping operations. As has been said, this is not
solely a matter of equity, but also of effectiveness in
fulfilling the mandates of those missions.
In that context, we underscore the fact that
Argentina has reached the United Nations goal of 15 per
cent participation of women as military observers and
officials in peace operations, and is therefore above the
general average. We will continue working to deepen
that commitment through the implementation of the
national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, which is as an
overarching instrument of all national bodies regarding
the issue of women and peace and security.
The strength of resolution 1325 (2000) has been
acknowledging the important role that women play as
key actors in peace processes. The inclusion of women
must remain our priority in defining the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as well as Security Council peacebuilding
efforts, by integrating specialists in gender issues,
gender violence and sexual violence in the various
Security Council missions and mediation teams. In
addition, we consider it crucial that specific provisions
and gender commitments be included in peace and
ceasefire agreements.

S/PV. 8079

Argentina welcomes the highly appropriate proposal
of the Secretary-General to strengthen the mediation
and good offices agenda of his Office, using a gender
perspective to reach solutions. Argentina therefore also
supports his recommendation to create and strengthen
national and regional networks of female mediators.
Argentina strongly believes that more equitable
and egalitarian societies that respect the rights of
women are more peaceful societies. For that reason,
and to conclude, I would like to reiterate Argentina’s
continued support for various mechanisms and
platforms that contribute to complying with the
commitments assumed in the framework of the revision
of resolution 1325 (2000), particularly the Justice Rapid
Response initiative, the Women and Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network and the promotion of the
Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of all,
my delegation would like to thank France for organizing
this open debate during its presidency of the Security
Council, on an issue that is of the utmost importance to
Morocco — women and peace and security.
The historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
represented international recognition of the role
played by women in peace and security, not only as
victims but also as agents of change and essential
players in restoring, maintaining and consolidating
peace. Maintaining peace and security requires the
integration of the gender perspective into all peace
efforts, in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) and the other resolutions that followed in
that regard.
Women’s participation in negotiation processes
increases the chances of settling conflicts and
sustaining peace. That finding was confirmed by a UNWomen-led global study in 2015, which revealed that
the presence of women in peace negotiations promoted
the sustainability of peace agreements, and that 35 per
cent of agreements negotiated by women lasted more
than 15 years. That means that the presence of women in
peace negotiations is a great help for the sustainability
of peace agreements.
On 7 September, 2016, Morocco organized an
international conference on the topic of women and
peace and security. It contributed to the international

17-3496257/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

debate on the role of women in peace processes and
the implementation of national plans of action to
promote collective action on implementing resolution
1325 (2000). It was an occasion to reaffirm the
international community’s consensus on the need to
strengthen women’s participation in negotiations and
agreements concerning the settlement of conflicts and
peacebuilding, as well as to renew the United Nations
commitment to the issue of the inclusion of women
and gender equality in all peacebuilding and conflictprevention strategies.
During the conference, debates focused on
three areas: the role of women in mediation and
conflict-prevention processes, the role of women in
deradicalization and the lessons learned and best
practices in the prevention of sexual violence in
conflict. At the conference, my country announced the
creation in Rabat of an independent regional centre, a
think-tank, dedicated to studying the role of women in
peacekeeping operations and their contribution to the
achievement of sustainable development. The centre
could serve as a space for reflection, a think-tank and
a source of independent thought regarding the role and
place of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations in conflict zones. It is in keeping with the
priorities of the Security Council in promoting women’s
empowerment and gender equality in the establishment
of peace and international security, the dissemination
of the culture of peace, ensuring access to justice and
the protection of civil rights.
Women and girls have special needs in the postconflict period, such as health services, livelihood,
land rights and property rights and employment.
They must also participate in decision-making and
the development of national strategies for postconflict economic recovery. Unfortunately, women
are often underrepresented in the decision-making
process associated with economic recovery and public
governance in the post-conflict phase. They are
not included in formal decision-making structures,
including key economic sectors, such as infrastructure,
extractive industries and commercial agriculture.
To that end, the preparation of an approach based on
gender and development in a post-conflict context is
imperative in order to ensure that, from the beginning
of the reconstruction process, there is sustainable
and equitable development where both women and
men share resources, opportunities, decision-making
and power.
58/104

27/10/2017

In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco takes
this opportunity to commend the work of UN-Women
to promote the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
particularly with regard to economic recovery and
reconstruction through the three areas of intervention:
post-conflict planning, economic recovery and
governance restoration.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
has placed great emphasis on peace, including the
prevention of conflict and the elimination of its root
causes through Sustainable Development Goal 16,
which seeks to promote peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, provide access to justice
for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels.
The universal 2030 Agenda, which advocates a
cross-cutting incorporation of gender in all Sustainable
Development Goals, emphasizes the need to redouble
efforts to prevent conflict and help countries emerging
from conflict, while ensuring that women are involved
in peacekeeping and reconstruction. In that sense,
the Goals demonstrate that gender, peace, security
and development are interconnected, interrelated and
inseparable from one another.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baumann (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam, for convening this important debate
on women and peace and security. This is an important
opportunity to remind the international community of
the reasons why resolution 1325 (2000) and its followup resolutions matter significantly for international
peace and security. And it further shows why Member
States need to pursue their efforts to implement the
provisions of those resolutions. Resolution 1325 (2000)
has become the main reference for addressing women’s
rights and gender equality in conflict and fragility.
Its adoption in 2000 was emblematic of a shift from
national to human and people’s security.
Human security, gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls represent
cornerstones of Swiss foreign policy. The Swiss Federal
Department of Foreign Affairs recently launched its
first comprehensive strategy on gender equality and
women’s rights, which highlights the agenda on women
and peace and security as one if its main pillars. The
reasons for that are obvious.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

First, gender equality is key for the prevention of
conflict and violence, including violent extremism.
There is a connection between gender equality and
the readiness of a society to take up arms. Secondly,
respecting women’s equal rights and ensuring their
inclusion in peace processes are simply a must.
Women and men negotiate equally well, but there are
still numerous obstacles that women face in trying
to be accepted. And let us remember here that the
participation of women in peace processes is not only
about a seat at the negotiation table, but also about the
ability and power to bring ideas and concerns to the
negotiation agenda. In that connection, Switzerland
commends the Secretary-General’s strategy on gender
equality and his call for nominating more women as
special envoys, mediators and mediation experts.
Switzerland further commends General Assembly
resolution 70/304, on the role of mediation, which calls
upon Member States to promote the equal, full and
effective participation of women in all forums and at
all levels of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. We have learned an
important lesson: we need to engage with civil society,
build capacities and empower women from early on.
We need to work on creating a pool of women who
are ready to get on board when time arrives, both as
mediators and negotiators. Switzerland therefore insists
that women must be included in all mediation training
and activities. We also promote local women’s networks
that are active in peace and security.
Thirdly, the agenda on women and peace and
security contributes to better results for sustainable
peace, which requires an integrated approach based
on coherence between political and security measures,
development and human rights agendas. Switzerland
therefore promotes the connection between resolution
1325 (2000) and women’s rights frameworks, which
makes it possible to leverage existing United Nations
and treaty bodies and their reporting mechanisms,
in particular the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
universal periodic review and special mandates. That
will strengthen accountability for all actors, including
Governments, and prevent the fragmentation of the
gender equality and women’s rights agenda. In that
spirit, Switzerland supports an initiative that focusses on
the implementation of general recommendation No. 30
of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination

S/PV. 8079

against Women, which deals with women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations.
Tо conclude, let me mention two aspects that
Switzerland deems crucial for the further implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), namely, the engagement of
men and boys in women’s economic empowerment. The
agenda on women and peace and security should not
focus on women alone. The transformation of power
relations in societies must be at its heart. Engaging
men and boys, who may be allies, victims and potential
perpetrators, in all transformative actions is crucial for
any conflict and violence prevention strategy and will
benefit both women and men.
Finally, women’s economic empowerment must
receive greater attention in post-conflict recovery
and State-building. Women’s access to resources,
income and economic independence are important
enabling factors in efforts to enhance women’s active
participation in matters of peace and security, which
ultimately leads to a safer world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Ms. Fata (Holy See): The Holy See thanks the
French presidency for convening this important
open debate.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) represented
and continues to represent an important step in ensuring
that women play their rightful role and have their voices
heard in the areas of peace and security. While many
positive steps have been taken to implement the eight
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
women remain a small minority in peace and security
mediation efforts and in peacebuilding operations. This
open debate should serve to highlight that fact and find
new ways to advance the implementation of the Council
resolutions on the subject.
The experience of the Catholic Church in
conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and
peacebuilding at the grassroots level during the more
than five decades of violent conflict in Colombia and
today in the implementation of the peace accord on
the ground has amply demonstrated that women have
been, and are, key peacemakers. They disarm the
violent with their multiple capacities to comprehend
and empathize, dissuade, convince and forgive and
rebuild lives, families and entire communities. Pastora

17-3496259/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

Mira Garcia, who lost her father, husband and two
children during the civil war, is an icon for women
peacemakers. She represented and spoke for all the
victims in Colombia’s 52-year armed conflict during
the meeting on 8 September with Pope Francis and the
victims of the conflict in Villavicencio. She teaches us
that forgiveness is the balm of healing.

and best practices verified in those fields clearly
show that women are, indeed, effective agents for the
achievement and maintenance of peace and security
for all.

Sadly, however, most of today’s conflicts show
that women are all too often targets and victims, rather
than peacemakers and peacebuilders. Women and girls
suffer the impact of violent conflicts disproportionately.
The most heinous aspect of such violence is the fact
that they are specifically targeted as objects of violence
and abuse, as a strategy of war. They are treated as
pawns of war, rather than instruments of peace. Violent
extremists and terrorists have used, and continue to
use, sexual violence as a terror tactic. Acts of violence
against women and girls are perpetuated not only in
conflict situations. Women and girls also constitute, for
instance, the great majority of the victims of trafficking
in persons.

Ms. Darisuren: It is a great honour for me to
be here representing the Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I commend the focus of this year’s debate
on moving the women and peace and security agenda
towards a systematic implementation leading to
tangible results. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is the largest regional security
organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. With our comprehensive approach to
security, the women and peace and security agenda is a
common thread throughout all our work, not only in the
political and military fields, but also in economic and
environmental issues, and in the promotion of human
rights and democratic institutions.

The States Members of the United Nations have a
fundamental responsibility to prosecute the perpetrators
of human rights abuses, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including those related to sexual
violence against women and girls. Parties to conflict
should respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Access to education in crisis situations is vital for
the empowerment of women and girls. Through its
institutions and agencies around the world, the Catholic
Church provides assistance and support, education
and skills training to thousands of women and girls
who are the survivors of sexual violence in conflict
situations. The courageous men and women who run
those institutions sacrifice themselves daily, and
many of them have paid dearly for their endeavours.
Locally rooted, those institutions are able to respond
rapidly and effectively so as to address on the ground
the consequences of violence in armed conflict.
Internationally networked, they are active advocates in
national and international forums, where policies are
shaped and decisions are taken.
The Holy See and the Catholic Church will
continue to engage women in their efforts aimed at
conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and
peacebuilding in many parts of the world, not only as a
matter of principle, but also because the lessons learned
60/104

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe is active in all phases of conflict, from prevention
to conflict resolution, post-conflict rehabilitation and
peacebuilding. The inclusion of a gender perspective is
essential in all those phases. The OSCE approach aligns
closely with the goals set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We support our participating
States in fulfilling their gender-equality commitments
and in enhancing comprehensive security. We recognize
that formal political processes provide, unfortunately,
little access and space for women.
There is a clear need to increase the meaningful
inclusion of women in all phases of the conflict
cycle, so that we give more recognition to the central
contribution of women, in particular at the grassroots
level. For example, the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine makes sure, in its monitoring
work, that the experiences of women and men from the
conflict-affected populations are heard and are making
their way into the daily public reports. We need to
further invest in improving the gender balance among
our monitors in order to ensure mixed patrols that reach
out more effectively to the local population.
Allow me to share with the Council some examples
of progress achieved over the past year by the OSCE.
A total of 31 countries members of OSCE have adopted
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

national action plans on resolution 1325 (2000), an
increase of three since last year. OSCE continues to
build the capacity of participating States to develop and
implement their national action plans, by exchanging
experiences and by providing targeted support at the
national level. Just last week, the OSCE secretariat
conducted the second National Action Plan Academy
for five countries, and there are several more in
the pipeline.
We welcome the development and implementation
of localized action plans at the subnational level in
Ukraine. We will be supporting that initiative, which
presents a unique opportunity and potentially good
practice. OSCE field operations, institutions and
our secretariat work to build women’s leadership at
the national and local levels, through mentoring and
supporting their networks and capacity development.
For example, the Border Management Staff College
in Dushanbe offers specialized training for women
border guards.
We continue to work on gender-inclusive mediation
processes. In April this year, we organized a high-level
mediation retreat with heads of mission and special
representatives. Building on that meeting, OSCE is
preparing an analysis of our OSCE-led mediation
processes and practical guidance.
OSCE political-military bodies, such as the Forum
for Security Cooperation and the Security Committee,
increasingly incorporate gender perspectives in their
agendas, and the High-level Planning Group has
mainstreamed gender in its work plans. The OSCE
has been at the forefront in ensuring that a gender
perspective is included in its efforts to prevent violent
extremism and radicalization, which may lead to
terrorism. The new Leaders against Intolerance and
Violent Extremism project specifically includes women
community leaders and young women and men. Strong
leadership is essential if we are to achieve progress.
We have therefore introduced the executive gendercoaching programme for the Secretary General and
secretariat Directors so as to provide them with the
necessary skills and tools to mainstream gender into
their work.
Within our organizations, we recognize that
more efforts are needed to implement a sustained and
systematic approach aimed at improving women’s
participation in peace processes and at preventing
and effectively responding to conflict. The OSCE will

S/PV. 8079

continue building stronger synergies and linkages and
participating in key initiatives, such as the Woman,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network and
the regional acceleration initiative. We look forward to
developing even closer partnerships with the United
Nations and other organizations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s important debate.
I would also like to thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas, member of the
Non-Governmental Organizations Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, and Ms. Michaëlle Jean,
Secretary-General of the Organisation internationale
de la Francophonie, for their briefings.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was indeed a
turning point in our approach to the issue of women and
their role in the maintenance of peace and security. The
international community has recognized the serious
impact of conflict on the lives of women. It has also
acknowledged the importance of including women in
conflict prevention and in post-conflict mediation. The
Council addresses this issue quite often. The regular
holding of debates on the role of women in the area of
peace and security is proof that we are on the right path
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
by 2030.
It is unfortunate to see that women and girls are the
primary victims of violent conflicts around the world.
Women pay a high price in such conflicts as a result of
the fact that State representatives, Governments and the
parties to conflict do not respect international law. That
is why we must continue to consider the role women
play in order to prevent such situations. We also need a
long-term strategy aimed at empowering women and at
putting an end to the human rights violations of which
women and girls are victims.
In that framework, it is important that we facilitate
women’s access to transitional justice mechanisms,
which seek, in particular, to combat crimes that take
place in conflicts and in transitional situations. We
therefore also attach due importance and interest to
the role of women in combating radicalism, which

17-3496261/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

very often leads to terrorism. Women can contribute
to creating an atmosphere that is beneficial for fighting
such phenomena, in particular so as to protect children.

commend the French delegation for convening this open
debate. We also thank the briefers for their remarks and
steadfast commitment to this important issue.

That is why Qatar has been undertaking initiatives
at the national and international levels aimed at
strengthening peace and security in our societies.
Furthermore, and within the framework of our policy
to achieve peace worldwide, we aim to contribute to an
international study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That is part of the State of Qatar’s efforts
to implement its national 2030 vision, which we seek
to do at the national, regional and international levels.
We are attempting to integrate work on the women and
peace and security agenda in all of our development
and humanitarian programmes. We are doing that
in a number of different regions around the world.
Moreover, the international community has time and
again hailed those efforts.

The empowerment of women, their inclusive
engagement, the promotion of gender equality and the
mainstreaming of human rights are fundamental for
sustaining peace. We commend the Secretary-General
for his dedication to further advancing the women and
peace and security agenda. Keeping in mind the broad
scope and cross-cutting nature of that agenda, allow me
to focus on priority aspects for the Baltic countries.

Women’s participation in decision-making within
the United Nations is an extremely important element.
It allows us to implement resolution 1325 (2000), and
it is the reason why we pay particular attention to that
aspect. We are an active member of the Group of Friends
of Gender Equality within the United Nations, and we
support various programmes and activities aimed at
ensuring that an increasing number of women occupy
important posts within the United Nations.
I would therefore like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to achieve gender equality
within the Organization and to end gender-based
violence — and to do so not only within the Organization
but worldwide. That is one of the flagship measures
of his administration, and I hope we will be able to
implement it by 2028.
Finally, the State of Qatar remains committed to
strengthening women’s participation in international
peace and security. It supports the various measures to
promote an atmosphere that protects women and allows
them to contribute to conflict resolution and to postconflict efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of Estonia,
Latvia and my own country, Lithuania. Our delegations
also align themselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union. At the outset, we
62/104

The critical role of women in negotiating,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is often overlooked.
The Baltic countries emphasize the need for the full
and effective participation of women at all stages
and all levels of conflict prevention and resolution
as well as peacebuilding. However, 17 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), far too few women
around the world act as mediators or are engaged in a
decision-making. It is not only a question of equality.
Peace negotiations and agreements set the structure and
direction for post-conflict reconstruction and overall
policies that affect the lives of all women and society
as a whole.
We strongly advocate for the gender perspective to
be fully integrated into all aspects of peace operations.
Increased numbers of women peacekeepers and the
deployment of women’s protection and gender advisers,
as well as human rights and gender-awareness training,
have all proven successful and should be further
expanded. In the course of this past year, the Baltic
countries significantly stepped up their contribution
to United Nations peace operations. We are striving to
deploy more gender-balanced peacekeeping troops, and
we continuously encourage female military and police
personnel to apply.
Training is crucial to raising awareness and
improving the implementation of gender aspects in
peace operations. Before their deployment, Estonian,
Latvian and Lithuanian peacekeepers undergo highquality training on human rights and gender-related
issues, including the eradication of sexual exploitation
and abuse, as well as the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence. That training has
moved well beyond abstract concepts towards more
hands-on, scenario-based learning, to which those
working on the ground can relate.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

In that regard, the Baltic countries strongly
support the Secretary’s-General efforts to bring
sexual exploitation to an end. Therefore, we signed the
Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse, and the Presidents
of Estonia and Lithuania have joined the Circle of
Leadership on the prevention and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations.
The scale and complexity of the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda requires
coherent and comprehensive efforts. The central role of
civil society, including women’s organizations, should
be fully recognized. We are pleased that women civilsociety representatives now regularly brief the Security
Council during country-specific meetings. That useful
practice should be continued.
Last but not least, a gender-responsive legal
and judicial system constitutes, as is emphasized in
the Secretary’s-General report (S/2017/861), one of
the building blocks of a resilient society. However,
access to justice still faces structural inequalities. In
the absence of credible judicial and security systems,
the perpetrators of crimes against women and girls
will pursue their malfeasance. The Baltic countries
remain committed to securing accountability for
sexual and gender-based violence through national
and international mechanisms. It is equally important
to ensure that victims receive genuine compensation
for the harm they have suffered. In that regard, the
International Criminal Court continues to be an
important mechanism for combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict, and should be used
vigorously to pursue accountability.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
gender equality and resilience to conflicts and their
prevention are closely interlinked. We therefore fully
support the Secretary-General’s profound commitment
to shifting the focus of all United Nations activities
towards a holistic approach to prevention, including
through the advancement of the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): The full participation of women
in every field is vital. From the chambers of Government
to the boardrooms of businesses, women leaders play
important roles in society. That extends to achieving
peace and security, where women must be present

S/PV. 8079

in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, humanitarian
response, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction.
That is not for the benefit of women alone, but
for our collective benefit. The data prove it. The
Secretary-General’s 2015 global study concluded that
peace agreements are 35 per cent more likely to last
more than 15 years if their processes include women.
We cannot ignore such statistics. Today, we are here to
share ideas on the crucial and unique role that women
play in promoting and maintaining a safer and more
peaceful world.
The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirms
the important role played by women in the promotion
of peace and security. Allow me to highlight some
examples where women have made a significant
difference.
First, in Colombia, the Government heeded the calls
of its women and established a gender subcommittee
during peace negotiations with the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia. The result was that women
gained a third of the seats at the negotiating table.
Secondly, in Liberia, President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf’s
election gave women a seat at the head of the table.
As Liberia’s first woman president, President
Johnson-Sirleaf passed ground-breaking women’s
rights legislation. She, along with two Liberian peace
activists, received the Noble Peace Prize in 2011 for
their outstanding advocacy for women in peacebuilding.
Thirdly, over the past decade, India sent nine
rotations of all-women peacekeeping units to Liberia.
Inspired by the self-defence training that they received
from the all-women peacekeeping units, Liberian
women joined their country’s security forces in record
numbers.
Today, despite the recruitment efforts, women
still comprise only 22 per cent of United Nations
peacekeeping staff and 4 per cent of military staff. We
must create an environment for women peacekeepers
in which they feel safe and comfortable in joining
peacekeeping efforts. We should establish and
implement a zero-tolerance policy on sexual harassment
within peacekeeping missions, so that women will feel
safe serving in the field. Preventing and eliminating
sexual harassment in the workplace must be a priority.
In that vein, during the most recent session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, Israel introduced

17-3496263/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

the first-ever United Nations resolution adopted by
consensus on the prevention and elimination of sexual
harassment in the workplace.
Israel is committed to the promotion and protection
of the human rights of all women and girls. We were the
first country in the world to implement parts of resolution
1325 (2000) in our national legislation. Amendment
4 to the Women’s Equal Rights Law requires the
Government to include women from all parts of society
in all national policy-making committees. Additionally,
over the past decade, the Israeli Parliament has passed
over 50 laws and amendments to further gender
equality. Nevertheless, like most countries, much work
remains to be done.
Women’s voices and women’s leadership are
fundamental to peace and security. Women’s
participation in peace and security is a global issue
that must be met with global efforts. Let us build on
each country’s experiences. Let examples of local
implementation inspire global implementation, and let
us continue together on an upward path.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to the Chef de Cabinet for
the Secretary-General, Ms. Viotti, for her statement
and for the annual report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2017/861). We also welcome
the insightful contributions that were made by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, as well as by Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas,
representative of civil society, and Ms. Michaëlle Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
la Francophonie.
The year 2017 will mark the seventeenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), which formally acknowledged
the changing nature of warfare, in which civilians are
increasingly being targeted and women continue to
be excluded from participation in peace processes.
The resolution remains a significant milestone in the
progress towards women’s full enjoyment of their
rights and equality throughout the world, a world in
which for the first time women are given a significant
and necessary voice in the field of peace and security.
Despite that honourable objective, much more
needs to be, and must be, done. Women remain excluded
within peace processes, including in the drafting of
64/104

27/10/2017

peace agreements, and their involvement in United
Nations peacekeeping within the military, police
and civilian components is limited. In addition, the
contribution of women and girls to the peacebuilding
process remains undervalued and underresourced,
leaving a vital tool regarding transformative change
and sustainable peace underutilized.
South Africa is committed to contributing to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). My country’s
history illustrates the relevance of the role that women
play in achieving and maintaining peace and security
in a post-conflict environment. South Africa’s women
have been at the forefront of efforts to drive reform
and to develop and advance responsible policies and
legislation aimed at advancing the role of women in
society. Today, at the level of political decision-makers,
42 per cent of South Africa’s representatives in
Parliament and 41 per cent of the national cabinet
are women. That illustrates the progress that is being
made towards a 50-50 representation in both houses
of Parliament and the cabinet. Furthermore, both the
speaker of the national Parliament and that of the house
of Provinces are women.
South Africa provides training for women
mediators in the African region. Such mediators will
make up an African women mediators’ network that
can assist in peace negotiations. In addition to that,
the South African National Defence Force operates
the Peacekeeping Training Centre in Pretoria, where
women peacekeepers from South Africa and throughout
the region receive training. It must be stressed that the
National Defence Force is highly aware of the fact that
gender issues need to be highlighted, which is reflected
in the fact that at present 30 per cent of our National
Defence Force comprises women.
Additionally, we recently held the third Gertrude
Shope Annual Dialogue Forum on Conflict Resolution
and Peacemaking in Africa. That initiative includes
participants from across the African continent and
inspires women to play more important leadership and
peacebuilding roles than they have traditionally played,
without necessarily being part of an official delegation.
That Forum also provides a platform that women can use
to share their experiences, reflect on existing policies
and challenges, and thereafter make recommendations
to national, regional and international institutions.
This year saw the adoption the historic Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons on 7 July, and
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

we are pleased that South Africa was one of the first
countries to sign that Treaty on 20 September. South
Africa wishes to warmly congratulate the International
Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons for being
awarded the 2017 Nobel Peace Prize. That welldeserved and timely award is a clear recognition of the
role played by civil-society organizations in the area of
nuclear disarmament in pursuit of a world free of nuclear
weapons. Allow me to pay special tribute to women’s
organizations for their active role in the abolishment of
nuclear weapons, including the Women’s International
League for Peace and Freedom based in Geneva.
In order to strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the resolutions that build
upon it, including resolution 2242 (2015), my country
continues to engage with representatives of civil society
and academia to find ways to further empower women
and remove obstacles that impede their participation
in peacekeeping missions and mediation efforts on the
African continent. Furthermore, we fully support the
various solidarity missions to Africa that have been led
by UN-Women and the African Union recently.
South Africa looks forward to further cooperation
and the sharing of experiences with Member States, UNWomen, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and other partners that seek to further incorporate
gender perspectives and the concerns of women in order
to enhance the sustainability of peace and security in
all conflict situations. We support the slogan HeforShe.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): As we have heard today,
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/861) is clear. We
have made progress on policy and normative change.
But we need to further mainstream gender equality and
ensure the effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. We must move from adhoc programmes and words on paper to ensuring that
women are included in all aspects of this agenda as a
matter of course.
That is possible. Australia commends the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund for exceeding its target,
with 20 per cent of funding focused on promoting
women’s participation in peacebuilding. That shows the
positive outcomes that can be achieved by focusing on
implementation, setting clear targets and investing in
dedicated gender expertise. Australia is pleased that our
$10 million commitment to the Fund is helping countries

S/PV. 8079

build sustainable peace. We have also increased the
number of our women officers serving as staff officers
and military observers in United Nations missions to
25 per cent, exceeding the commitment made at the
2016 Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference.
Australia commends the Department of Political
Affairs for its oversight of dedicated efforts across
a range of special political missions in 2016, which
resulted in a substantial increase in the deployment
of gender expertise, with 25 gender advisers working
across 11 field missions. Australia is pleased to have
helped with that expansion by providing the first-ever
military gender adviser to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. We have also seconded a senior military
officer to UN-Women here in New York as a technical
expert on women and peace and security. That officer is
assisting in the conduct of the female military officers’
course and helping UN-Women country teams as they
work to increase gender equality in local armed forces.
Such efforts demonstrate that with dedicated
funding and specific targets, we can improve women’s
participation, but all key actors must play a role in
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda. We must also acknowledge the expertise and
enduring capability of civil society. Civil-society
groups often predate conflicts and will carry on
after them, and civil society is our greatest source of
expertise on the ground. That is why Australia is also
pleased to be the founding — and largest — supporter
of the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which
supports civil-society organizations in contributing to
conflict prevention, crisis response and peacebuilding.
To sustain peace we must include women, not just
in our words but in our actions. We must all accelerate
and strengthen practical efforts to place women front
and centre in the peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to join previous speakers in commending the
French presidency’s initiative in convening today’s
open debate on the critical issue of women and peace
and security.
I would also like to align myself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of Canada and
Turkey, respectively, on behalf of the Group of Friends

17-3496265/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

of Women, Peace and Security and the MIKTA group
of Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Turkey and Australia.
In 2000, the landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
laid a robust normative foundation, on which we
have made considerable progress, for strengthening
the protection of women in conflict and facilitating
women’s participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. Despite that progress, however, a wide
gap still remains between our goals and the reality on
the ground. Civilians, particularly women and girls,
continue to get caught up in armed conflicts in many
parts of the world. That is also a historical issue, and
much work remains to be done on it. The effects of
sexual violence perpetrated in the past can persist in
its victims as deep trauma. With that in mind, I would
like to highlight three points as we strive to implement
and further strengthen the normative frameworks of the
agenda on women and peace and security.
First, we must coordinate our efforts better if we
are to prevent women from falling victim to violence.
The Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2017/249) shows that terrible sexual
violence continues to occur in conflict and postconflict situations. We must scale up our collective
efforts to prevent sexual violence in conflicts and hold
all perpetrators accountable for their heinous crimes.
We continue to be disturbed by occasional reports of
alleged crimes committed by peacekeeping operations
personnel, despite the fact that intensive efforts have
been made to combat the problem. We should not
tolerate any form of sexual exploitation or abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers. In that regard, I commend
the Secretary-General’s determination and welcome his
initiatives aimed at stamping out such crimes, including
the voluntary compact and Circle of Leadership.

27/10/2017

in 2014, and has been scaling up its efforts to increase
women’s participation in peace efforts ever since. As
a result, we have met the 15 per cent target for women
peacekeeping officers, and will continue to increase
women’s participation in the future.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the ongoing efforts
to reform the United Nations peace and security
architecture contribute to the women and peace and
security agenda. I welcome the fact that, in his recent
report (A/72/525) on restructuring the United Nations
peace and security pillar, the Secretary-General
once again emphasized his determination to ensure
women’s meaningful participation in all peace efforts
at all stages of the conflict cycle. I also commend his
efforts to promote women’s participation in peace
processes and to enhance gender equality, especially
through the selection process for high-level United
Nations positions.
I look forward to hearing more details from the
Secretary-General on how the women and peace
and security agenda will be promoted in the new
architecture’s peace and security pillar. As the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am committed
to working closely with him in that regard. When I
assumed the chairmanship of the PBC earlier this year,
I announced that I would build on the Commission’s
ongoing work to promote gender dimensions in
peacebuilding efforts. For the first time since its
inception in 2005, the PBC has appointed gender focal
points to implement the gender strategy it adopted in
September 2016, with Bangladesh and Canada currently
serving as those focal points.

Secondly, our professed goal of increasing the
participation of women in peace efforts must be
translated into concrete action. That was highlighted by
the 2015 global study on women and peace and security
and its follow-up resolution 2242 (2015), as well as 2016’s
twin resolutions on sustaining peace — resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262. Noting
the variety of initiatives that have been undertaken at
the national, regional, and international levels, I urge
all Member States to continue such endeavours so that
they can all lead to tangible results.

The PBC has been increasing women’s participation
in peacebuilding efforts at the country-specific level
as well. Most recently, during the PBC Organizational
Committee meeting on Solomon Islands, which
was attended by the country’s Prime Minister, PBC
members engaged with a representative of the country’s
Young Women’s Parliamentary Group. The Chairs of
the country-specific configurations of the Commission
have also been engaging with women’s groups and
individuals in their work, in both meetings and visits to
the countries on their agenda. The PBC will continue its
ongoing efforts to further promote gender perspectives
in sustaining peace.

The Republic of Korea, for its part, adopted its own
national action plan on women and peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Republic
of Korea’s commitment to promoting the women and

66/104

17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

peace and security agenda both in its national capacity
and as Chair of the PBC.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Nason (Ireland): Ireland takes women and
peace and security seriously. Almost 20 years after the
Good Friday Agreement and our own peace process
in Ireland, we firmly believe in the importance of the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution and
peacekeeping and -building. I think it is fair to say that
we are a testament to that. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/861) correctly highlights that if we
are to successfully deliver on the women and peace
and security agenda, we absolutely need broad-based
cooperation and coherence in what we do, and that must
be at the international, regional and national levels. We
see this as essential to the fundamentally transformative
nature of the women and peace and security agenda. I
stress that none of us can deliver that alone. We have
to work together and, importantly, it is crucial that we
work in full partnership with civil society. This year
and next, Ireland, as Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women will embed the women and peace and
security agenda in everything we do. We look forward
to working hand in hand with our excellent partner UNWomen to deliver on that.
All the evidence shows that ensuring women’s
empowerment and participation in peacebuilding is
critical to creating any lasting peace. It is not just the
right thing to do, it has been shown to be the smart and, if
I may say so, the efficient way to deliver on sustainable
peace. Initiatives strengthening women’s capacity to
participate in peace processes and enhancing gender
expertise and mediation need our support. We thank the
United Nations entities, including UN-Women, that are
working every day to find the tools to do that.
Ireland currently funds non-governmental organizations
that we think can make a difference in this area, including
the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue and its “Women
at the Peace Table — Africa” initiative in Nigeria, the
Dialogue Advisory Group and the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs. Last year
we hosted a regional workshop on the acceleration
of resolution 1325 (2000) in which the discussion
was devoted to gender advisers from peacekeeping
operations in the United Nations, the European Union
(EU) and NATO. Ireland is also a founding member
and a key funder of the excellent Women’s Peace and

S/PV. 8079

Humanitarian Fund. We support women in that role in
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and accountability.
The Fund facilitates valuable civil-society initiatives in
conflict-affected countries such as Burundi, promoting
women’s leadership on the ground. We are working
in Jordan for the empowerment of Syrian refugees.
Frankly, we need to do more of that.
Nationally, Ireland is currently working to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) through our second
national action plan on women and peace and security.
We are particularly focusing on the empowerment
and participation of women in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recognition of the importance of synergies between
the agendas on young people and peace and security
and women and peace and security. Ireland is pleased
to be funding the progress study on youth, peace and
security led by the Peacebuilding Support Office. We
see the role and potential of young women’s meaningful
participation in peacebuilding as significant, and we
must challenge the obstacles that prevent young women
on the ground from participating. The interlinking of
these two agendas is an area that we plan to highlight as
we build our third national action plan for 2018.
I am proud to say that the Irish Defence Forces have
adopted their own action plan for women and peace and
security, mainstreaming the priorities across all areas
of their policy, including in their overseas engagement.
There are trained gender advisers and focal points in all
units, and our Defence Forces are committed to doubling
the rate of female participation in peacekeeping by
2021. We strongly support and implement a policy of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Of course, many women are vulnerable. Ireland
welcomes the Secretary-General’s focus on the
protection of women and girls during conflict and in
humanitarian responses. We make sure that our Irish
aid policies make the protection of women and girls
a top priority in our rapid-response initiatives. We
support accountability initiatives for ending impunity
for sexual exploitation and abuse, including through
working in partnership with Justice Rapid Response
and UN-Women. We would like to underscore Ireland’s
major cooperation with and financial support to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Ireland is one
of only 14 States, along with the EU, that are signatories
to the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-based
Violence in Emergencies. This is a multi-stakeholder

17-3496267/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

initiative to fundamentally transform the way genderbased violence is addressed in humanitarian action, and
we fully support it.
On disarmament, another matter that is a key
priority for us, Ireland’s gender and disarmament policy
recognizes the specific effects that the use of weapons
of mass destruction and conventional weapons have on
women and girls. We actively emphasize the importance
of women’s participation in disarmament discourse and
salute women’s capacity to act as a positive force for
change in that regard, something that we are already
seeing evidence of.
I could sum up by saying that much has been done,
but there is more to do. The challenges remain and even
grow. I need only mention migration and international
protection as two examples of the major hills, or perhaps
mountains, that we have to climb. Ireland is ready to
play its part fully in addressing them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s open debate. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their remarks and to acknowledge the
contributions by the Executive Director of UN-Women
and other representatives.
As we mark the seventeenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it presents
an opportunity to reflect on our achievements and
challenges in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. The issues of the different
impact that armed conflict has on women and girls and
their exclusion from conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping continue to be critical aspects of the
work that we still have ahead of us in that regard, at
both the international and domestic levels.
There is undoubtedly an indissoluble link between
gender inequality and international peace and security.
Indeed, finding ways to increase women’s inclusion
in peacekeeping and end the problem of sexual abuse
and exploitation have been two of the most challenging
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
Despite several Council resolutions, including
resolution 2106 (2013), which encouraged troop- and
police-contributing countries to increase the number
of women recruited and deployed in peace operations,
and resolution 2272 (2016), of March 2016, which
68/104

27/10/2017

explicitly tackled sexual exploitation and abuse, a
holistic transformative culture remains largely absent.
In that regard, we are pleased to announce that Sri
Lanka has taken the initiative — together with the
participation of the Permanent Mission of Canada,
the International Civil Society Action Network and
the Association of War Affected Women — to co-host
a side event at the United Nations on 31 October on
ending sexual exploitation and abuse and increasing the
numbers of women in peacekeeping, in order to mark
the seventeenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
We invite everyone here to attend this interactive
discussion so that we can raise greater awareness and
work together to better serve our communities.
Sri Lanka has demonstrated its wholehearted
commitment to the elimination of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We were one of the first countries to sign the
Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse. Our
President, His Excellency Mr. Maithripala Sirisena,
has joined the Secretary-General’s Circle of Leadership
on preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, and we have
made contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund
in support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Historically, Sri Lanka has made strides in the
area of women’s empowerment. We adopted a women’s
charter two years before the Beijing Platform for
Action, and we already have in place a national plan of
action on women. But we know that more remains to be
done. Sri Lanka takes the responsibility of promoting
and protecting the rights of women very seriously,
including preventing conflict-related sexual violence
and sexual exploitation and abuse as an urgent priority.
Sri Lanka’s long-drawn-out conflict has resulted
in a large number of victims, including orphans, war
widows, single mothers and female-headed households.
We are committed to addressing their immediate
concerns and making them participants in all areas of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. This will continue to
be a priority in our post-conflict peacebuilding efforts.
Successful
peacebuilding
means
working
to ensure that gender equality and women’s
empowerment — including economic empowerment,
human security, human rights and development — mesh
together. It is also vital that we engage domestic
actors, from the grassroots to the highest echelons of
Government, in ensuring ownership of peacebuilding
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

processes and guaranteeing long-term sustainability.
In all those endeavours, we are committed to including
women as essential participants in the conversation. In a
reflection of Sri Lanka’s commitments, and as we tread
the path of reconciliation and transformative justice,
my Government has appointed an 11-member task force
of eminent persons to hold nationwide consultations
on reconciliation measures. The members of the task
force are entirely drawn from civil society and include
six women. However, all this can be done only by
acknowledging the existence of institutionalized
structural gender bias, identifying the associated
problems and sincerely seeking solutions to them.

against women, promoting gender mainstreaming and
protecting human rights.

Sri Lanka has been making modest contributions
to United Nations peacekeeping efforts for more than
five decades. We are equally committed to including
our highly trained and disciplined women forces in
our peacekeeping efforts. Furthermore, as Sri Lanka
proceeds in its reconciliation and peacebuilding
process, with the active participation of women at all
levels, we will continue to share our experiences and
practices, especially in relation to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

Kenya’s gender policy guides the integration of
gender and resolution 1325 (2000) into all our military
operations. It is behind our project for engendering
peacebuilding activities in Kenya, which is now the
basis for our establishment of a national conflict earlywarning and early-response system. On prevention,
the Government has established an international peace
support training centre for enhancing the capacity of
both women and men as meaningful participants in
peacebuilding, negotiations and preventive diplomacy
at the community and national levels. On protection,
we have launched a country-wide campaign,
Jitokeze — which means “speak out” — aimed at
breaking the silence on gender-based violence.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Kenya commends France for
convening today’s important open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.
We also welcome the 2017 report (S/2017/861) of
the Secretary-General and its recognition of the fact
that the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda contributes to the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals and facilitates
sustained peace and the prevention of conflict.
On 8 March 2016, International Women’s Day, the
Government launched Kenya’s national action plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). Aptly entitled Kuhusisha wanawake ni
kudumisha amani, which means “involving women to
sustain peace,” it has been very well received in our
country. The plan draws on relevant national, regional
and international instruments to address the intersecting
areas related to security, peacebuilding and conflict
resolution, as well as to ending impunity for violence

With regard to participation and promotion, Kenya
is ranked first in the world among troop-contributing
countries in its deployment of military female officers.
I am happy to report that today our deployment of
women in peace support operations stands at 19 per
cent, surpassing the United Nations-recommended
percentage of 15 per cent. Efforts aimed at increasing
female professional advancement and improving
gender balance in our military leadership have led to
many women being promoted to the ranks of brigadier
or colonel.

Among my Government’s efforts to promote
countrywide sensitization to the gender dimensions
of peace and security are its formulation of a 2016 bill
on access to public information and a review of our
national information and communications technology
policy. Our establishment of a toll-free number,
the Gender Helpline, and revitalization of various
platforms for peace dialogue and online reporting have
increased the number of users accessing early-warning
and early-response systems throughout the country.
The Government’s efforts have been complemented
by various non-State actors, including the media. A
network of 150 journalists are permanently engaged
with the Kenya national action plan to build media
capacity on gender- and conflict-sensitive reporting
through training workshops.
With regard to the relief and recovery pillar, the
Government’s efforts include establishing, first,
clear guidelines on referral pathways within medical
facilities for sexual and gender-based violence
survivors; secondly, national guidelines and standard

17-3496269/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

operating procedures for the psychosocial management
of survivors and forensic management; and thirdly,
gender-based violence recovery centres within health
facilities, which help to create access to justice for
survivors, with noted improvements in the investigation
and prosecution of gender-based violence cases.
In September 2016, the President launched a
national strategyfor countering violent extremism
that incorporates women into its county security and
intelligence committees, which are also linked to local
peace committees and community policing initiatives.
The rapidly changing nature of terrorism and the
limited research available on it is a major concern for us.
Kenya’s priorities for future action in these areas include
climate change and its impact on women and peace and
security; disarmament for nomadic populations where
illicit small arms proliferate; the increased insecurity
that results from regional instability and growing
border conflicts; the radicalization of young people; the
emerging forms and dynamics of cyber- and technologyled crime, including electronic violence against women,
which is becoming more prevalent; the mobilization of
funding for women and peace and security initiatives,
including closing the gap between research and
practice. We are also working on establishing a strong
monitoring system for the Kenya’s national action plan
for women and peace and security and, lastly, we are
setting up a central depository for peace and security
data that can be accessed by everyone.
In conclusion, Kenya remains committed to
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda in full measure. We support the reinforcement
of the United Nations Trust Fund in support of actions
to eliminate violence against women and the United
Nations Fund for Gender Equality. We continue to
call for further support and increased funding for
UN-Women.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks the
French presidency for convening today’s open debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
In open debates on women and peace and security,
Bangladesh usually focuses on a particular set of
issues. This time, however, we have to depart from
70/104

27/10/2017

that. One of the briefers this morning referred to the
crisis in Myanmar. That description hardly captures
the grim realities of the catastrophe. In the past two
months, nearly 600,000 people, mostly Rohingya and
the majority of them women and children, have fled to
Bangladesh in sheer desperation to save their lives and
dignity. Thousands are still arriving on an almost daily
basis. In her address to the General Assembly this year,
our Prime Minister said that the
“forcibly displaced people of Myanmar are fleeing
an ethnic cleansing in their own country, where
they have been living for centuries.” (A/72/PV.14,
p. 14)
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has also termed it a textbook example of
ethnic cleansing.
As is evident from numerous eyewitness accounts,
rape and sexual violence have been systematically used
as a main tactic by Myanmar security forces in order to
drive the Rohingya out of Myanmar and prevent them
from returning to their homes. In its report released on
11 October, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights rapid response mission to Bangladesh
says that
“[w]ell into the course of the mission, more and
more information began to be shared both by girls
and women who had survived rape or other forms of
sexual violence. Information was collected related
to girls as young as five to seven years of age who
had been raped, often in front of their relatives, and
sometimes by three to five men taking turns, all
dressed in army uniforms.”
The rest of the report makes disturbing reading, but
to cite further,
“[t]estimonies also indicate that many women,
even ones who were pregnant, were raped. In several
cases, women and girls were reportedly raped in
their homes and at police stations, and at other
times in full view of family members, including
children; anyone trying to protect their female kin
was dealt with severely by the perpetrators.”
The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect, respectively, have made a compelling case, and
in their words,
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

“Myanmar has failed to meet its obligations under
international law and primary responsibility to
protect the Rohingya population from atrocity
crimes. The international community has equally
failed its responsibilities in this regard.”
As a country that played an instrumental role in
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot
remain silent or objective in the face of such atrocities
happening just across our border in total impunity. In
Bangladesh, our humanitarian partners are trying, to
the extent that they can, to provide support to the women
and girls who have survived rape and sexual violence.
Special priority has been given to supporting the nearly
2,000 pregnant women who have fled to Bangladesh
so far. Properly addressing the gender-sensitive issues
of protection and assistance in already overcrowded
camps, amid vulnerable host communities, is an uphill
task. The team of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
is visiting the camps this weekend, while the Special
Representative herself will be there the following week.
She had previously urged the Myanmar authorities
to issue clear orders through the military chain of
command to prohibit such crimes, conduct rigorous
investigation and accountability processes, institute
training for the security forces and implement a policy
of zero tolerance, in line with resolution 2106 (2013), on
sexual violence in conflict.
It is high time to move past words into action.
The Security Council has spoken with one voice in
condemning the violence, but it must show its resolve
by sending an unequivocal message to Myanmar
through a resolution calling for an immediate cessation
of the violence and unfettered humanitarian access
for all those affected, as well as for action to ensure
the safe, dignified and sustained return of all those
who have been forcibly displaced to Bangladesh and
accountability for the perpetrators.
The significant number of Member States that
today have reaffirmed their commitment to ending
sexual violence during armed conflict should also
demonstrate their support for the draft resolution
being steered through the General Assembly by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. If Member States
unite and stand behind that draft resolution, it would
assure the people who have been violated, battered,
forcibly evicted and traumatized that they are entitled
to return to their place of residence in safety, security
and dignity, and can consider doing so. Only if, and

S/PV. 8079

when, they can voluntarily return to Myanmar can the
road map outlined by the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State make a real, meaningful difference on
the ground.
Bangladesh will continue to pursue its bilateral
efforts with Myanmar as far as it can, but the
international community must accompany us in the
process. The Rohingya women and girls have not yet
had a chance to have their voices heard in this Council,
but as the Special Advisers have said, “Once again, our
failure to stop atrocity crimes makes us complicit.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the French presidency for convening
today’s open debate on such an important subject.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and recommendations (S/2017/861), and the
Executive Director of UN-Women and the Secretary
General of the International Organization of La
Francophonie for their briefings, as well as Ms. MinaRojas for the reality check that she brought to the
Chamber from the real world.
Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union, and I want
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
We now have accumulating evidence that
achieving gender equality and empowering women
contribute to the success of peace talks and the
achievement of sustainable peace, accelerate economic
recovery, improve humanitarian assistance, help
counter violent extremism and prevent human rights
violations. There has been genuine progress since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and Member
States are progressively integrating their principles and
obligations into their national legal frameworks.
However, the implementation of the normative
framework is lagging behind. Despite the international
community’s commitment, the meaningful inclusion of
women in preventing conflicts and negotiating peace
processes is still inadequate. Women continue to be
sidelined during peace negotiations, and even when
they are present it is always the men who decide when
and how to make peace. We Member States should
strengthen our resolve to fully implement the women

17-3496271/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

and peace and security agenda in order to effect real
change on the ground.

more women leaders. And our world needs more men
standing up for gender equality.”

Albania has made significant progress in
empowering women and achieving gender equality.
Today women in Albania constitute 28 per cent of
Parliament and 50 per cent of the Council of Ministers.
Although we have not yet adopted a national action
plan for resolution 1325 (2000), gender is mainstreamed
across the security sector under the umbrella of our
national strategy on gender equality and fight against
domestic violence. We have also integrated the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) into our strategies
for human-resources management in the armed forces
and for public order in Albania’s State police.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.

As a result, women’s participation in the armed
forces has increased, and today 17 per cent of our
military personnel are women. Albania’s current
Minister of Defence is a woman, as was her predecessor.
In addition, policies and regulations have been
developed with a view to facilitating the promotion of
women in their careers and through the ranks. The State
police has instituted a temporary 50 per cent quota for
women in their recruitment policy in order to accelerate
the increase in women’s representation. Women now
represent 14 per cent of the State police, while specific
training programmes have been introduced to promote
them in operational command roles.
We are currently drafting our national action plan
with the support of our Dutch partners, UN-Women,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union delegation. We are
making sure that the drafting process brings together
not only the relevant Government stakeholders, but
also civil society and women’s groups, as that is the
best way to increase ownership and political will for its
future implementation. Regional action plans also play
an important role in promoting peace and security. In
that context, Albania has pledged its full support to the
Italian initiative of creating a Mediterranean women
mediators network, which is a concrete mechanism
that aims to prevent and mitigate conflict through the
increased participation of women in peace processes.
Finally we encourage the United Nations system to
ensure that gender perspectives are integrated across all
its activities. Albania strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts and personal commitment to advance
gender equality and women’s empowerment. I shall
conclude by quoting his wise words: “Our world needs
72/104

Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I thank France for convening today’s open debate.
Let me join others in thanking our briefers this morning
for their very informative and moving reports.
In conflict-affected areas, women are agents
for peace. They play a key role in ensuring family
livelihoods in the midst of chaos and are particularly
active in community-building and peace movements
at the grassroots level. Women’s talent should be fully
utilized not only in political decision-making, but also
in countering violent extremism. At the local, national
and international levels, we support the peace initiatives
of local women and hope to see the important role civil
society and women-led organizations play in peace
processes recognized.
We believe that the issues on the women and peace
and security agenda are interrelated and interconnected,
and must be addressed as such. In order to ensure the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security framework at the national and international
level, close and comprehensive cooperation is needed
among institutions and Governments. We must ensure a
holistic approach from the local to the global level, using
all tools available within the United Nations system.
Hungary is an active member of the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network and
continues to engage in interministerial consultations
processes, with the goal of establishing a national
mechanism on the implementation of the task deriving
from the women and peace and security agenda. The
Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade is now
planning to organize an awareness-raising workshop
on the women and peace and security agenda for the
experts of the relevant ministries, the army, police,
peacekeeping personnel, as well as for interested civil
society organizations and academics. One of the topics
of the workshop will be dedicated to women’s effective
participation in peacebuilding.
Hungary is deeply concerned about the growing
threat and use of violence against women human rights
defenders. We should step up our efforts in combating
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

that dangerous phenomenon more effectively, and
develop a horizontal and specialized response. Hungary
believes that youth engagement is important to forging
sustainable peace and development and we need to
empower girls so that later they become strong women
and active members of their societies. We also believe
that women’s increased participation in peacekeeping
missions is of the utmost importance. Their contribution
could be particularly useful in designing, implementing
and assessing strategies for the protection of civilians
and humanitarian assistance. We are pleased to see the
continued effort of the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
European Foundation Centre in building staff capacity
and senior-level accountability on gender.
At the national level, Hungary is seeking to
continuously increase the number of deployed female
military experts and police officers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Ending the culture of impunity
is a major contributor to conflict-prevention and
sustaining peace at the national and international
level, since ensuring accountability for serious crimes
helps us bring about reconciliation. Stable and resilient
societies address injustice, promote human rights and
build peaceful societies. We highly appreciate the
work of the United Nations team of experts on the
rule of law and sexual violence in conflict. Moreover,
Hungary is a proud contributor to the invaluable work
of the gender advisers deployed in the framework of
the collaboration between UN-Women and Justice
Rapid Response, as well as to UN-Women’s work on
preventing violent extremism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s very important meeting on realizing the
promises of the women and peace and security agenda.
We thank the Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
representatives of non-governmental organizations for
their briefings this morning.
The past couple of decades have witnessed a sharp
increase in the number of conflicts. Situations of
chronic instability, violence, armed conflict and wars
continue to affect women and girls disproportionately.
From sexual violence to sexual exploitation and abuse
inflicted by terrorist organizations and parties to the

S/PV. 8079

conflict, women carry a disproportionate burden of
physical and psychological trauma during conflicts.
What is worse is that the exploitation of women and
girls is not an incidental by-product of conflict. It is an
instrument widely employed to humiliate and terrorize
civilians. According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/861), sexual violence continues to be employed
as a tactic of war, with widespread and strategic rapes,
including mass rapes, allegedly committed by several
parties to armed conflicts. But to their credit, that has
not held women back. Across the globe, they have been
willing and able to share the burden of peacebuilding,
peacemaking and conflict prevention.
The Security Council and its global efforts to end
that dehumanizing practice have played a part in their
endeavour. The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) both
ushered in and institutionalized a new focus on women
in conflict, moving their participation and rights to
the front and centre of the political debate. Although
challenges remain daunting and many new protection
crises continue to emerge, our collective resolve to
stamp out the scourge provides a reason for hope. In that
regard, I would like to emphasize four specific points.
First, the Security Council, as the primary body
tasked with maintaining peace and security, should
focus on the root causes of conflict to remove the ground
where such crimes breed. Secondly, the United Nations
should play its unique role in enhancing cooperation
and coordination with the relevant bodies to help secure
for women their rightful place at the table. Thirdly,
national Governments bear the primary responsibility
for women’s safety and rights. The international
community should support countries concerned in
their efforts to safeguard women’s rights and provide
assistance in that regard. Strengthening the capacity
of national institutions is critical to that endeavour
and UN-Women can play a major role. Fourthly,
gender perspectives should be fully integrated into the
peacebuilding paradigm to reinforce the protection
environment. That would entail not only the greater
participation of women in peacekeeping mandates, but
also an enhanced role of women in peace accords and
in the stabilization and reconstruction phases of postconflict rehabilitation.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Pakistan was among the first batch of countries to
sign the Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on the

17-3496273/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

subject. We have also contributed to the Trust Fund for
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, let me recall that multidimensional
peacekeeping missions with protection mandates
play a key role in combating violence against women
in conflict and post-conflict situations. As a leading
troop-contributing country, Pakistan remains fully
committed to that cause.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to thank the French presidency of the Council for
convening this very timely open debate on women
and peace and security. I also wish to extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his dedicated
efforts on this issue.
Women can change the world for the better. For
that to happen, national Governments and international
organizations, such as the United Nations, must provide
the space for women to shape key decisions concerning
national security. We are strongly encouraged by
the commitment of the Council to reinvigorating
the discussion on women’s participation in peace
and security.
In many ways, the landmark resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted 17 years ago, changed our perception towards
ensuring the increased representation of women at
all levels of decision-making in national, regional
and international institutions and mechanisms for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, as
well as peacebuilding. Yet, 17 years after the resolution
was adopted, and 40 years after the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, we have far too little to show.
The Maldives is blessed in that it is a peace-loving
and peaceful country. At the same time, we in the
Maldives also recognize women’s role in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding as part of the larger
historic and holistic agenda for gender equality and
women’s empowerment. The principles of equality and
non-discrimination are at the heart of the Maldives
Constitution. The Maldives has achieved gender parity
in education, with more female graduates than male,
and more women with doctorate degrees in higher
education. Women comprise over 60 per cent of our
civil service and 40 per cent of our judiciary staff,
inclusive of court officers and administrative staff.
74/104

27/10/2017

National laws have been strengthened with new
laws on sexual harassment, domestic violence and
sexual offences to ensure the protection of women from
sexual, physical and psychological abuse and violence.
As a further step towards women’s empowerment, new
policies have been established by President Abdulla
Yameen Abdul Gayoom that guarantee that 30 per cent
of seats in all management boards of State companies
go to women.
Legislation, laws and policies can take us only so
far. As we see it, resolution 1325 (2000), with gender
equality at its core, can be realized only through a
change in our social practices, moving towards a culture
of respect for women, of inclusivity, of recognizing that
women, by virtue of being human, have equals rights as
men. Changing laws are important, but ultimately it is
the change in hearts and minds that matters.
Research shows that seeing more women in positions
of power and decision-making roles can in turn increase
acceptance and, thereby, the perception of women
in decision-making. That is why the Government of
Maldives has focused on ensuring that women have an
equal share in key decisions of the Government. That is
why our police force is celebrated as having the highest
percentage of women in South Asia. That is why, here
at the United Nations, our envoys — our messengers
of peace — must include women at the top levels. As
a symbol of commitment, the Secretary-General could
perhaps increase the number of women as his special
representatives, especially in conflict resolution.
Countries and societies will become stronger, more
prosperous, more stable and, indeed, more peaceful
when women are agents and managers of change. The
Council can and should drive that change. The Council
can do that with more credibility if it is more inclusive,
and the Maldives stands ready to contribute to and be
the partner in shaping our common future — a shared
destiny where women will call the shots.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): I thank the French presidency for organizing
this important debate today.
(spoke in English)
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself fully
with the statement of the European Union. We also
fully support the statements made by the Permanent
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

Representative of Italy and by the Permanent
Representative of Canada as Chair of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
We also wish to thank the Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General for her briefing, and the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/861) and leadership on
this issue.
Nalia, Valérie, Angèle, Arlette, Josephine, Alice,
Martine, Marie, Nicole and Natifa are names that deserve
to be mentioned in the Council, because they are names
that appeared in this month’s report of Human Rights
Watch on widespread sexual violence by armed groups
in the Central African Republic. The report observes
how, during nearly five years of conflict, those groups
have used rape and sexual slavery as a tactic of war.
As such, it provides us with both a gruesome reminder
of how conflict affects women and a painful reminder
of the acute relevance of resolution 1325 (2000) to this
day. That reminder is painful because it reminds us
that, eight resolutions down the road, we need to have a
serious talk about the resolution’s implementation.
Women are still not actively engaged in many peace
processes, including those that are United Nations-led
or assisted, and are therefore not recognized as the
powerful agents of peace they are. If we truly want
to practice what we preach, we must pressure parties
to a peace process to include women, and not leave
it as an afterthought, because those that have briefed
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, or someone like Ms. Mina-Rojas, today are
living proof of what the meaningful participation of
women could do for peace processes. However, if they
cannot, conflicts are often prolonged and women and
girls bear the brunt. As the Secretary-General rightfly
observes in his report,
“Commitments become meaningful accomplishments,
changing lives and transforming societies, only upon
implementation” (S/2017/861, para. 6).
Today, I wish to emphasize three conditions that
need to be met in order to make resolution 1325 (2000)
become a reality.
It is good to remind ourselves, firstly, that
gender mainstreaming is not a goal in itself, but
rather an instrument — an instrument to achieve a
transformative peace agenda. The meaningful and
balanced participation of women and men has the
potential to transform conflict prevention and peace

S/PV. 8079

processes. Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted with
that transformative intent.
We do not tick the box, let alone implement
resolution 1325 (2000), by simply having women
around the table; it is not simply about the numbers.
We have to integrate a women’s perspective and let
the voice of women’s organizations on the ground be
heard at mediation tables through their substantive
participation. If we do, there is a 35 per cent increase
in the probability of a peace agreement lasting more
than 15 years. That figure alone speaks for itself. In
that respect, I welcome the meeting the visiting mission
to the Sahel held with women’s organizations in Mali.
Ideally, in future missions, that would not be a separate
session, but rather the voice of women would be
integrated into the other meetings.
Secondly, in order to be implemented, resolution
1325 (2000) needs to be translated not just into United
Nations languages, but into plans and activities. It
needs to be operationalized and, equally important,
funded. To date, 68 Members have devised their
national action plans. While we applaud those Members
that did so, the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
calls on the remaining two-thirds of the United Nations
membership to follow suit. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands, moreover, is sadly one of just a handful
that actually finance their national action plans. More
funds should be made available if we are serious about
making gender equality a practical reality.
Thirdly and lastly, in all of that, as the SecretaryGeneral also states to conclude in his report, the United
Nations should “lead and inspire by example” (ibid.,
para. 111) by including sufficiently strong language on
women and peace and security in all of our mission’s
mandates; by systematically applying a gender lens in
strategic reviews and analysing the power dimensions
between women, men and youth in conflict dynamics;
by
consequently
requesting
troop-contributing
countries to train all peacekeepers on gender and
subsequently actually deploying women to the field;
by showing zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse through transparency, accountability and careful
victim care; and, as justly advocated by the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, by
upgrading rather than downgrading the role of gender
advisers in peacekeeping missions. We welcome efforts
made by other troop-contributing countries to that
effect, and we particularly support Canada’s efforts to
include gender as part of the discussions and pledges

17-3496275/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

at the Vancouver Defence Peacekeeping Ministerial
Conference next month.
In conclusion, the challenge and responsibility
are upon us to integrate resolution 1325 (2000)
into a transformative peace agenda — one that is
operationalized and funded and on which the United
Nations leads the way. Its implementation should enable
the likes of Valérie, Alice and Nicole to lead the peace
talks in their country. Let me finish by reiterating once
again the support of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for resolution 1325 (2000), as well as our genuine
commitment to its implementation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Jaime Calderón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
El Salvador is pleased to participate in this important
open debate focused on the theme of women and peace
and security. We wish to express our commitment to
the work of the Council on this agenda item.
El Salvador, as a country that overcame an armed
conflict through negotiation, is a faithful advocate for
the commitment to peace and development. We are
convinced that the consolidation of democracy and its
institutions is a determining factor in the development
of our peoples. In recent years, El Salvador has made
important advances in its protection of women’s rights
legislation and architecture because of its belief that
gender equality and the empowerment of women are
fundamental conditions for development, governance,
peace and democracy.
Likewise, for El Salvador it is important to
recognize the role played by women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in the consolidation of
peace, as recognized in resolution 1325 (2000). We
therefore consider it essential to give attention to the
violence against women by including the problem as an
important component of public policy. That is why in
July, El Salvador launched its national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, which bolsters our commitment
to women in different areas, particularly in building
peace and security.
76/104

27/10/2017

The plan represents the efforts made on this
issue since 2014 with the establishment of a national
committee for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions. It is a pioneering
document in the Central American region, and includes
in its five pillars measures to promotw the inclusion of
women in peace consolidation processes, especially in
the area of citizen
​​
security. Furthermore, the actions set
out in the national action plan transcend the security
issue by outlining innovative actions that address other
aspects of social security, which we consider to be
equally important for a comprehensive approach and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
El Salvador is involved in an ongoing process
of internal dialogue that seeks the engagement of all
stakeholders of the country with a view to continuing to
build upon the peace it achieved in 1992 by promoting
the participation of women and their experience on
gender issues, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000). We recognize the indispensable
role of women and young people in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, and emphasize the need to
promote their full participation in the maintenance and
promotion of peace.
Moreover, El Salvador considers it essential
to guarantee the highest level of ethical conduct
of personnel participating in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we therefore reiterate
our absolute commitment to the Organization’s policy
of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that regard, as a country we have voluntarily joined the
Secretary-General’s compact to end sexual exploitation
and abuse.
We would also like to express our appreciation
for the measures taken by the Organization within
the framework of prevention, training and assistance
to victims, and we stress the importance of reviewing
the progress made in that aspect and of including a
focus on reducing the stigmatization of survivors of
sexual violence in conflict zones. El Salvador wishes
to reiterate its commitment to supporting peacekeeping
operations by contributing the best trained personnel
and including more women in the troops and police
assigned to different missions.
To conclude, we reiterate our support for all
initiatives that ensure the participation of women in
various contingents, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions of
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

the Security Council. We recognize the important work
of France in presiding over the Security Council, and
we thank UN-Women for its support for and technical,
political and financial assistance to our national
committee efforts and in the preparation of our national
action plan of the resolution. I call on it to continue
supporting our country’s growth in such important
area. We hope that by learning of our experience, other
countries of the region will also be encouraged to work
in greater depth on the issue of peace and security,
especially from the perspective of inclusion manifested
in resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of France for convening this open
debate and we appreciate the statements made by the
briefers. We extend special greetings to the civil society
representative from our region.
Chile aligns itself with the statements delivered by
the representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and of Panama,
on behalf of the Human Security Network.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861) and express our support for the initiatives
related to the voluntary compact to end sexual
exploitation and abuse, which Chile has signed, the
appointment of the victims’ rights advocate, the Senior
Women Talent Pipeline initiative, and the strategy
for the equal participation of men and women in
the Organization.
Chile was a Latin American pioneer in developing
an action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in 2009, under the administration of
President Bachelet, conscious of the important role
played by women as agents of change and forgers of
peace. The second national action plan is now in full
implementation, with a strong emphasis on education
and staff training.
The new plan includes the recommendations of
the Security Council and international best practices
in that area, making strides in creating indicators to
measure progress on specific objectives that facilitate
and promote women’s access within peace operations at
all levels of action and decision. We have incorporated
a gender perspective in doctrine, planning and carrying
out of Chile’s peace operations in all four thematic

S/PV. 8079

areas and goals established by the United Nations:
prevention, participation, protection and relief, and
recovery. Chile co-sponsored resolution 2242 (2015),
promoted by Spain, and is a founding member of the
Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network. The Network’s last meeting in September
reaffirmed its commitment to continuing to support
and develop women’s participation in decision-making
in all areas.
Equal opportunity and the empowerment of women
has been a key pillar of our Government’s gender
agenda, which has made solid progress such as the
incorporation of gender equality in electoral reform,
and which requires that at least 40 per cent of candidates
running for Congress be women. At the international
level, we promote and protect women’s rights in
armed conflict, especially given the need to increase
women’s participation in decision-making related to
international peace and security. That is how we bolster
women’s presence in peace missions both in Haiti and
in Colombia’s special political mission. In the field
of prevention, we are developing academic initiatives
based on the women and peace and security agenda,
incentivizing the inclusion of a gender perspective in
sustaining peace activities.
The inclusion of women in peace operations raises
awareness about women’s and children’s issues on
the ground in such operations, and their presence has
helped prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. In that
context, women both in peace operations and within
communities have played a central role in sustaining
peace and protecting women’s rights. We echo the
sentiments of previous speakers in affirming that one
of the greatest challenges we face is increasing the
participation of women in peace operations and, in
particular, ensuring the presence of gender advisers in
such operations.
The President (interpretation from French): I now
give the floor to the representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): Let me first thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/861) and
acknowledge the efforts of the Secretariat, UN-Women
and you, Madam President, in keeping the women
and peace and security agenda alive. My delegation is
pleased to be associated with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.

17-3496277/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

I am honoured to be able to participate in the
Security Council’s open debate on resolution 1325
(2000). Jamaica has had a long history of association
with that resolution and fondly recalls the deliberations
that culminated with its adoption in 2000 during our
tenure on the Security Council. We continue to regard
it as seminal to our efforts to advance international
peace and security. Jamaica believes that women must
be recognized for the invaluable role that they can play
in restoring broken communities and sustaining peace.
It is against that background that we share the
views of the Secretary-General that more needs to be
done to ensure women’s meaningful participation in
peace processes and the actual implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. However, we
note with concern that we continue to fall short on
implementation and are particularly worried about
that fact, given the increasing challenges to peace and
security around the world. We therefore concur with the
view that preventative measures need to move beyond
addressing the imminence of crisis to tackle structural
and root causes, including gender inequality.
For its part, the Government of Jamaica has
developed a national policy for gender equality to
ensure that the principle of equality between men and
women is advanced in both the public and the private
spheres in Jamaica. The policy is aligned with our
national development policy and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Indeed, in keeping with
Sustainable Development Goal 5, Jamaica launched the
HeForShe campaign in July 2016 as part of the wider
global solidarity campaign created by UN-Women. The
campaign was launched as a platform with which both
men and boys can engage and become change agents
towards the achievement of gender equality, as well as
to end violence against women and girls. Additionally,
as recent as July of this year, a national strategic action
plan to eliminate gender-based violence (2017-2026)
was approved by our Cabinet.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that effective mechanisms should be established to
ensure the meaningful measurement of results with
respect to women and peace and security. My delegation
would go even further to suggest that such mechanisms
should take account of the cooperation and support
that needs to be provided to ensure the attainment of
the requisite results. Financing will be central to that
endeavour. Jamaica therefore welcomes the fact that
78/104

27/10/2017

the Secretary-General has addressed this issue in his
report. We fully concur with his assertion that we need
“to reprioritize spending patterns, effectively
coordinate funding instruments and explore
innovative forms of flexible financing” (S/2017/861,
para. 97).
Such efforts must supplement long-standing commitments
that would guarantee adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing.
We share the view that the focus on women and
peace and security should, of necessity, take account
of the role that young people and young women, in
particular, can play as peacebuilders. We therefore
value the work being done pursuant to resolution
2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security to bring this
objective to fruition.
Ensuring the equal and effective participation of
women and men is fundamental to building inclusive
and peaceful societies. My delegation endorses efforts
aimed at ensuring women’s economic empowerment,
promoting their participation in governance structures
at all levels and enabling access to justice and
security. Furthermore, women’s roles in disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control can also not be
overstated. In that regard, Jamaica commends our
sister Caribbean Community partner, Trinidad and
Tobago, for spearheading the consideration by the First
Committee of the biennial resolution on that issue. We
are especially interested in ensuring continued progress
towards addressing the gender specific effects of armed
violence and ensuring women’s full participation
in gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.
A critical feature of that endeavour will be the
engagement of civil society, which has been an invaluable
partner throughout this entire process. Indeed, there
can be no progress without the involvement of diverse
stakeholders who are central to building confidence
among local communities. It is in that regard that we
commend the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace
and Security and the Peace Research Institute Oslo
for developing the Women, Peace and Security Index,
which was launched just yesterday.
In conclusion, my delegation is encouraged by the
Secretary-General’s personal commitment to ensuring
that the United Nations fulfils its obligations in support
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

welcome intensified efforts that would result in more
inclusive participation by and engagement of women in
United Nations peace and security initiatives. It is our
firm belief that it augurs well for the Organization as a
whole and would provide the catalytic impact necessary
to ensure the effectiveness of peace processes, secure
economic development and realize social prosperity
across the globe.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the French Republic
on presiding over the Council this month. We thank
France for its transparent and tremendous efforts
in steering the work of the Council. I also thank the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for its work
during its presidency last month.
Iraq seeks to increase the participation of women
in public life. We are raising awareness among women
of their social, economic and political rights. We apply
the principle of gender equality via equal opportunity
policies. This principle also applies to appointments
to senior posts and representation in Parliament and
municipal councils, in addition to decision-making and
capacity-building.
Iraq’s Constitution of 2005 protects and upholds the
rights of women and provides for their care. It provides
women with social and health insurance and a means
of living in freedom and dignity. The Constitution
considers all Iraqis equal before the law without
discrimination based on gender, race, nationality or
religion. We have increased the percentage of women
in positions of leadership in Iraq since 2003. The new
Iraqi Constitution establishes a quota of no less than
25 per cent for women holding seats in the Council
of Representatives. We now have 83 female members
of Parliament and ministers; 3 female ambassadors
and 86 female judges. Iraqi women today have been
able to become presidents of universities and deans
of 75 colleges, in addition to mayor of the capital.
The capital of Iraq has 7 million residents and has a
woman mayor.
The advancement of women is an important step
towards achieving peace and security. Therefore, Iraq
continues to work with international organizations
focused on the advancement of women and the
empowerment of women in society. The Government
is working with the gender unit of the United

S/PV. 8079

Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to
achieve an agreement on a partnership between
the national reconciliation committee and UNAMI
aimed at enhancing the role of women in national
reconciliation and awareness of the importance of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The provision of equal opportunities to women and
girls in all areas is the cornerstone of peace, prosperity
and sustainability in the world. However, Iraq has
suffered a vicious wave of terrorist attacks perpetrated,
inter alia, by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). These attacks have threatened international
peace and security. Iraqi Civilians, in particular
women and girls, have suffered the most heinous forms
of terrorist practices. We must draw attention to the
crimes of that terrorist organization against thousands
of Yazidi women and girls and other women in Iraq
of various ages. They were sold as slaves in the areas
along Iraq’s border with Syria and were subjected to the
worst forms of sexual enslavement. The international
community must therefore redouble its efforts to
assist Iraq in freeing, rehabilitating and reintegrating
these women into society so that they can return to a
normal life.
My Government has taken constructive steps to
that end, including the signing of the joint communiqué
between the United Nations and the Government of Iraq
on the prevention of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence, on 23 September 2016. We continue to
work with UNAMI in Baghdad and the technical team
in New York of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to implement the provisions of this statement through
a national plan set out for that purpose. In addition,
we established 19 June as the National Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Iraq sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council on 9 August (S/2017/710, annex), conveying
our hope and intention to see the Security Council adopt
a resolution to ensure that members of ISIL would be
held accountable for crimes they have committed in
Iraq, including all acts that constitute crimes against
humanity. We have sought the help of the international
community in the condemnation of ISIL for murder,
kidnapping, hostage-taking, sexual slavery and other
forms of sexual violence, rape, sale into or otherwise
forced marriage, in addition to the recruitment and use
of children, attacks on infrastructure, the destruction
of cultural heritage and trafficking in cultural property.

17-3496279/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

On 21 September, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2379 (2017), on collecting evidence of
crimes committed by ISIL, in order to hold perpetrators
accountable for their crimes and bring them to justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): Let me begin by thanking
France for convening this very pertinent open debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statements made
earlier on behalf of the European Union, the Human
Security Network and the Group of Friends on Women,
Peace and Security.
As the President pointed out, we need to focus
more on the implementation of the agenda. Austria
is convinced that regional organizations, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), have a crucial role to play in translating our
political commitments on the global level into concrete
action and impact on the ground. As a consequence,
we have put the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and its successors high on the agenda of the
Austrian OSCE chairmanship this year. Based on our
experiences, let me share just three short points that we
take away from our work in the OSCE.
First, there can be no sustainable solution to a
conflict without the participation of women. In April,
we organized a high-level retreat on effective peace
processes and the inclusion of women, and we were
able to collect concrete recommendations on how to
increase women’s meaningful participation in them.
Secondly, another key element is gender-responsive
journalism and the protection of female journalists.
While women are often portrayed only as victims,
gender-responsive journalism can transform gender
stereotypes, promote women’s empowerment and
raise awareness of the critical role of women in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
We will take this discussion forward in the OSCE
on 3 November through an event on the role of the
media in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.
The third point I would like to highlight is that
regional organizations are ideally suited to building a
bridge between the global framework and its national
and local implementation. Therefore, Austria has
repeatedly called for the adoption of an OSCE-wide
action plan on women, peace and security, which would
80/104

27/10/2017

be a useful tool in this regard. Unfortunately, to date
no consensus on the adoption of such action plan could
be reached.
Having said this, we believe that the upcoming
OSCE Ministerial Council meeting in Vienna in
December will provide a good opportunity to strengthen
and reaffirm the OSCE commitments in this regard. We
hope that the OSCE participating States will be able to
support us in this endeavour and adopt the two draft
decisions that we have tabled.
Finally, let me stress that Austria remains
committed and will continue to promote women’s
rights, gender equality and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in the OSCE
region and beyond.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): Let me first express
our gratitude to the French presidency for convening
today’s debate on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. Let me
add few remarks in my national capacity.
As we approach the seventeenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we once
again underscore the importance attached to the issue
of gender equality, women’s empowerment and the
protection of women’s rights. Over the past years,
that landmark resolution has established a complex
agenda for States Members to further empower women
and promote their rights and increased participation
in peace and security efforts. Following the adoption
of the resolution, the importance of women’s role has
gradually increased, particularly in conflict prevention
and resolution, and in maintaining peace and security.
However, more has to be done to achieve the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and the relevant resolutions.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861), which underlines the crucial role
of women’s increased participation in peace and
decision-making processes at all levels. As stated
in the report, efforts aimed at achieving peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights
must be linked not only in words but also in practice.
It is obvious that the sustainability of peace depends
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

directly on women’s engagement in peace processes,
politics, governance, institution-building, the rule of
law, the security sector and economic recovery, and
that the level of gender equality and the security of
women are among the most reliable indicators of peace.

that existing commitments need to be translated into
practice. In that context, let me once again reiterate
Georgia’s readiness to join global efforts aimed
at better implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.

Georgia adopted a national policy framework and
action plans for the effective implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda early on. At
present, the Government is in the process of drafting
its third national action plan aimed at implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2018-2020. The
new action plan, just like previous ones, is being
developed in broad consultation with civil society
together with national partners from line ministries,
State institutions responsible for its implementation and
women’s organizations. The whole process is highly
inclusive and transparent.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank France for
organizing this important meeting, and extend our
appreciation to the Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
and the Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie for their efforts and
important briefings.

As an illustration of its strong commitment to
improving and advancing gender equality and ensuring
women’s empowerment and the full protection
of women’s rights, Georgia recently ratified the
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence, also known as
the Istanbul Convention, and established an inter-agency
commission for gender equality and ending violence
against women and girls at the executive branch. The
commission represents the domestic coordination and
monitoring mechanism envisaged by article 10 of the
Istanbul Convention, and its work focuses on human
rights, domestic violence, and women and peace
and security.

The issue before us is of relevance not only to
half of the planet but to everyone, given the role and
contribution of women in the area of peace and security,
and the untapped potential that could be unleashed by
mainstreaming their participation. Much has happened
since the adoption by consensus of resolution 1325
(2000), and yet we remain far from the goal of full
and equal participation, including in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and
from ensuring the protection and empowerment of
women. Gender equality and non-discrimination
remain prerequisites for the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Organization, and all of our lofty,
collective commitments, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

While underlining the significance of strengthening
protection measures with regard to violence against
women and women’s empowerment, our persistent
concern relates to the women living in the occupied
regions of Georgia — Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Women in the occupied territories continue to suffer
grave violations of their fundamental rights and
freedoms, including but not limited to the freedom of
movement, among many others. The situation in the
occupied territories is particularly alarming, given
the absence of international monitoring missions. As
we seek to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and deliver on the promise to leave no
one behind, the rights of women living in the occupied
regions of Georgia are of great concern for us.

The State of Palestine welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/861) and his commitment
to implementing the women and peace and security
agenda, including by placing gender at the centre of
his prevention platform and surge in diplomacy. We
appreciate all efforts of the United Nations in that
regard, including by UN-Women, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations Development Programme,
notably in the area of human rights, capacity-building,
employment and the rule of law. We urge United Nations
bodies, notably those operating in Palestine, including
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
to intensify their engagement and collaboration with
women’s organizations.

We support the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, and share the view

I wish to highlight some of Palestine’s own
important efforts in that regard. The Palestinian women’s

17-3496281/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

movement is one of the oldest and strongest in and
beyond the region, with institutional and representative
structures established as early as the nineteenth century.
Within the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO),
the General Union of Palestinian Women was among the
first unions to be established. A coordination structure
linking various women’s groups within PLO political
parties and other organizations was also established as
the Women’s Affairs Technical Committee, following
the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference. Since then, there
have been many other achievements, including the
2012 inauguration by Palestine of a high-level national
committee for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which was led by the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs in partnership with relevant Ministries and
non-governmental organizations.
In 2016, the State of Palestine was among the
68 countries and entities that adopted a national
action plan on women and peace and security. The
2017-2019 action plan, adopted by the Government and
civil society organizations, identifies three primary
objectives: first, ensuring the protection of women
and girls both domestically and in the face of the
Israeli occupation; secondly, ensuring accountability
through national and international mechanisms, with
a particular focus on crimes and violations committed
by the occupation; and, thirdly, furthering women’s
political participation in decision-making at the
national and international levels. The State of Palestine
also joined core international humanitarian law and
human rights instruments, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, without reservations. Women’s participation
and empowerment are also important and cross-cutting
objectives in the context of the national policy agenda
for the period from 2017 to 2022.
We are, however, conscious that, despite all those
efforts, much more work remains to be done. Only in
2009 was a women elected to the highest executive
body of the PLO. Quotas are still decisive in allowing
women’s election to Parliament and local councils.
Although women’s organizations were among the
strongest advocates of national reconciliation, they
have been unfairly absent from reconciliation talks.
The relevant, applicable legislative framework in
Palestine is also outdated and must be revised to
ensure consistency with Palestine’s international
commitments and obligations so as to provide women
82/104

27/10/2017

the protection and rights to which they are entitled and
the opportunities they deserve.
The Palestinian women’s movement, since its
establishment over a century ago, has pursued the
struggle on two fronts: the struggle for the independence
of Palestine and the struggle for women’s rights and
empowerment. It is a dual struggle that the movement
continues to pursue to this day. The Israeli occupation
remains the main source of violations of our women’s
rights, their vulnerability and violence against their
persons. We have repeatedly called for the protection of
the Palestinian people, especially women and children.
We have also called for accountability — a key element
of resolution 1325 (2000), which was the first of its
kind to address the disproportionate and unique impact
of armed conflict on women, as the only way to end
violations and crimes.
While Palestine stands ready to do its part to
advance women’s rights and the role of women in the
area of peace and security, it is clear that the enjoyment
of those rights in our country requires ending the
Israeli occupation. We will therefore continue to work
towards an end to the occupation and true progress on
the path to independence, justice and peace with the
equal and full involvement of women leading to an
independent State of Palestine, ensuring human rights
for all its citizens without discrimination.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me to join others
in thanking you and in congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also commend you
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his very comprehensive report (S/2017/861), which
highlights the main achievements and challenges in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
Similarly, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank
all the briefers for their very insightful contributions to
the subject matter under discussion today.
Botswana fully supports the clarion call by the
Executive Director of UN-Women to increase women’s
participation across the peace and security continuum,
including in conflict prevention and resolution. My
country reaffirms its commitment to the implementation
of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, which this organ adopted 17 years
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

ago. The resolution contributes significantly to efforts
aimed at women’s empowerment and participation in
peace and security initiatives, particularly with regard
to conflict prevention, peace and confidence-building
measures. In furtherance of this noble objective, in
2015 a global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) was undertaken. In the same year, the
Secretary-General produced his report on women
and peace and security (S/2015/716). Above all, the
Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action was adopted.
The United Nations has made great strides in the
promotion of the women and peace and security agenda
through the establishment of UN-Women, which
amplified women’s voices and created momentum for
women’s leadership in the area of peace and security. In
addition, the establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the appointment of the Victims’
Rights Advocate, the creation of the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
and the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of, and
response to, sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations operations will go a long way in addressing
the challenges faced by women in the field and also
in combating and preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse. Through those initiatives, thousands of women
and girls have been assisted in various countries around
the globe.
Regrettably, women continue to bear the brunt of
armed conflicts, domestic violence, sexual abuse, rape
and humanitarian crises. The participation of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and
peacebuilding still remains low at the national, regional
and international levels, although studies show that
women’s increased participation would significantly
contribute to sustainable peace and stability.
The international community has to continue to
address social norms that perpetuate sexual violence
and abuse against women, and promote respect for
international human rights law and humanitarian law. In
that regard, we emphasize the primary responsibility of
States to comply with their obligations to end impunity
and effectively use all available means to enforce
accountability by prosecuting all perpetrators of such
crimes and abuses. We call on States to take practical
steps to address obstacles in women’s access to justice,
including by creating an enabling environment where
women can easily report incidents of violence without

S/PV. 8079

fear or intimidation. We furthermore urge all States
to strengthen the capacity of their national criminal
justice systems in order to facilitate victims’ access to
justice. Botswana recognizes the critical importance
of gender equality and its mainstreaming in national
development agendas, including of course in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In conclusion, I wish to applaud the Security Council
for regularly convening open debates on women and
peace and security since 2000, which has ensured that
this matter remains at the top of the global agenda. We
also support the work of various stakeholders towards
the advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda. I pledge Botswana’s continued support for
these endeavours.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): We thank the delegation of France
for convening this open debate. We also thank all the
briefers for sharing updates on the ongoing efforts and
the emerging trends regarding this agenda item.
The situations of armed conflict directly addressed
by the Security Council over the past two decades
have primarily been intra-State conflicts. Such
internal armed conflict situations are often a result
of a breakdown in the capacity of the State to enforce
the rule of law and maintain effective governance.
These conflicts also involve non-State actors and
terrorist networks destroying the social fabric. In
many of these conflicts the world has, regrettably,
seen extreme brutality being inflicted upon women
and sexual violence being used as a tool. At the same
time, the importance of women’s empowerment and
their participation in conflict resolution, peacebuilding
and governance for sustaining peace is also becoming
better understood.
Despite the increased focus on the links between
women, peace and security, and the evolving normative
framework during the past decade and a half,
non-combatant women and girls continue to be major
victims during armed conflicts. The heinous crimes
against humanity perpetrated by terror networks such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in West Asia,
Boko Haram in parts of West Africa or Al-Shabaab in
East Africa, especially against women and girls, are
stark reminders of the serious challenges that need to
be overcome.

17-3496283/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

Increased institutionalized involvement by women
in peacekeeping, conflict prevention and resolution and
political processes is important to address this challenge.
That requires capacity- and institution-building at
the ground level. Therefore, the issue of women,
peace and security must be seen in the wider societal
context of women’s empowerment and longer-term
sustainable development.
At the United Nations, the work done by the
Commission on the Status of Women, the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women and other entities continues to push a gender
empowerment agenda that can have a transformative
impact on societies. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development highlights the interlinkage between
sustainable development and peace and security. Also
at the United Nations, while there is recognition of the
need for greater participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, progress remains slow.
In the specific context of United Nations
peacekeeping, India has been the lead troop contributor
over the past seven decades. While there has been only
a marginal increase in the overall number of women
peacekeepers, almost a decade ago, in 2007, India
deployed the first-ever all-women formed police unit
for peacekeeping with the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. Prime Minister Modi has committed to a
higher representation of Indian female peacekeepers
in missions. India has committed to fulfilling the
pledge to have women serve in 15 per cent of military
observer positions by the end of this year. India has
also committed to provide another all-female formed
police unit.
Moreover, India has taken the lead in hosting
specialized training courses for peacekeepers on sexual
violence in armed conflict situations. Among other
issues, those courses have focused on the role of women
in the context of post-conflict situations. Earlier this
year, India hosted the third such specialized course for
female military officers, which was organized by the
Centre for United Nations Peacekeeping in New Delhi,
in partnership with UN-Women. India, the first country
to contribute to the Secretary-General’s trust fund in
support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, has
continued to contribute to this cause this year.
Prosecution is essential for prevention. The
international community has an important role in helping
build adequate resources and capacities in that regard.
84/104

27/10/2017

In that context, earlier this year, India contributed to the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone. The Special
Court was among the landmark tribunals that tried and
convicted persons for crimes that included the use of
child soldiers and forced marriages.
Several key decision-making positions in India are
held by distinguished women. They include the Speaker
of the Lower House of Parliament and many ministers.
More than 1.3 million elected women representatives at
the local Government level across India are involved in
formulating and implementing gender-sensitive public
policies. In international forums, too, India assigns
high importance to the role of women. In 1953, the
first woman President of the General Assembly was
from India.
India remains ready to contribute further
internationally, both to the normative and practical
aspects, on issues relating to the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mrs. García Gutiérrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the fact that, since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace and
security agenda has gained significant importance
as part of the normative architecture of the United
Nations as a crucial component in order to prevent
conflict, maintain peace and achieve the Sustainable
Development Agenda. It should continue to be included
in all areas of the Security Council’s work as a priority.
We recognize the various steps taken to improve
the implementation of this agenda in various areas.
However, the gender balance at the senior management
level is desirable and necessary. According to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/861), to date only
23 per cent of senior peacekeeping posts are held by
women. Therefore, the gender parity commitments
have not been complied with. We call upon both
the permanent and elected members of the Council
to unequivocally support the Secretary-General’s
commitment to achieving gender parity at all levels in
the appointments of the United Nations.
It is crucial to include gender and human rights
perspectives in various areas of peace and security
processes, such as, for example, in commissions of
inquiry, in mediation processes and in justice and
transition mechanisms. We welcome some efforts in
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

that regard, such as the systematic inclusion of women
protection advisers in strategic planning processes
for political missions and peacekeeping operations, in
the training of experts on the rule of law and sexual
violence in conflict and as gender advisers in each
commission of investigation of cases of crimes related
to cases of sexual violence and abuse. The incidence
and widespread use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror and a weapon of war is heartbreaking and
unacceptable. Such acts must be punished with full
force, while completely eliminating impunity and
referring perpetrators to the International Criminal
Court. These acts are a crime against humanity.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to reform the Organization’s peace and security
architecture, in particular the initiative to address
sexual exploitation and abuse, with regard to which we
reiterate our zero-tolerance policy. Costa Rica joined
the voluntary compact on this issue, launched last
September, as a way of reiterating our commitment to
the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. We also
welcome the appointment of a victims’ rights advocate
and the establishment of a trust fund to support victims.
We stress the need to provide the necessary support
to victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict
so that they have the ability to properly reintegrate into
their communities in a dignified manner. The economic
empowerment of women has a positive effect on postconflict recovery, and on economic growth in general.
We must break the standards of discrimination and
guarantee women’s access to economic and financial
resources, to property, inheritance, health services,
including sexual and reproductive health, and to justice
and education.
It is also necessary to address the effects of armed
violence on women, and in particular recognize the
important role that women can play in disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control. The adoption of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons was a
historic achievement that included a large number of
women’s groups and organizations. The leadership of
the conference that culminated in the adoption of the
Treaty was held by a woman from Costa Rica.
To guarantee equal opportunities and the economic,
social and political empowerment of women is an
imperative so that women and girls can take on, with
all the tools necessary, their essential transformative
role in their communities during post-conflict periods.

S/PV. 8079

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): Since its
adoption, resolution 1325 (2000) has become a valuable
tool in the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
and in particular for the implementation of the concept
of sustaining peace.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I would
now like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
The past 17 years have demonstrated that women
are key actors in promoting peace. Nonetheless,
only half of the peace agreements concluded contain
provisions relating to women. The presence of women
in peacekeeping missions has a positive effect on the
local female population, allowing women to ensure
that they are not only perceived as victims but also as
providers of security. They also serve as a model of
inspiration for women and girls to play a more active
presence in society.
We welcome initiatives by the United Nations since
2015 that have contributed to gender equality and to
the increasing role of women. In that regard, Romania
greatly appreciates the personal commitment of the
Secretary-General. However, more remains to be done.
We can see that there is a great need for more women
in command-level posts in peacekeeping operations.
We appreciate the initiative of the Police Division to
launch a training course exclusively for female staff
candidates for leadership positions, including within
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Romania is a strong proponent of the integration of
women into the troop contingents deployed in United
Nations missions, and we are proud that a female
Romanian police officer has been awarded the title
of International Female Police Peacekeeper for 2015.
Currently, another Romanian policewoman occupies
the post of Chief of Operations at the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
In implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
the Romanian Ministry of Defence adopted a plan
of action to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, and currently 40 Romanian military
women are involved in United Nations missions or of
other international organizations, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan, the Balkans and
Georgia. It is also important to involve more women

17-3496285/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

in processes related to the promotion of lasting peace.
Romania therefore joined the network of women and
peace and security national focal points officially
launched in New York on 23 September 2016. I would
like to add that, on 13 and 14 June 2017, the Romanian
Ministry of Defence organized a regional conference
in Bucharest on gender mainstreaming in security
and defence, and Romania joined the United Kingdom
and Peru in an event organized for the opening of the
current General Assembly session on the presence of
women in peacekeeping operations.
Our representatives also participate in the United
Nations Senior Missions Leaders Training Course, which
is currently taking place in Dakar and is being organized
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. Romania is also involved
in the Female Military Officers Course, co-organized
by UN-Women in Nairobi. Our resolute commitment
to realizing women’s enormous potential is also
reflected in the fact that, on 1 and 2 November, we will
organize in Bucharest a conference of the women of the
International Organization of La Francophonie.
Building and keeping peace is a ongoing process
that requires the broadest possible popular support and
the participation of all segments of society, among whom
women play an essential role. Romania is resolutely
convinced that all the players — States, regional
organizations, civil society and the media — should
continue to work together for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
Ms. Bailey: On behalf of the African Union, I wish
to congratulate and commend the French presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate.
We also wish to thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her
contribution to this debate. We commend all the briefers
for their insightful statements, which highlighted their
robust commitment to the global agenda on women and
peace and security.
Today’s debate is taking place at a pivotal moment,
when both the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations have embarked on a path of institutional
reform to better serve and support Member States in
their quest for peace and sustainable development for
all. Over the years, Member States have reaffirmed
86/104

27/10/2017

their commitment to advancing the agenda of women
and peace and security, yet we continue to see a very
limited and disproportionate presence of women in
peace processes around the world.
The slow progress witnessed in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda is
fully recognized by His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, who at the very outset of his accession to
the helm of the African Union Commission pronounced
very clearly his commitment and determination to
advance the gender agenda on the continent, with a
primary objective to have concrete actions and results
on the ground that impact the lives of women and girls
who, for far too long, have and continued to suffer the
brunt of violence and conflict.
Building on the 2014 decision of AU Ministers of
Gender that, among other things, called for the creation
of an association of women in mediation, at its meeting
on 13 March, the African Union Peace and Security
Council endorsed modalities for the creation of a
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, known as FemWise-Africa, which aims to
strengthen the role of women in conflict prevention and
mediation efforts in the context of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture.
Subsequently, in the spirit of enhancing working
relations between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council, this
Council received a briefing and endorsed the African
Union initiative FemWise-Africa in the context of an
Arria Formula meeting on 27 March. FemWise-Africa
was officially endorsed by the AU Assembly of Heads
of State on 4 July.
We strongly believe that FemWise-Africa will
be a potent tool to strengthen the role of women in
conflict prevention and mediation efforts and will
provide a platform for strategic advocacy, capacitybuilding and networking in order to further enhance
the implementation of commitments for women’s
inclusion in peacemaking in Africa. Key priorities
of FemWise-Africa include, among others, ensuring
a channel for women’s meaningful and effective
participation in peace processes, including as heads of
official high-level mediation missions, and initiating
women’s action that will catalyse and mainstream
the engagement of women in mediation in line with
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the global
Sustainable Development Goals.
As part of the African Union’s effort to build
partnerships in enhancing the leadership of women
while promoting and supporting Africa’s transformation
agenda with a focus on governance, peace and stability
in order to accelerate the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), the African Union Commission and UNWomen, with the support of the Federal Republic of
Germany, launched an initiative called the African
Women Leaders Network during a high-level women
leaders forum for Africa’s transformation held at the
United Nations from 31 May to 2 June.
At this juncture, Madam President, I wish to thank
your delegation for announcing here your Government’s
support to the African Women Leaders Network. One
of the hallmarks of this partnership was the visit
undertaken to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the first solidarity mission under the aegis
of the African Women Leaders Network. A group of
friends of the African Women Leaders Network will
be established in New York and will be headed by
Her Excellency Mrs. Martha Pobee, the Permanent
Representative of Ghana. The African Women Leaders
Network will also be officially launched in Africa in
February 2018.
It is often said that there is strength in numbers. The
recently signed Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security provides yet another window of opportunity
for an enhanced partnership between our institutions to
strengthen efforts in advancing the women and peace
and security agenda. From that perspective, the African
Union commends the Secretary-General and welcomes
the establishment of his High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation and for appointing three prominent African
women leaders, namely Ms, Gbowee, Ms. Machel and
Ms. Migiro.
In line with United Nations-AU enhanced
partnership, the African Union collaborates with several
United Nations offices, particularly UN-Women and the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. That robust
framework of cooperation reflects our mutual efforts to
fully empower women as peace agents and to prevent
sexual violence in conflict. In that context, our common
objective is to ensure joint advocacy and concrete
engagement on the ground. This emphasis on ensuring

S/PV. 8079

the participation of women and accountability for
crimes of sexual violence is a key aspect of prevention,
notably through support to national authorities in
order to strengthen their rule-of-law response and
institutional configurations to implement the women
and peace and security agenda.
Before I conclude, allow me to commend and salute
the tradition of holding an annual commemorative
meeting on the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. The African
Union Peace and Security Council has adopted a similar
approach in its endeavour to resolutely advance the
women and peace and security agenda. Accordingly,
on 31 October, the African Union Peace and Security
Council will hold an open meeting on the theme “The
role of women in preventing and countering violent
extremism in Africa”. The African Union Commission
remains a key partner and will continue to mobilize its
member States and partners to ensure that the women
and peace and security agenda remains central in the
implementation of the African Union’s Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the observer of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.
Mr. Meszaros: Empowering women is not only the
right thing to do, but we know that it also leads to more
peaceful, just and inclusive societies. It is essential
for conflict prevention and it makes peace more
sustainable. That is why NATO supports empowering
women within our own organization, the armed forces,
civilian structures and societies of allies and partners.
NATO’s current action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions have
been endorsed not only by the 29 NATO allies, but by
a total of 55 nations in all, bringing together the largest
political coalition to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. NATO aims to maintain that
momentum and level of support in 2018, with revised
versions of both our policy for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and our action plan. Much has already been
achieved. NATO’s military commands and missions
have established a network of gender advisers, and
the implementation of the action plan is supported at
headquarters level by a network of gender focal points.
Military guidelines on preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence
are being implemented by our strategic commands,
and NATO will review progress in 2018 in concert

17-3496287/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

with other international organizations, including the
United Nations.
NATO recently updated and approved a strategic
command-level directive on gender that includes
standards of behaviour and a code of conduct to be
upheld by our personnel and NATO-led forces. We are
funding research on the role of gender in countering
violent extremism, and we have initiated a structured
dialogue with civil society through the civil society
advisory panel, which held its second meeting in early
October in order to contribute to the upcoming revision
of our policy for implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and action plan.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done. On the key
question of participation, we have seen only a small
increase in female representation in the armed forces
of member States — an average of 10.9 per cent in
2016, compared to 10.8 per cent in 2015. The average
percentage of women in NATO operations for NATO
allies was 6.8 per cent in 2016, compared to 6.4 per cent
in 2015. We understand that we need to improve those
figures, and urge our member States to do their part.
On the leadership side, women hold only 21 per
cent of the NATO civilian staff leadership positions.
Over the past year we have seen the departure of two
out of three of our female four-star officers. Again, we
urge NATO member States to play their part to redress
the imbalance.
Our work on revising our policy and action plan
for 2018 will enable us to highlight the importance of
integrating gender perspectives in all our tasks and at all
levels. Gender is not only a perspective; it is a tool that
contributes and adds value to all of NATO’s objectives
and core tasks, and it is fundamental to ensuring peace
and security for all.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Andot (Philippines): At the outset, allow me
to report to the Security Council that Marawi City,
in the southern part of the Philippines, has just been
liberated from terrorist forces inspired and aided by
the Islamic State terror network, having been captive
for the past five months. However, the liberation is no
cause for celebration. Marawi City was destroyed by
the fighting and 700,000 people have been displaced
by the conflict — more than 50 per cent of whom are
women and children.
88/104

27/10/2017

There have been casualties on both sides, as well
as within the civilian population. The damage and
losses as a result of the conflict are still being assessed,
but conservative estimates are between $1 billion
and $2 billion. Cognizant of that, President Rodrigo
Roa Duterte has declared that the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of Marawi City is a Government
priority. In fact, as early as June, the President
issued Administrative Order No.3, creating the Task
Force Bangon Marawi, an inter-agency mechanism
that is spearheading the recovery, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Marawi City and affected localities.
I am happy to share that our agency, the Office
of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process,
which also serves as the focal point on women and
peace and security, sits as one of the members of that
Task Force. We are in the process of coming up with
a comprehensive rehabilitation plan, informed by a
rigorous post-conflict needs assessment and a rapid
recovery and peacebuilding assessment, with the help
of various stakeholders ranging from community
members to national and international partners, such
as the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank.
Throughout the process, the Government has been
keen to observe conflict-sensitive and peace-promoting
approaches, with a particular focus on mainstreaming
gender and observing cultural sensitivities in its various
interventions. After almost two decades of Government
interventions to implement the resolution 1325
(2000) — and its related resolutions — the Philippines is
most proud of the three national action plans on women
and peace and security that it has delivered. Now in
its third cycle for the 2017-2022 implementation period,
allow me to briefly share the salient features of our new
national action plan on women and peace and security.
At its crafting, the Philippine national action plan
on women and peace and security, which incorporates
the lessons learned from the previous cycles of
implementation, adopts a broader framework to address
the situation of women in armed conflict and recognize
their contributions to conflict transformation. It
primarily aims to embed the language and precepts of
gender equality, as provided for in the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) and, in particular, CEDAW General
Recommendation No. 30l with regard to ensuring
women’s human rights before, during and after various
conflict contexts. It also takes into account the context
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

of non-international armed conflicts, such as ethnic
and communal violence, states of emergency and
internal displacement, and the war against terrorism
and organized crime — some of which are situations
of concern in the Philippines at present, as exemplified
by the Marawi crisis and continuing the pursuit of a
final political solution to the Bangsamoro conflict in
southern Philippines.
In pursuit of the peace process with rebel groups,
significant actions are continuously being taken to ensure
the meaningful participation of women, especially
Moro and indigenous women, and that their rights are
protected in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Filipino women have played a crucial role in
responding to the Marawi crisis. For the first time
amidst the fighting, the armed gorces of the Philippines
and the Philippine national police formed and deployed,
on 29 August, a composite all-female civil relations
company to Marawi to assist in the implementation of
rehabilitation and recovery programmes for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the battle-stricken city. The
company was organized, trained and developed with a
mission to build a culture of peace and to make every
child and young person a peacebuilder. The company is
composed of 55 enlisted personnel from the army and
40 non-commissioned police officers. Of its members,
36 are Muslim with 22 from the Maranao tribe. The
company is led by four female officers from the army.
Their mission is to assist the survivors of the siege, who
are currently in evacuation centres and communities and
require significant humanitarian and recovery support.
Women-led civil society organizations and local
agencies have also channelled their resources in
providing psychosocial support for healing the trauma
suffered by displaced women and children. We have
been training women in the IDP camps on community
organizing for livelihood generation, as well as actively
engaging them in women and peace conversations.
In a nutshell, the national action plan on women
and peace and security serves as the blueprint of the
Government and civil society efforts to protect women,
prevent violation of their rights and empower them so
that they play a decisive role in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Our Department
of National Defense and its allied forces, as well
as the national police, are part of formulating and
implementing that plan and are required to regularly
monitor, evaluate and report their commitments and

S/PV. 8079

roles within the plan. Those plans will guide the
rehabilitation of Marawi. Our Government is committed
to protecting the affected population — especially
women and children, who are particularly vulnerable,
including to trafficking in persons.
Over the past years, the implementation of the
national action plan on women and peace and security
has seen women helping other women; women leading
peace processes and signing and implementing the
peace agreements; women being deployed as soldiers at
the battlefront defending the civilians from terrorism;
and women working as peacekeepers, both here and
across borders, to help women and children victims of
the conflict.
A training kit on mainstreaming women and peace
and security in development planning processes was
recently developed and launched by the Philippines
with the support of UN-Women. This is an important
tool in further localizing the national action plan on
women and peace and security and recognizing the role
of local Government units in the partnership to protect
all women who may be affected by conflicts at the
grassroots level.
Peace throughout the land, as well as the
rehabilitation of Marawi City, remains a priority for the
Philippine Government. This objective enjoys the full
support of leaders at the highest level of Government.
Sustainable peace and development are the building
blocks of AmBisyon Natin 2040, the long-term vision
of the Philippines.
While some Filipino women have become
victims in the areas affected by conflict, there are
also Filipino women who, in one way or another, are
continuously inspired by their fellow Filipinas to
champion the implementation of gender-sensitive and
peace-promoting policies and programmes. Filipino
women sit among the high echelons of our Government,
including peace panels that are negotiating for and
implementing signed agreements. They sit in two
Government panels for the implementation of peace
agreements with the Moro National Liberation Front
and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, respectively.
I would say that Filipinos are demonstrating their
resilience now more than ever. As the armed conflict in
Marawi draws to a close, we know that our journey to
its rehabilitation and recovery has just begun. There is
a long way ahead as we build the extrinsic aspect of the
city but also, more important, as we mend the torn fabric

17-3496289/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

of Maranaw society. It is in this process that Filipino
women — within each basic unit of the Maranaw family
as a child, sister, mother and sometimes a father — will
play a critical role in the rebuilding of relationships in
their respective communities and eventually in Marawi
as a whole. In turn, the Philippine Government remains
committed to preventing violent extremism and
ensuring that such crises will not happen again.
In conclusion, allow me to extend our gratitude to
the United Nations, its agencies and Member States
for their support in the humanitarian response and
peace-based rehabilitation initiatives for Marawi.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): My delegation would
like to thank the French presidency for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security. We
also express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Executive Director of UN-Women for their
comprehensive reports.
Our discussion today under the theme of “Realizing
the promise of the women and peace and security
agenda: ensuring its full implementation, including
the participation of women”, is very timely, as there
are growing threats to peace and security that are both
traditional and non-traditional. This event offers us an
opportunity to renew our commitments to the women
and peace and security agenda in order to enhance the
equal participation and involvement of women in all
efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.
We welcome efforts and progress made in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which have greatly contributed to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
We are pleased to see that the role and participation
of women have been promoted in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction, as
well as their growing leadership in peace processes.
Despite those efforts and progress, much remains
to be done. Women’s underrepresentation, gender
inequality and discrimination still persist. We are
concerned about the continuing violence and abuse
targeting women and girls. We strongly condemn the
heinous acts of forcing or recruiting women and girls to
commit terrorist attacks.
Against that backdrop, we call for a strengthened
collective response to effectively address these
90/104

27/10/2017

challenges. Representation and decision-making by
women in post-conflict structures and peace operation
efforts should be broadened to ensure that their
needs and interests are reflected and met. The gender
perspective should be mainstreamed in a consistent and
comprehensive manner in all areas of peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Impunity must be ended
to effectively combat and eliminate human rights
violations, including conflict-related sexual violence
and abuse. In that regard, we welcome the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and encourage serious consideration of its findings
and recommendations.
We would also like to highlight the importance of
education in enhancing women’s capacity. Together
with women’s economic empowerment, it is crucial to
equip women and girls with the knowledge to better
protect themselves from conflict-related risks as well
as to build their resilience against economic shocks,
climate change and natural disasters. At the same
time, we need to raise awareness of the women and
peace and security agenda through different means of
communication and encourage the engagement of all
the relevant stakeholders, especially young people, in
its implementation.
Throughout the history of Viet Nam, women have
proved and played an indispensable role in national
defence, construction and development. Today we are
proud to see the increased participation of women in
all spheres of life, especially the military and security
forces. Women are an essential driving force of our
economic and social development, making significant
contributions to promoting and maintaining an
environment of peace, security and stability.
This year the twelfth National Women’s
Congress of Viet Nam, under the theme
“Solidarity — Renovation — Equality — Integration”,
set its objectives for the term 2017-2022. These include,
inter alia, the promotion of women’s potential and
creativity, improving their material and spiritual life
and status, striving for gender equality and women’s
advancement and contributing to the cause of national
construction and defence.
We are also pleased to announce that we are now
working closely with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in preparation for the early deployment of
the very first Vietnamese woman officer to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. Another nine women
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

are prepared to work at our level 2 hospital once it is
deployed in South Sudan.
It is women who plant the seeds and inspire the love
for peace. For the seeds of peace to grow and the love
of peace to be nurtured, we must turn our commitments
into actions. It is necessary to mobilize greater support
for the role of women, increase opportunities for their
meaningful participation and tackle all challenges that
stand in their way. Viet Nam is committed to working
closely with Member States and the relevant United
Nations agencies in this endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlMunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the French presidency
for convening this important debate. I would also like to
thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, as well as
Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas and Ms. Michaëlle Jean, for
their important briefings.
The women and peace and security agenda has
become a key pillar of international relations and a
crucial took for strengthening United Nations efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts and to provide
humanitarian assistance. This agenda allows us to
fulfil two essential conditions of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Seventeen years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). In adopting it, the international
community reaffirmed the important role of women in
preventing and resolving conflict. I would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm my country’s commitment
to the principles set out therein. My country is firmly
convinced that gender equality and the empowerment
of women, as well as the protection and promotion of
women’s rights, are important elements in sustainable
development and conflict prevention.
The meaningful participation of women in resolving
conflicts, in humanitarian efforts and in peacebuilding
are crucial to sustaining peace. In this regard, I would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his annual report on the implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), on women and peace and
security (S/2017/861). The report highlights recent
developments in the implementation of resolution
2242 (2015) by focusing on the contributions that

S/PV. 8079

women can make in terms of implementation. We
also welcome the recommendations contained in the
report, as gender equality and women’s empowerment
are sine qua non prerequisites for conflict prevention
and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including
Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 16, as outlined in
the report. This will allow us to effect genuine change
in the context of the three pillars of the United Nations,
security, human rights and development.
My country is committed to involving women
in development plans, decision-making and civil
society. Moreover, women in Kuwait participate in
decision-making at the highest levels and occupy
high-level posts. They are ministers, deputy ministers,
members of parliament, and ambassadors and
representatives in diplomatic missions worldwide.
We call for further efforts to be made for women’s
empowerment and their inclusion in society.
We have also undertaken efforts to promote the
role of the United Nations, and, in cooperation with the
Organization, we have developed a number of projects
for women’s empowerment. We have also reviewed and
updated all legislation relating to women in Kuwait.
Thus we have put an end to all forms of discrimination
against women and established a mechanism to protect
women from all forms of violence, both in society and
within the family, and established a national centre for
that purpose.
The eight resolutions adopted by the Security
Council in this area have made clear that this
agenda requires greater commitment in order to be
comprehensively implemented. We will undertake
additional efforts to integrate these resolutions in the
global agenda of the United Nations and in the work of
the Security Council in particular. The past two decades
have made clear that the meaningful participation of
women can strengthen protection, economic recovery
and peacebuilding efforts.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate Kuwait’s
commitment to acting in favour of women’s
empowerment and promoting the role of women in
sustaining peace and security. Participation by women
and girls must be at the top of our priorities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al Mazrui (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank France for having

17-3496291/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

convening this open debate on women and peace and
security. We join others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral’s Chef de Cabinet and the Executive Director
of UN-Women. We pledge our continued support to
UN-Women for its role in advancing this agenda.
Two years have passed since we marked the
15-year anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Security Council also unanimously adopted resolution
2242 (2015), which was co-sponsored by the United
Arab Emirates. As a sponsor of the resolution and a
strong advocate of the women and peace and security
agenda, the United Arab Emirates is committed to
building a strong framework for action to realize the
full implementation of this agenda.
Since 2015, the United Nations has taken important
steps to implement this agenda. The Security Council
established the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security and launched the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network,
of which the United Arab Emirates is a founding
member. The Network is responsible for coordinating
and implementing the women and peace and
security agenda at the national level. However, such
implementation remains a challenge owing to a number
of threats, including the rise of terrorism and violent
extremism and the targeting of women and girls in
conflict zones, as well as the protracted nature of the
displacement crisis.
The United Arab Emirates recognizes the range
of challenges that prevent the full implementation of
this agenda, and we are doing our part in preventing
conflict and promoting sustainable peace, which are
critical to the implementation of Agenda 2030.
We have focused on the protection and empowerment
as women as one of the three key pillars of our external
assistance strategy. Respect for the rights of women and
girls underpins every aspect of our country’s approach
to this global response. The United Arab Emirates
considers its partnership with UN-Women a key part
of its strategy to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. Accordingly, the United Arab
Emirates has supported UN-Women since its inception.
In this regard, I would like to announce that we have
contributed $15 million to support its critical work over
the next three years.
As a result of this strong partnership and under
the leadership of Her Highness Sheikha Fatima bint
Mubarak, Chairwoman of the General Women’s Union,
92/104

27/10/2017

Supreme Chairwoman of the Family Development
Foundation and President of the Supreme Council for
Motherhood and Childhood, the United Arab Emirates
and UN-Women launched a liaison office in Abu Dhabi
that will enhance and strengthen collaboration so as
to advance gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls as a core part of the women and peace
and security agenda in the region.
The UAE also recognizes that a strong research
base is required so that our policies can be data-driven
and effective. That is why our country contributes to
this research base by supporting UN-Women’s global
programme on women and peace and security in
order to promote conflict-resilient societies through
prevention efforts. This global programme has
furthered gender-sensitive research and data collection
and revealed the drivers of extremism and the impact
of counter-terrorism strategies on women’s rights and
women’s organizations.
The United Arab Emirates is aware of the need
to strengthen the capacity of Governments to address
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence. That
is why the United Arab Emirates has supported the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in the development and implementation of an
action plan on conflict-related sexual violence as well
as in the establishment of prevention and response
mechanisms in Somalia, of which accountability is a
central element.
In closing, the United Arab Emirates recognizes
that the international community will achieve
sustainable peace only by placing women’s participation
at the core of our global peace and security efforts.
We will continue to advocate for the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects
of senior leadership and decision-making, and we
will work towards the effective implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I wish to thank
you very much, Madam President, for having initiated
the present open debate and providing an excellent
concept note (S/2017/889, annex). We thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his comprehensive report
of 16 October (S/2017/861), and we recognize and
support the consistency of the policy recommendations
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

and conclusions contained in the report with the overall
priorities and reform agenda of the Secretary-General.
At such an important stocktaking open debate
of the Security Council on the past 17 years of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda of the United Nations, Armenia reiterates
its full commitment to the resolute pursuit of such a
transformative agenda and the consistent strengthening
of the link between the empowerment of women and the
sustainability of peace and development at the national,
regional and international levels. At the national level,
the implementation of our strategic action plan on
gender policy and on combating gender-based violence
is a continuous works in progress.
Shortly, my Government will be presenting to the
Parliament a draft law on the prevention of domestic
violence and the protection of victims. Our national laws
and provisions of equal rights and equal opportunities
for women and men and identifying and assisting
victims of trafficking and human exploitation, as well
as numerous other legal and normative acts, remain
important instruments for the promotion of gender
equality and the protection of the rights of women.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women
received considerable prominence in Armenia’s overall
national strategy and action plan for the promotion and
protection of human rights.
Following the adoption of a new Constitution in
2015 and the new electoral code in 2016, the quota
for women’s representation in elected bodies has been
raised to 25 per cent from 20 per cent. There is an
aim to gradually increase that figure to 30 per cent by
2021. Presently, the representation of women in our
national Parliament stands at nearly 20 per cent, which
is a considerable increase from the previous level of
11 per cent. Promoting gender balance in the judiciary
represents another important priority for Armenia. As
a result of the implementation of our respective national
action plan, the number of female judges has reached
25 per cent.
The empowerment of women and the promotion of
their rights represent an important agenda in Armenia’s
work within regional and international bodies.
Presently, the Government is considering modalities for
setting up a working group for the implementation of
Armenia’s international commitments, including those
stemming from the national report on Beijing + 20 and
its concluding observations. Furthermore, domestic

S/PV. 8079

procedures have been launched to sign the Council
of Europe Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence.
I am also glad to inform the Council about
the setting up of an inter-agency working group
for the elaboration of a national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with a view
to its adoption in 2018. In 2015 and 2016, the Minister
of Defence of Armenia, in collaboration with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the United Nations
Population Fund, initiated and conducted workshops on
the national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The publication in 2016 of a reference book on women
and the army, as well as the elaboration of a concept
note and a draft action plan that is to be approved soon
by the Minister of Defence concerning women’s rights
and equal opportunities in the field of defence, are
important building blocks in Armenia’s national efforts
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In all of our work, the Government of Armenia
relies heavily on the strong engagement, cooperation
and contributions of its very vibrant civil society
organizations, particularly those dealing with
issues of women. We strongly commend and thank
our civil society activists for their important work
and commitment.
We support the Secretary-General’s observations
about the need to elevate the women and peace and
security agenda to systemic, large-scale, transformative
programmes and approaches to preventing conflict
and sustaining peace. Overall, that resonates strongly
with the Secretary-General’s concept of placing
prevention at the heart of the actions of the United
Nations — a concept that we support. In that respect, the
empowerment of women, the promotion and protection
of women’s rights in general and, in particular, the
women and peace and security agenda should not be
viewed as a standalone agenda. Rather, it should be
firmly viewed as an indispensable and integral part
of the broader objective of securing durable solutions
to crisis situations and addressing the root causes of
violence and conflicts. Gender-based vulnerability
often represents an exacerbating factor in targeting
groups on the grounds of their broader identities, such
as, for example, national, ethnic, religious or racial
identities. The reinforced emphasis on the promotion
and protection of all human rights, the strengthening
of national institutions to that end and reinforced
international corporation to promote the human rights

17-3496293/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

agenda remain significant objectives, both at national
and international levels.
In conclusion, Armenia particularly underlines the
role of women in establishing an environment conducive
to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and promoting
confidence-building among conflicting parties. We
recognize the significance of the role of civil society
organizations, in particular women-led organizations,
for that purpose. Armenia consistently emphasizes the
importance of dialogue and confidence-building in
the context of the peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. However, meaningful effort to
promote such dialogue and confidence-building
measures is considerably undermined by persistently
flaring hate speech, intolerance, xenophobia and
ethnic profiling of Armenians. The glorification of
hate crimes, especially encouraged by the political
leadership in the neighbouring States, as well as
violence and the imprisonment of human rights
defenders, including women.
Armenia remains firmly committed to the
peace process and reiterates its deep appreciation
for the support of the international community, of
the Council and of the Secretary-General for the
efforts of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In the context of the present debate, we recognize and
underline the significant role of women as catalysts for
sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to uphold its tradition of participating
in this annual open debate on the important topic of
women and peace and security. Trinidad and Tobago
recognizes the competence of the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
in matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and wishes to express its satisfaction
regarding the fact that the issue of women and peace
and security remains prominent on the agenda of
the Council.
My delegation also welcomes the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/861)
on the subject. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral in his report that the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals requires the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
94/104

27/10/2017

agenda. For my country, the achievement of gender
equality and the empowerment of women remain
pivotal to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Seventeen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted by the Security Council. Trinidad and
Tobago remains steadfast in its view that the seminal
character of that resolution cannot be overemphasized,
as it was the first resolution to recognize the need for
the involvement of both women and men in efforts
to attain sustainable peace and security. Similarly,
we recognize the distinctive nature of subsequent
resolutions on sustaining peace and the importance
of women’s leadership and meaningful participation
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding, as embodied in subsequent resolutions
on sustaining peace. Our support for those resolutions
is not only based on our legal obligations under the
Charter, but also on our own national laws, which have
entrenched the inalienable rights of women into our
domestic legal framework.
Trinidad and Tobago subscribes to the rule of law
as a fundamental safeguard in the advancement and
protection of the rights of women. Therefore, we view
as essential our continued adherence to obligations
from a number of international instruments that seek
to protect the rights of women and girls, including
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict and, in my country’s specific
circumstances, armed violence, continue to engage
our attention. Trinidad and Tobago remains a strong
proponent of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). We submit
that the ATT represents a significant achievement in the
global fight to eliminate the diversion of conventional
arms to the illicit market. It could contribute to
the reduction of, if not an end to, untold suffering,
particularly to women and girls.
In the spirit of advancing the dual agenda of the
attainment of international peace and security and the
empowerment of women, in 2010, Trinidad and Tobago
introduced General Assembly resolution 65/69, which
was the first General Assembly resolution on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. It is
our view that that resolution complements resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on the matter
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8079

by focusing on the participation of women in processes
geared towards the advancement of disarmament and
international peace and security.

value in addressing especially critical issues, such as
protecting children’s rights, combating gender-based
violence and promoting human rights.

As a current member of the Executive Board of
UN-Women, Trinidad and Tobago pledges to continue
to work with Member States towards the universal
achievement of gender equality. We recognize UNWomen’s strategic plan for the period 2018-2021 as
an important instrument that could help to achieve
that objective.

After listening to the briefers for today’s debate, it
is clear that blocking women’s rights and empowerment
has direct negative effects on society as a whole.
During the genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi, rape
and other forms of violence were primarily directed at
women not just to degrade them individually but also to
strip the humanity from the larger community of which
they were a part. As situations of armed conflict and
violent extremism continue to prevail in many parts
of the world, with women and children bearing the
primary burden, we must work steadfastly to empower
women and encourage their participation in the entire
spectrum of peace processes and in the promotion of
the rule of law, good governance and mediation.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago would like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to the
advancement and empowerment of women. We remain
committed to working with other Member States and
our partners at the regional, hemispheric and global
levels to promote the involvement of women as equal
partners in matters related to peace and security,
including at all levels of the decision-making process.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Ms. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the French presidency
for convening today’s important debate.
(spoke in English)
We are also grateful to all the briefers this morning for
their insightful remarks.
It has been almost exactly 17 years to the day since
the international community recognized the urgent
importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective
into peacekeeping and multidimensional peace support
operations. On this anniversary, we must take stock of
the progress we have been able to make and of what
still remains for us to accomplish, individually and
collectively. My delegation welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to mainstream this agenda within
the ongoing reforms of the United Nations peace and
security architecture and recognize the collaborative
advantage that it will confer on the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security.
The participation of women in peace and security is
not only the right thing to do but also the smart thing to
do, as it is a proven fact that when women are involved
in conflict prevention and efforts to achieve unity and
reconciliation, as well as peacebuilding, sustainable
outcomes are achieved. Women contribute added

As a regional initiative, the East African
Community, in collaboration with the African Union,
has developed a regional implementation framework
to enhance women’s leadership in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and mainstreaming gender in security
policymaking, and to ensure that women’s rights are
protected in humanitarian crises, transitional contexts
and post-conflict situations. It is important to note that
the action plan also ensures that activities related to
women and peace and security are not seen as standalone efforts but rather as an integral part of regional
peace and security discussions that are in line with
promoting gender equality.
Nationally, the Government of Rwanda, bringing
to bear strong political will, has made great strides
in empowering women to fully participate in all
sectors and fields, an approach complemented by
the fact that private-sector, civil-society, religious
and non-governmental organizations are also taking
ownership of the part they play in the empowerment and
advancement of women. In addition, we have adopted
a national action plan in order to fast-track existing
national mechanisms and frameworks for implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). The plan is based on two pillars,
the first being that of promoting the equal participation
of women and men in all peace initiatives at all levels,
and the second of integrating gender perspectives into
peace and security efforts.
Individually and collectively, we have a long way
to go, but we can achieve the meaningful and long-term
changes we seek if we continue to put women at the

17-3496295/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

centre of our agenda. In conclusion, Rwanda stands
ready to work with Member States, the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations as a whole, particularly
UN-Women, to make this agenda a success.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
the French presidency for convening today’s open
debate, and the briefers for their very comprehensive
presentations this morning.
I fully align my statement with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
Portugal is encouraged by several very positive
developments with regard to the women and peace
and security agenda. This subject matter has become a
consistent feature in Security Council resolutions and
peacekeeping mandates, and gender-sensitive reporting
is now a fundamental element in any comprehensive
understanding of a given situation. We are also pleased
to note that nowadays more women are taking part in
peace talks, more peace agreements contain provisions
in support of women’s human rights, and more securitysector personnel are trained to prevent and properly
respond to sexual and gender-based violence.
Portugal also welcomes other important kinds of
progress at the multilateral, regional and national levels,
including the African Union and NATO’s appointment
of special envoys for women and peace and security and
the increasing number of countries that have adopted
national action plans for implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and the related resolutions that have followed.
However, since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the context of peace and security and the nature of
conflict have evolved, sometimes very dramatically.
We are currently confronted with entrenched cycles
of conflict and fragility, daily violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, growing humanitarian
crises and the mass-scale displacement of people and
refugees, along with new threats, including the increase
in violent extremism and terrorism, that affect women
and girls in particular.
We understand that the women and peace and
security agenda is a critical yet still underutilized tool
for preventing conflict and shaping more effective
responses to complex crises. That is why it is so
essential to consistently build on the progress already
achieved and scale up the commitment to this agenda.
96/104

27/10/2017

Portugal has been a firm and consistent supporter
of the women and peace and security agenda, as we
consider it to be critical to ensuring the active and
meaningful participation of women and girls in all
aspects and stages of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict processes. It is an agenda
of fairness and inclusivity that has been shown to
contribute positively to the achievement of sustainable
peace, besides offering multiple cross-cutting benefits,
including strengthening United Nations peacekeepers’
protection efforts.
In 2009, Portugal adopted its first national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
A second plan, adopted in 2014, will be in force until
next year. We have remained consistently committed to
promoting the women and peace and security agenda and
raising awareness of the importance of establishing and
fully implementing national action plans for resolution
1325 (2000) in all relevant international forums,
including the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and NATO. We reiterate our
pledge to continue conducting training programmes on
gender equality and violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, gender-based violence and
trafficking in human beings, for national personnel and
members of the armed and security forces assigned to
international peacekeeping missions.
Portugal fully supports the Secretary-General’s
policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse, and highly welcomed his initiative to organize
the high-level meeting on that topic in September.
Portugal took part in the high-level event, has signed
the voluntary compact to end impunity and strengthen
measures to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse,
joined the Circle of Leadership and contributed to
the United Nations Trust Fund for victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.
To conclude, 17 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we realize that much has been
achieved, but also that we have a long way ahead,
with no end in sight, to definitively ensure the gender
perspective and women and girl’s participation in all
stages of peace processes, including in prevention
and disarmament, protection in displacement settings,
peacekeeping, policymaking and reconstruction. No
concrete effort should be spared to move forward and
advance this meaningful agenda. Portugal is complying
at the national level and stands ready to extend his
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

cooperation at the bilateral and international levels to
promote the women and peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): I thank the
French presidency for having organized this important
open debate.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
17 years ago, the women and peace and security
agenda has increasingly been recognized as a main
pillar of maintaining global peace and security.
However, in term of implementation, women’s role and
participation in this area in all capacities remain low
and fragmented. On the positive side, we note that in
addition to resolution 1325 (2000) and the other seven
Security Council resolutions on the women and peace
and security agenda, there are a number of newly
established frameworks to push forward this agenda,
such as the informal expert group on women and peace
and security, and the Women, Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network.
The Kingdom of Thailand believes that it is
the responsibility of the international community
as a whole to strengthen the implementation of this
agenda. In so doing, we must find ways to further
promote gender equality and women’s rights, while
increasing the number of women in peace and security
leadership positions.
On our part, in 2016 Thailand adopted national
measures and guidelines on women and peace and
security that encompass the aspects of prevention,
protection, capacity-building and empowerment.
This document emphasizes the significant role of
women in addressing political and social conflicts at
the domestic and international levels. The national
economic and social development plan of Thailand also
underlines the concept of women’s rights, as enshrined
in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.
We strongly believe that women can play an
important role in and increase the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations, and has worked increase
their participation. Among the Thai military and
police personnel now serving in the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan, and the African

S/PV. 8079

Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
24 per cent are women. We also believe that Member
States can and must do more to improve the global level
of female participation in peacekeeping, which now
stands at fewer than 4 per cent of all Blue Helmets,
and in conflict prevention and resolution. According to
UN-Women, between 1992 and 2011 only 4 per cent of
signatories to peace agreements and fewer than 10 per
cent of peace negotiators were women.
To address that deficit, we must first ensure that the
women and and peace security agenda is mainstreamed
across the entire spectrum of the work of the United
Nations. Secondly, in our work we need to constantly
remind ourselves that women are not just victims
but rather effective agent of change. Mechanisms
and programmes should be created to increase their
meaningful participation in various sectors of the
United Nations. Thirdly, the rhetoric must go beyond
promoting the role of women in merely providing a
sense of security to other women and children, as we
need to stop perpetuating the stereotyped views of
women as gentle pacifiers. In addition, more efforts
must be made in all countries, including Thailand, with
regard to increasing the role and the number of women
engaged in national and local politics, particularly in
the political decision-making processes.
I concur with the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861) that an inclusive process and women’s
meaningful participation in peace and security must
be the norm, not the exception. Thailand is committed
to continuing to do our part at home and stands
ready to work with others to genuinely advance this
important agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank France for convening this important
open debate on women and peace and security.
I also thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti for
her valuable briefing, and the other briefers for their
important comments and remarks.
We celebrate today the seventeenth anniversary
of the adoption of the women and peace and security
agenda, which has become an important pillar in conflict
prevention and resolution, humanitarian action and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Despite the
international consensus on the vital role of women in

17-3496297/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

peace, security, human rights and development, States
and organizations still have a long way to go in order
to achieve these goals. We therefore need to redouble
our efforts to address the root causes of the challenges
that confront women and undermine their rights. In this
regard, and in the interests of time, I would like to focus
on three main challenges.
First, occupation represents one of the main
obstacles to women’s advancement and is the most
heinous violation of rights, freedoms and international
norms. Every day, Palestinian and Arab women suffer
under the Israeli occupation, which commits all forms of
violence, including sexual violence, arbitrary detention,
physical and psychological torture, amounting to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
Secondly, we note the increasing violence in
conflict zones and the growing threat posed by
non-State actors, sectarian militias and terrorist groups.
Atrocities are being committed on a daily basis against
civilians, women in particular, by the Syrian regime,
Iranian sectarian militias, the terrorist Hizbullah
militia, Houthi militias, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Al-Qaeda and Boko Haram in Syria, Yemen,
Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia and elsewhere.
Thirdly, we see the spread of violent extremist
discourse against Muslims and Islam, including
women. Women are oppressed even in countries that
call for democracy and religious and personal freedoms.
These countries enact laws that limit the freedom
of women, including their religious freedom, and
prevent them from participating in public life merely
because of the way they look. All of these practices
run counter to our goal of empowering women and
respecting their religious and ideological freedom.
All of these challenges adversely affect economic and
social development and undermine the well-being and
prosperity of women and society.
In order to address these challenges, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia calls on the Security Council
and other United Nations entities overseeing the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda to confront these challenges comprehensively
and consistently, end occupation and colonization,
and refrain from supporting oppressive sectarian
regimes and sectarian militias. We should all combat
extremist discourse against Islam and Muslims and
ensure the comprehensive development of all nations.
Most importantly, we should seek to ensure the active
98/104

27/10/2017

participation of women in all of these efforts and refrain
from controlling their religious and cultural choices.
The advancement of women has been a priority
for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We are focused on
women’s education at all levels, which helps to ensure
their access to the private and public sectors. Women
in Saudi Arabia have proven themselves. They have
been able to become members of the Shura Council and
have participated in municipal elections as candidates
and voters. They have become diplomats and occupy
a number of leadership positions. Women have also
been a focus of our development efforts, including the
2030 Vision of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which the
Kingdom launched in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The achievements of Saudi women have been
many, and I cannot enumerate them all. They have
made great inroads in the fields of science, technology,
medicine, business, humanitarian action, pilgrim
services and other scientific, social and economic
activities. All of these achievements are the results of
our arduous efforts and of the attention we accord to
women’s empowerment.
I note that this success has not happened in a
vacuum. Women have played a pioneering role in
Muslim and Arab history. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is making great strides in order to ensure the
advancement of women and their empowerment, based
on our belief that addressing the root causes of women’s
exclusion and marginalization is our religious, national
and development duty.
Thanks to the courageous and wise leadership of my
country, women in Saudi Arabia are allowed to dream.
We promise that the next stage will allow women to take
part in all walks of life. This is based on the principles
of moderate Islam, which has given women the status
they deserve and guarantees their dignity and rights,
far removed from extremist discourse that has nothing
to do with our principles or our way of life.
Our achievements are many, but we still have a long
way to go. Saudi women have been a model of patience,
dedication and devotion. Today, women in Saudi Arabia
are allowed to dream and to lead in favour of peace,
security and well-being, not only in the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the region but also throughout the
world. These are not empty promises. They are part
of an action plan that my country has launched and is
determined to see through to the end.
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me thank the Mission
of France for convening this meeting on women and
peace and security.
We also thank all speakers who have made strong,
positive references to Afghanistan’s progress with
women in general. However, there is no place for
complacency. We remain steadfast in our resolve to
improve the lives of half of our population.
The role of women is inextricable from the promotion
of peace and security worldwide. Experience has also
shown that the full involvement and participation of
women are not only desirable but absolutely necessary
to the advancement of society, as well to preventing and
resolving conflicts. Today’s meeting is of particular
importance to my country, Afghanistan, which has seen
decades of imposed conflict, including terrorism and
violence extreme, all of which has left our institutions
and social fabric in a shambles.
Afghan women have borne the disproportionate
burden of violence and suffering for a long period of
time. Their basic rights and fundamental freedoms
were completely denied under Taliban rule, as they had
no access to education, health care or employment.
Needless to say, the plight of Afghan women
has seen profound improvements since the fall of
the Taliban regime, which marked the start of a new
era in our modern history. Since 2001, we have seen
tremendous progress across all spectrums of society.
Today, the National Unity Government is consolidating
the gains of recent years. Women’s equality in all
spheres remains an important national priority, as we
are committed to furthering women’s participation and
role in all stages of decision-making, particularly in
relation to peace and security issues.
Our commitment to women’s empowerment is
embedded in our firm resolve to meet our pledges
within the framework of our national and international
obligations, including the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the international treaties to
which we are party. To that end, the Government of
Afghanistan is sparing no effort to meet the goals of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Afghanistan national action
plan on women and peace and security remains the
overarching framework for implementing that hallmark
resolution. A key component of our strategy relates

S/PV. 8079

to ensuring women’s participation in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts, as well as
other matters related to peace and security.
Ending the cycle of terror, violence and conflict in
Afghanistan is the surest way to protect and promote
the rights of all our citizens, particularly women. In
this respect, women are front and centre in our national
peace process as members of the High Peace Council
and civil society, as human rights advocates, and as
members of Parliament and Government. Accordingly,
the participation of women in peacebuilding efforts is
recognized as a prerequisite for peace and reconstruction
across the country. In the broader context, there is a
common acknowledgement that durable peace and
stability in Afghanistan require the participation of
women in every aspect of society, be it social, political
or economic.
The national action plan for the women of
Afghanistan, spanning the years 2008 to 2018, commits
the Afghan Government to increasing women’s
representation in the civil service to 30 per cent. The
Ministries of the Interior and National Defence have
committed to increasing women’s representation in
those institutions by 20 per cent over the next 10 years.
Furthermore, my delegation is pleased to report that at
present more than 3,000 female armed-service members
and police officers are proudly serving in our national
security forces in order to protect our citizens, combat
international terrorism and preserve law and order.
In the economic domain, the launch of our national
programme for women’s economic empowerment
has marked another important step forward in the
advancement of women. It has supported 67,000 women
in agricultural activities and empowered 35,000 in the
livestock sector, and it is also recruiting 3,000 female
teachers and 900 community midwives and nurses.
Physical protection from any form of violence
constitutes an integral component of our national efforts
to empower women. A number of national structures
have been established to enforce constitutional and
legislative provisions to protect women. They include
the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, commissions
in Kabul and the provinces for the elimination of
violence against women, the creation of the post
of Deputy Attorney-General for the Elimination of
Violence against Women and a commission on the
elimination of sexual abuse of women and children.
Those structures are integral to the Government’s

17-3496299/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

promotion and protection of women’s rights and to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Amid all our gains, we realize how vital it is to
continue sustaining and enhancing progress on women’s
empowerment on all fronts. We can say with confidence
that Afghanistan has entered a new phase in its journey
to transform the role of women into a powerful force
of change, while contributing to the vision of a selfreliant nation that stands in lasting peace, tranquillity
and stability. We are confident in our success, but
the support of the international community continues
to be crucially important to realizing that vision. We
would like to take this opportunity to express our
consciousness of the deep debt of gratitude we owe to
all the friends and partners that continue to make an
important contribution to our efforts. We look forward
to continuing our collaboration in order to elevate our
progress in the protection and empowerment of Afghan
women to new heights.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks France for convening today’s
open debate on an issue of increasing importance to
the Organization. I believe it is important for all of us
here in the Security Council to draw the international
community’s attention to the need to periodically
revisit the issue of the role of women in the area of
peace and security. They are simultaneously the victims
of conflicts, participants in fulfilling peacekeeping
operations’ mandates and society’s peacebuilders.
Ecuador welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/861), the concept note (S/2017/889,
annex) provided to guide our work and the important
briefings we heard today. We agree on the ever-present
and genuine need to work to achieve gender equality,
the empowerment of women and the protection of their
rights, and to raise awareness about the risks they
face, including all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence. Conflict prevention and resolution, postconflict reconstruction and lasting peace can be fully
achieved only if those intrinsic goals are duly taken
into consideration.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
mechanisms that have been established to include a
gender perspective in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. Gender-based violence and sexual violence in
conflict situations will always be unacceptable, which is
100/104

27/10/2017

why it is important for those responsible for such crimes
to be held accountable. Support mechanisms must
therefore be established for victims, as well as ongoing
educational processes for societies. For many, the face
of the United Nations is its peacekeeping operations.
Every effort must be made to end the cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation in those operations for good, as
such abuses undermine the Organization’s credibility.
The current national challenges in the area of
women’s participation and leadership are not the result
of a lack of legislation, public policies or administrative
structures, but rather of the lack of implementation of
such laws, policies and structures. That is because
mindsets still have to be changed, and that must be done
every day. If change is to be permanent, our inclusion
efforts must be ongoing and meaningful, but that is a
slow process in which we have to contend with glass
ceilings, broken ladders and sticky floors. Planning,
regularly submitting reports and disaggregating
statistics are therefore all-important. In addition, the
cross-cutting nature of gender equality increasingly
demonstrates the interrelated nature of the various
forums and the need to work assiduously to assess the
outcome of today’s meeting.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that,
starting this year, Ecuador has three women in its
infantry unit serving as peacekeeping operations
observers. We trust that that will be the start of an
ongoing and growing participation that can be extended
to other branches of our armed forces and police force,
as yet another sign that my country is committed to the
ideals of peace and security on which the Organization
is based.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Ademola Ogunnaike (Nigeria): I thank
the delegation of France for organizing today’s open
debate on women and peace and security. I would
also like to commend Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. Nigeria welcomes the presence at today’s
debate of Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and of the representative
of non-governmental organizations. We listened
attentively to all the briefings and have taken note of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/861), which
provides an update on the progress that has been made
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

across all areas of the women and peace and security
agenda, as well as highlighting gaps and challenges.
Undoubtedly, respect for women’s rights and
interests, as well as their protection, is not only a mark of
progress in human civilization but is also closely related
to the attainment of world peace and development.
Nigeria therefore welcomes this opportunity to reflect
on the progress made on the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, 17 years after the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). While
we acknowledge the substantial achievements that have
been made in that endeavour, however, there are still
challenges and significant gaps to be addressed. The
international community should therefore go beyond
protecting women’s safety and upholding their rights
and interests in conflict and post-conflict situations,
and dedicate greater collective efforts to ensuring their
active participation in peace processes. We believe that
today’s debate can help to determine potential solutions
for addressing the prevailing challenges and gaps, and
offer suggestions for acquiring the resources needed to
advance the role of women within the context of the
global peace and security architecture.
Meeting those challenges will be critical to
making the progress we need on the women and peace
and security agenda. It requires a multi-stakeholder
approach involving all actors at the global, regional,
subregional and national levels. Communities, civil
society and individuals also have crucial roles to play.
In order to promote women so that they can truly take
ownership of their peacekeeping roles and play an
important part in peacebuilding processes, the various
United Nations bodies and entities will need to work in
accordance with their respective mandates, with a clear
division of labour on the one hand, and complementarity
on the other.
We are also convinced that national Governments
have the primary responsibility to protect women’s
safety, rights and interests. The international
community should therefore support countries by
providing constructive assistance, with their consent.
However, such support should be consistent with
national priorities and focus on capacity-building.
There is also the urgent need to step up assistance
aimed at supporting the countries concerned with their
specific financial and technical difficulties.
In our region, the African Union has provided
a useful platform for the advancement of the women

S/PV. 8079

and peace and security agenda. It should be noted
that Agenda 2063 of the African Union, which was
adopted by African Heads of State and Government
in Addis Ababa in January 2016, places particular
emphasis on the engagement of women and youth in the
continent’s development.
At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has been a major
driver of the women and peace and security agenda.
In collaboration with the United Nations Office for
West Africa, ECOWAS developed an integrated plan of
action for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in September 2010. The plan of action emphasizes the
importance of the role of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, mediation and peacebuilding, as
well as the rebuilding of post-conflict societies.
Consistent with subregional efforts, Nigeria
launched a national action plan to fully implement the
relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, the
second national action plan has expanded the concept of
security to cover the use of violent extremism, trauma
and healing, disarmament and demobilization, and
subject them to further localization. The plan reflects
the Federal Government’s commitment to ensuring the
security of women and girls during armed conflict and
to enhancing their active and direct participation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
I wish to state that there is ongoing collaboration
with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon, the Niger and
Benin, within the framework of the Multinational Joint
Task Force, to fight Boko Haram, whose activities
have targeted women and girls. Our experience
today is evidence that, with determined international
collaboration, terrorism can be defeated. The sustained
efforts by Nigeria and its international partners
have culminated in the liberation of four territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram.
It should be noted that 80 per cent of the 2 million
internally displaced persons in north-eastern Nigeria
are women. We have taken concrete steps to address
their humanitarian needs and to ensure that the
necessary conditions are established for enabling the
voluntary return of the displaced persons to their homes
safely and with dignity. The Nigerian Government is
working around the clock to ensure the release of the
remaining Chibok girls and other persons in Boko
Haram captivity.

17-34962101/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

We believe that the effective participation of women
is an important foundation for realizing sustainable
peace and social stability. Women should naturally
become important participants in conflict prevention
and mediation. They should enjoy adequate rights
and be allowed to participate in the decision-making
process, making contributions to post-conflict
arrangements, peacebuilding and national development.
Indeed, women’s development is the foundation for
truly realizing their empowerment. The international
community should make deliberate efforts to promote
the socioeconomic development of women, thereby
enhancing their capacity to make positive contributions
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

in human lives. Civilians are the primary victims of
such wars, and their lives are in jeopardy on a daily
basis. It is obviously no coincidence that women always
pay the highest price. Day after day, if nothing is done,
their lives become a never-ending string of misfortunes,
accompanied by a lack of access to water, health care
and adequate food. Any hope of a quiet and peaceful
life is obliterated, and they face abject poverty, pain and
misfortune as they gradually become deprived of any
means of subsistence. Indeed, the resulting insecurity
takes a high toll on their daily lives, filling them with
despair and making their future increasingly uncertain.
The precarious security environment creates a fertile
breeding ground for terror and terrorism.

Nigeria remains fully and firmly committed to
the promotion and protection of the rights of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
shall work assiduously to enhance the participation
of women in peace and security initiatives. We are
determined to reinforce and implement the principles
of resolution 1325 (2000) and, within that context, to
address the factors that impact negatively on the lives
of women and girls.

Much progress has been made under the women
and peace and security agenda, but much remains to be
done. We note with satisfaction that the framework of
preventative diplomacy and preventive action in various
areas — such as demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration, security-sector reform and human rights
aimed at preventing and resolving conflicts — can
support complex political transitions and maintain
peace among national stakeholders.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.

In that context, there is a clear trend towards
increasing women’s participation. As such, those tools
have the immediate goal of mitigating the triggers
and impacts of violent conflict, while seeking to build
peace and move towards the long-term objectives
of prevention and lasting peace. In that respect, we
believe that women’s participation is crucial in order to
increase effectiveness. We also commend the efforts of
the Secretary-General with regard to the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the French presidency of the Security
Council for convening this debate on women and peace
and security, as well as for the excellent quality of
the accompanying concept note (S/2017/889, annex),
which highlights the relevance and importance of this
issue on the agenda of the Security Council and the
General Assembly as we implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
We also welcome the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/861) and thank Ms. Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
la Francophonie, and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for the quality of their briefings.
Since 2000, some eight Security Council resolutions
have substantively contributed to the progressive
enrichment of the legal and institutional framework
dealing with the issue before us, while also being
translated into closer institutional links among peace
and security, development and human rights bodies.
In times of conflict, the security situation on the
ground deteriorates significantly and takes a heavy toll
102/104

We welcomed the launch of the African Women
Leaders Network in May in New York. We also
reiterate that we are pleased to see the high degree of
integration of the issue of women into the peace and
security architecture of the African Union. Indeed,
commendable efforts have been made in the African
Union to integrate objectives relating to women and
peace and security into its mechanisms for security and
human rights protection, as well as its crisis-response
and peacebuilding strategies, including, inter alia, the
promotion of women’s access to positions such as peace
mediators, election observers and gender advisers.
Djibouti has long worked to adopt measures relating
to women’s economic empowerment, governance and
justice. Many sectoral public policies in that regard
17-34962

27/10/2017

Women and peace and security

have been implemented and featured in the national
programme on gender. Article 1 of our Constitution
establishes equality between men and women with
respect to civic and political rights. Since 2013, our
Parliament has had a 12 per cent representation of
women. In public administration, thanks to a legal
framework and the political will for equal participation,
women now represent some 25 per cent of the
workforce. Finally, Djiboutian women are participating
in peacekeeping missions, in particular in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the African
Union Mission in Somalia.
As affirmed by the Beijing Declaration in the
Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference
on Women,
“Women’s equal participation in decision-making
is not only a demand for simple justice or
democracy but can also be seen as a necessary
condition for women’s interests to be taken into
account. Without the active participation of women
and the incorporation of women’s perspective at all
levels of decision-making, the goals of equality,
development and peace cannot be achieved.”
Currently, we in Djibouti are initiating the
preparation of a project aimed at the creation of a
gender observatory. That project consists, on the one
hand, of collecting, analysing and disseminating data
relating to gender equality, and on the other, of making
recommendations that will inform decision-makers
in their decision-making and, consequently, the
development of public policies to promote and improve
the situation of gender equality in our country.
To conclude, the topic debated today — about
which predictions indicate that the road ahead is fraught
with difficulties, but also that the obstacles are by no
means insurmountable — provides us with an excellent
opportunity and means of eradicating the root causes of
conflicts and strengthening conflict prevention. We can
and must collectively work with vigour to implement
the elements and recommendations of the global study
in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the French presidency for holding

S/PV. 8079

this important open debate on women and peace and
security. We also thank the briefers for their statements.
The women and peace and security agenda has
gained significant momentum since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted. As such, the Security Council has
paid increasing attention to the issue by acknowledging
that combating impunity, addressing past violations
and asserting the principles of the rule of law underpin
efforts to build peace and stability. Among other areas,
it is important to continue paying close attention to the
gender consequences of the breakdown of the rule of
law during and after conflict.
While genuine strides have been made in
strengthening the political will and international legal
framework needed to secure justice and deal with
conflict-related sexual violence, there is still a need
for greater focus on the full range of violations and
serious crimes experienced by women, including such
matters as forced disappearances, foreign occupation,
mass forced displacements and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. There must be no tolerance for
such acts. Combating impunity and strengthening the
responses of both international and national justice are
critically important in that regard.
Against that backdrop, it is curious that the
representative of Armenia — the country that bears
primary responsibility for unleashing the war and
perpetrating the aggression against Azerbaijan and has
been carrying out ethnic cleansing on a massive scale
and committing other serious crimes during the conflict,
including against women and children — should
take the floor in the Security Council, and attempt to
lecture others and voice groundless accusations against
my country.
Suffice it to say that the attack and capture of
the town Khojaly in the Nagorno Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan in February 1992 involved the brutal killing
of hundreds of Azerbaijanis, including 83 children and
106 women. Thousands of civilians were wounded and
taken hostage, and many remain missing. The town
was razed to the ground, and the level of brutality in
Khojaly was indeed shocking. Atrocities included
scalping, beheading, the bayoneting of pregnant women
and mutilation of bodies. Seventy-eight of the mutilated
were minors. Six families were exterminated. Twentyfive children lost both parents, and 130 children lost one
parent. The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators
of the crimes committed in the course of the Armenian

17-34962103/104

S/PV.8079

Women and peace and security

27/10/2017

aggression not only impedes progress in achieving the
long-awaited peace and reconciliation process, but also
aggravates the situation on the ground.

among civilians, as well as destroying or substantially
damaging private and public property, including
residences, schools and kindergartens.

In April of last year, the armed forces of Armenia
stepped up their firing from their positions in the
occupied territories, thereby subjecting the armed
forces of Azerbaijan along the line of contact and the
adjacent densely populated areas under the control
of Azerbaijan to intense fire with heavy artillery
and large-calibre weapons. As a result, 34 towns and
villages in Azerbaijan were shelled, causing casualties

Armenia should therefore be the last to comment
on such notions as women and peace and security and
human rights. Azerbaijan will continue its efforts to
eliminate the consequences of the Armenian aggression,
with a view to achieving a political settlement of the
conflict based on international law and ensuring peace
and justice in the region.

104/104

The meeting rose at 8.20 p.m.

17-34962
