UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
UNLIBRARY

FORTIETH

YEAR

UNiSA

2626”

MEETING:

14 NOVEMBER

19kS

NEW YORK
,

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2626)

*....................................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17618);
(b)

Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17619) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2626

.

NOTE
-;
,- ; : .Symbois of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention. of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
dscu~e~~t,.
.- I ‘$, , ‘: ’
,a.:.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

,

I

2626th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 14 October 1985, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Richard A. Woolcott

(Australia).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sinclair (Acting
President of the United Nations Councilfor Namibia) and the
other members of the delegation took a place at the Council
table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with a decision taken
at the 2624th meeting, I invite Mr. Toivo ya Toivo,
Secretary-General of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO), to take a place at the Council
table.

Provisional agenda (SIAgendaI2626)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Toivo ya Toivo took a
pIace at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(4

(b)

4. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions taken
at previous meetings on this item [2624th and 2625th meetings], I invite the representatives of Cameroon, Canada,
Cuba, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Libya Arab Jamahiriya, Senegal,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side.of the
Council chamber.

Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the .United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17618);
Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17619)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Enzo (Cameroon),
Mr. Lewis (Canadaj, Mr. Oramas OIiva (&&a), Mr. Oit
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Lautenschlager (Federal
Republic of Germany), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Sarrk (Senegal), Mr. von Schirnding (South
Africa), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Bouziri
(Tunisia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
‘Ihe situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to tbe President of the Security Council (S/17618);
(b) Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to tbe President of tbe Security Council
(S/17619)

5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Ghana in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

I. T’re PRESIDENT:
In accordance with a decision taken
at he 2624th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a place at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gbeho (Ghana) took
the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Seereekissoon (Mauritius) took a piace at the Council table.

6. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter dated 14November
1985 from the Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, which reads as follows:

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a decision taken
at the 2624th meeting, I invite the Acting President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation of that Council to take a place at
the Council table.

“I have the honour to request the Council to permit
me to participate, in my capacity as Chairman of the
1

15. Despite the fact that the so-called interim govemment is illegitimate and enjoys no international recognition, the Pretoria regime continues to defy the will of the
international community with its delaying tactics, which
are designed to enable it to consolidate the fait accomph’
and to ignore the legitimate demands of the Namibian
people, under the leadership of its genuine representative
(SWAPO), for the ending of occupation, the eradication of
racial segregation and the attainment of freedom and
independence.

Special Committee against Apartheid, under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure, in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in
Namibia’ .”
7. On previous occasions the Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies
in connection with the consideration of matters on its
agenda. In conformity with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation, under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to the Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid.

16. Pretoria continues to take unilateral measures which
the international community has declared in Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 566 (1985), to
be illegal and null and void. Similarly, it is trying to impede
the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) in order to
perpetuate its racist occupation of Namibia.

It is so decided.
8. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

17. The majority of the States of the world understood
years ago the purposes and the nature of the racist Pretoria
regime and the methods of procrastination and prevarication it practices to prolong its occupation of Namibia and
continue its exploitation and plunder of the wealth and
resources of the Territory. We are fully aware that the
relations of co-operation in every sphere linking the racist
Pretoria regime and some Western regimes, with the racist
Zionist entity in Palestine in the front rank, have enabled
that regime to continue to defy and disregard the will of
the international community, despite the numerous United
Nations resolutions calling for an end to all dealings with
the racist Pretoria regime.

9. Mr. AZZAROUK
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the delegations of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and of the other members of the
Group of Arab States, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
November. We are convinced that your experience and
wisdom will enable the Council to achieve the best possible
results this month.
10. In the same way, we cannot fail to convey our appreciation to your predecessor for the excellent way in which
he guided the Council’s work last month.

18. We have all read the further report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia [S/Z7442’j, in which he informs the Council of a
total lack of progress in his latest talks on this issue with
the South African Government. In the face of Pretoria’s
determination not to respect Council resolutions and not
to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) we can only reiterate yet
again that the racist regime in South Africa will not end its
occupation of the Territory of Namibia unless the Council
adopts more comprehensive and effective measures. By
that we mean the imposition against the South African
Government of comprehensive sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, so as to secure
from it a commitment to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly on this
subject.

11. Once again the Council is meeting to consider the
situation in Namibia, a question on which it has deliberated in the past and adopted many resolutions. It is an
issue which has been discussed by the General Assembly
ever since its first session in 1946 and on which it has
adopted dozens of resolutions.
12. The present meetings of the Council are being held as
the world’s peoples commemorate the fortieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
13. Despite those facts, the Pretoria regime persists in its
attempts to circumvent the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia as endorsed in Council resolution 435 (1978). It is using every means at its disposal to
ignore that resolution, which is the only internationally
accepted formula for the settlement of the problem. The
Pretoria rggime continues its occupation of the Territory
of Namibia and has set up a puppet government there,
thus defying Council resolutions, particularly resolution
264 (1969) which calls for the immediate withdrawal of
Pretoria’s forces from the Territory of Namibia.

19. We believe that, as we commemorate the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations and the signing of its
Charter, the credibility and reputation of the Organization
are experiencing a crisis of confidence as far as many peoples of the world are concerned, peoples that had pinned
the highest hopes on the Organization. That is because of
the lack of movement on this issue, which has been under
discussion ever since the first session of the General
Assembly.

14. Pretoria also continues to defy General Assembly
resolutions, particularly resolution 2145 (XXI), of 27 October 1966, which ended South Africa’s Mandate over the
Territory of Namibia.

20. We believe that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to restore the credibility and reputation of the
2

United Nations, which, since its creation, has made great
strides in the field of decolonization.

military support for UNITA [National Union for the Tota!
Independence of Angola] in Angola, as demonstrated most
recently by the South African attack near Mavinga, will
postpone rather than accelerate the withdrawal of the
Cuban forces from Angola.

21. Mr. BIERRING
(Denmark): May I start by saying
how pleased we are to see you, Sir, in the President’s chair
for this month. The very close relations, personal as well as
professional, which have always existed between our Missions to the United Nations reflect the affinity of positions
of our respective countries on most issues which come
before the Organization, and thus also on the problem
with which the Council is faced today. We wish you every
success in discharging your heavy responsibilities.

27. The Council has in recent months been treated to
lengthy dissertations on South Africa% perception of foreseeable developments in southern Africa. We have been
told repeatedly by South Africa’s representative that his
country is the last line of defence of democratic values in
the region and that the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) in present circumstances would result in a government in an independent Namibia which would threaten
South Africa’s western border.

22. I would also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
the representative of the United States, Mr. Vernon Walters, for the very efficient and good-humoured way in
which he conducted our business last month, giving ample
evidence that he is a seasoned hand in the noble art of
diplomacy.

28. South Africa’s argument totally lacks credibility and
is an affront to knowledgeable persons who have followed
post-colonial developments in southern Africa. An overwhelming majority of the world community clearly sees
that South Africa’s policy in the Namibia question and its
repeated attacks on Angola in support of UNITA contribute more to the increase of outside involvement in the
region than the mere presence of a certain number of
Cuban forces in Angola for reasons irrelevant to the implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia’s
independence.

23. Last June, the Council held deliberations on the
situation in Namibia and adopted resolution 566 (1985),
which strongly warned South Africa that failure to cooperate in its implementation would compel the Council to
meet forthwith to consider the adoption. of appropriate
measures under the Charter of the United Nations.
24. The Council’s debate left no doubt that a consensus
continues to exist in the international community on all
the fundamental issues concerning Namibia’s independence. It is agreed that the Council has a special responsibility for Namibia’s independence, that an internationally
acceptable solution must be based on the full implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and that the linking of the
independence of Namibia to irrelevant and extraneous
issues is incompatible with that resolution. The Council
has unequivocally condemned the installation of a socalled interim government in Windhoek, in clear detiance
of resolution 435 (1978), and declared it to be illegal, null
and void. Both SWAP0 and South Africa have accepted
resolution 435 (1978).

29. The policy of my Government is clear. We determinedly reject linkage. We believe that the Namibia question should be solved on its own merits and not be seen in
an East-West context.
30. There is a growing feeling that developments in
southern Africa represent an increasing threat to the stability of the region and have wider implications for international peace and security. We appeal to all parties
concerned to make a determined effort to settle the issue of
Namibia’s independence in a peaceful way. This effort
must be backed by pressure from the international community, but we hope that countries with particular leverage will bring their intluence to bear on the parties and,
not least, try to convince South Africa that its continued
delaying tactics are not in its own long-term interest and
will not be tolerated.

25. We welcome the fact, although long overdue, that
South Africa, in its letter to the Secretary-General dated 12
November 1985 [S/Z7627’J, has finally informed him of its
choice of the electoral system, thus removing the last
remaining obstacle to the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978). Much to our regret, however, we have also
noted that South Africa has again raised the question of
impartiality.
In this connection, we would like to recall
that the agreement reached on this issue takes effect only
after a date has been set for implementation of resolution
435 (1978).

31. Meanwhile, the Council must live up to its special
responsibility. It is the considered opinion of the Danish
Government that the Council must continue and, as
appropriate, step up the pressure on South Africa to pave
the way for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
32. That pressure should, however, be brought to bear in
unanimity. The adoption of resolution 566 (1985) marked
an important step in this direction. It is our hope that this
trend will continue and be strengthened, since experience
has shown that a divided Council cannot effectively influence South Africa. It is thus of paramount importance that
the Council act with consensus on this vital issue.

26. The most discouraging aspect of the statement by
South Africa’s representative yesterday [262&h meeting]
was, however, that he repeated South Africa’s insistence
on linking a clearly extraneous issue to Namibia’s independence. Furthermore, while pretending to make efforts in
good faith towards solving this artificial problem, South
Africa makes sure that its solution becomes increasingly
unobtainable. South Africa knows very well that its overt

33. Mr. BASSOLE

(Burkina

Faso) (interpretation from

French): My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding

over the Council this month. Your outstanding abilities as
3

a diplomat and your most helpful disposition give us the
assurance that our work will have a successful outcome.

freedom and independence. This role is also a moral obligation which the permanent members of ‘the Security
Council, in particular, have the overriding duty to fulfil.

34. I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
to your predecessor, Mr. Walters, the representative of the
United States, our warm congratulations on the very competent manner in which he presided over the Council’s
work in a particularly heavy month.

42. The Security Council is not a lordly mansion. We
hope that those of its permanent members that have so
misused their right of veto, thereby helping racist South
Africa to avoid heeding reason, will at long last deign to
open their eyes to see, their ears to hear, their, minds to
understand.

35. In 1966, the United Nations decided to terminate
South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. It thereby stripped
South Africa of any .right to administer that Territory.
That decision was taken 20 years after the United Nations
had first considered the question of Namibia. South Africa
has thus been disregarding that decision for 20 years,
because it has maintained and continues to maintain today
its unlawful occupation of Namibia.

43. We continue to believe that South Africa, which
oppresses its own people, in all logic cannot but oppress
other peoples outside its territory. A regime that does not
recognize the most elementary rights for the overwhelming
majority of its own people because of the colour of their
skin can clearly not recognize those same ritghts for other
peoples of the same colour.

36. There is little need to list here the many’ initiatives
taken by the Council or the many decisions it has adopted
in the.past 20 years to secure Namibia’s independence.
Such a historical review cannot, however, fail to highlight
the decisive step towards an internationally
acceptable
solution represented by the adoption of resolution 435
(1978).

44. In his statement on 14 June in the Council [259&/z
meefing3, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso expressed the hope that each
report of the Secretary-General on Namibia would henceforth be the subject of a meeting of the Council, in the
course of which the Council, drawing.appropriate conclusions from the report, would take the initiative and promote further action to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and thereby bring about progress
towards the implementation
of the United Nations plan
for Namibia.

37. By that resolution the Council endorsed a clear and
detailed plan for the transfer of power to the people of
Namibia. The plan provided for the assistance of the
United Nations to that end.
38. Notwithstanding the many intensive efforts made to
implement that plan, the Security Council has twice had to
sound the alarm, expressing in its resolutions 532 (1983)
and 539 (1983) grave concern at the slow progress in the
matter.

45. Moreover, in resolution 566 (1985), the Council
strongly warned South Africa that its failure to co-operate
would compel the Council to meet forthwith to consider
the adoption of appropriate measures under the Charter of
the United Nations, including Chapter VII, as additional
pressure to ensure South Africa’s compliance with the
resolutions mentioned in the sixth preambular paragraph
of that resolution. Resolution 566 (1985) was adopted by
13 votes. to none, with 2 abstentions. That result is, in our
opinion, clear evidence of a consensus that has come about
in the Council. It is also evidence of the determination of
all the members of the Council to take a decisive step.

39. And, as if to increase that concern, the racist Pretoria
regime has erected one obstacle after another, thereby
hampering the efforts being made in many quarters to
accelerate Namibia’s accession to independence, and to put
an end to the suffering of its people. At Geneva, in January 1981, in particular, Pretoria backed away from its own
commitments, thus dashing the hopes that the ongoing
talks had legitimately aroused.

46. Logically, the fact that the Council is meeting
today-pursuant
to the very instructive report of the
Secretary-General and at the request of the representatives
of India and Mauritius in their capacity of, respectively,
Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and Chairman of the Group of African States at the
United Nations-is unmistakable proof that South Africa,
notwithstanding that warning and the firmness with which
it was made, has refused to co-operate.

40. We feel that it is fitting to refer again here to the fact
that, during the same year, the Council was unable ,to
adopt a draft resolution that had been submitted to it and
that was designed to impose sanctions on South Africa.
That failure is, as we know, to be blamed on three permanent members of the Council. Some movement has
occurred in those countries since then, although it is still
too timid and falls far short of what the mtemational community expects of them.

47. Consequently, it is clear that the‘council, if it does
not wish to lose its credibility, must act, and act in keeping
with resolution 566 (1985). It is all the more important for
it to act because the situation in South Africa has greatly
deteriorated in the past five months. It must act in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter. And,
finally, it must apply Chapter VII of the Charter.

41. The United Nations, and primarily the Security
Council, has a unique role to play in upholding the interests of peoples, particularly those that continue to languish
under the colonial yoke at the dawn of the twenty-first
century. The Namibian people are one of those peoples
that for almost 100 years have aspired to peace, justice,
4

56. The representative of Denmark said a few minutes
ago that the delaying tactics which the South African
Government is employing are not in South Africa’s own
best interests. I am sure he is right, and I wish that the
South Africans would open their ears to that and reconsider what their own best interests are. I am convinced that
it would be very much to their interests, as well as to the
legitimate interests of the people of Namibia, that South
Africa should implement Council resolution 435 (1978)
forthwith.

48. The increasingly intense campaign that has been conducted throughout the world against the racist Pretoria
regime in a concerted effort to put an end to the illegal
occupation of Namibia and to apartheid makes it essential
that we should now, more than ever before, show firmness
and intransigence in our deliberations and decisions.
49. The veto right and the abuse and unjust use of that
right in the particular case of Namibia, and in other cases
as well, will not be able to silence for ever the rising clamour, which we too are now hearing, from an international
community that yearns for peace, justice, equality, freedom and independence.

57. My Government’s approach to the Namibian problem
is well known and is similar to that of many other Members
of the United Nations. It has two essential elements.

50. Nothing more can be hoped for from the racist
regime of South Africa. It has taken advantage for too
long of the complicity and culpable support of certain
permanent members of the Security Council. It is those
members in particular that we now invite to join the international community once again, after having strayed from
it so many times.

58. First, .our objective is to see Namibia achieve intemationally recognized independence at the earliest time and
by the most peaceful means. To this end, we joined with
the Governments of Canada, France, the Federal Republic
of Germany and the United States in formulating the
United Nations settlement proposal, a plan adopted with
the support of all but two members of the Council in
resolution 435 (1978). Like the other authors of the contact
group’s pian,,we have repudiated any attempt to circumvent resolution 435 (1978) through an internal settlement.
Resolution 435 (1978) remains the only internationally
accepted basis for a Namibian settlement. As such, it is
something that the Council should be careful to preserve.

51. My country, Burkina Faso, believes deeply in the
progress of history, history which invariably assures peoples struggling for peace, justice, freedom and independence of certain victory. We draw from our unshakeable
faith the solid conviction that in Namibia independence is
inevitable and that in southern Africa, in general, freedom
and justice will eventually triumph.
52. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): As you
well know, Mr. President, it gives my country the greatest
pleasure when we do from time to time beat Australia at
cricket. By the same token, we regard it as no disgrace to
be beaten by Australia. It is an honour for me personally,
as for any British Ambassador, to sit under the captaincy
of an Australian skipper, even though you have got the
wrong numbers on your team.

59. Secondly, we have joined not only with our contact
group partners but with wider groups of United Nations
Members in seeking to co-ordinate efforts to promote
rapid and peaceful change in South Africa-indeed,
in
southern Africa-including
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). As I explained in my statement in the
General Assembly on 29 October,’ we have formulated a
strategy which combines pressure and persuasion.

53. The pieasure that we had from the able captaincy of
Mr. Walters was increased by the ‘fact that he, toounusual among United States ambassadors-is a cricket
player, a man of many parts and great talents. We are
grateful for his presidency.
,
54. My cricket metaphor is not without political purpose.
I think that this debate is an occasion on which the Council can act as a united team. We are, so to speak, all on the
same side of the table; we have the South African problem
on the other side of the table to contend with.

60. With regard to Namibia, South Africa must be persuaded that there is no future in a policy of clinging to the
Territory or delaying the implementation of the settlement
plan in defiance of the unanimous views of the membership of the United Nations. South Africa must be persuaded that it is in its own best interests, as well as those of
all the people of Namibia, to cooperate in bringing
Namibia to independence at once. South Africa must
understand that the so-called linkage theory is not acceptable to my Government, nor, I believe, to the Council.
61. I would have liked to have been able to greet the
South African Government’s long-awaited decision on the
electoral system it prefers as evidence that it will now begin
to implement the settlement plan. I do indeed welcome the
decision. But I am all the more disappointed that it should
have been coupled with an uncompromising reiteration of
South Africa’s reasons for not implementing a plan that is
now complete.

55. This being so, I believe that we need to demonstrate
our unity of view and to illustrate practically our solidarity
in action. The speech we have just heard from the representative of Denmark was statesmanlike. It was a speech with
which I found myself wholly in agreement, and I hope that
the South African delegation and the South African
Government will take it to heart. They should understand
that when we are talking here this afternoon we are not
just taking part in a ritualistic, pro forma, boring United
Nations exercise. We are involved in something that really
matters and in a project where we are determined to
achieve a change in circumstances, and soon.

62. I take particular exception, since it concerns the work
of the contact group, to the suggestion that South Africa is
setting a pre-condition concerning impartiality. I would
remind the South African representative that this question,
5

was resolved satisfactorily some three years ago. I would
remind him further that my Government, and I am sure
this goes for our contact group partners as well, and for
the Secretary-General, will carry out scrupulously the
arrangements into which we entered, and that the onus
rests with South Africa to begin the implementation process, whereupon these agreements and arrangements can
take effect.

the representatives of a “Transitional
much for impartiality.

w

So

67. In the face of South Africa’s present attitude, we
must clearly reinforce our efforts at persuasion with pressure calculated to assist our objective and to underline our
determination.
68. The United Kingdom is therefore participating with
its partners in the European Community and in the Commonwealth in a strategic approach to the problems of
southern &&a.

63. In his statement yesterday I2624rh meerinal. the reoresentative of South Africa laid much stress &he
question of impartiality and, in this context, referred to the
request addressed to you, Mr. President, by six political
parties within Namibia. He asked the Council, in the interests of impartiality, to take prompt action on the request
of those parties to participate in the present debate. I
would refer the representatrte of South Africa to the enclosure to his letter of 12 November 1985 to the SecretaryGeneral, the penultimate paragraph of which states the
following:
-

Government”.

-

69. My Government, your Government, Sir, and other
Governments closely involved in this debate played leading parts in crafting the Commonwealth Accord on Southem Africa, adopted by the heads of Governments of
Commonwealth States at their meeting held at Nassau
from 16 to 22 October 1985. The opening words of the
Accord are the following:
“We consider that South Africa’s continuing refusal
to dismantle apartheid, its illegal occupation of Namibia, and its aggression against its neighbours constitute a serious challenge to the values and principles of
the Commonwealth, a challenge which Commonwealth
countries cannot ignore.“2

“The National Assembly of the Government of
National Unity resolved, in a motion adopted unanimously on I9 June 1985, to request the Security ‘Council formally
to permit a representative of the
Transitional Government to address the Council during
its then-current debate on the independence of South
West Africa. Inasmuch as the Council will be meeting
again soon to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral, dated 6 September 1985, the Cabinet now formally wishes to request that representatives of the
parties constituting the Transitional Government be
permitted to address the Council on this occasion.” [See
S/27627, annex. J

70. Furthermore, the Communique also issued at Nassau by the Commonwealth
Heads of Government2
declared the establishment of the so-called interim administration null and void and rejected attempts to delay Namibia’s freedom by linking it to the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola.
71. As part of their strategic approach, the members of
the Commonwealth agreed to adopt a number of economic measures against South Africa and decided to
review progress after six months. The Commonwealth
commended that approach to other Governments. It was
agreed that Commonwealth members would pursue the
objectives of the Accord in all the ways and through all
appropriate forums open to them, in the belief that the
joint pursuit of that programme would enIarge the prospects of an orderly transition to social, economic and political. justice in South Africa and of peace and stability in the
southern African region as a whole.

64. The message addressed to you, Mr. President, did not
describe the six parties as the “Transitional Government”,
nor did the South African representative tell the Council
yesterday that those representatives wish to participate on
behalf of the so-called Transitional Government. That was
a strange omission. However, their intentions and purported status seem entirely clear from the passages I have
just quoted.
65. My Government has supported requests from the
representatives of different groups within Namibia to be
invited to address the Council under rule 39. I would refer,
for example, to the letter which I signed jointly with the
representatives of France and the United States on 26 May
1983 [S/15792]. But we, for our part, cannot endorse any
attempt to accord recognition or status to the so-called
Transitional Government of National Unity. Like other
members of the Council, we regard this so-called government as having no validity.

72. It is entirely right that the Council should once again
address itself to the Namibian problem. I acknowledge
that the four of us who belong to the Commonwealth are
in a minority within the Council. Nevertheless, I hope that
our colleagues from other countries will see the merits of a
strategy which enjoys the backing of 46 Governments
from all parts of the world and that they’will assist us in
conveying to South Africa a unanimous message of firm
and consistent persuasion and pressure. The best way of
achieving this would be the adoption of a resolution consistent with the Commonwealth Accord. The South Africans must understand that we mean it when we insist that
Namibia must gain its independence without delay.

66. As it is clear that those who have applied for a hearing intend to speak in that capacity, we cannot endorse
their request. Needless to say, our view on applications
from competent persons remains as set in our letter of 26
May 1983, and we think it essential that equal treatment
should be given to all political parties when implementation of the settlement plan commences. This, inter alia, will
mean that no parties will be able to pass themselves off as

73. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet ‘Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I should like to
6

begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption of
the high offrce of President of the Council. There can be no
doubt that you will carry out the functions of President
effectively and thoroughly.

the question of Namibian independence, it is clear that
there has long been a precise division of roles. Pretoria
puts forward certain types of fabricated pretexts, preconditions and other obstacles in order to refuse to implement the decisions of the Council, while the United States
and certain other Western Powers defend the racist regime
from effective international sanctions and try to secure
new concessions from the Africans.

74. We wish also to pay tribute to your predecessor, Mr.
Walters, of the United States, who discharged his duties
last month most successfully.
75. The liberation of Namibia from the racist colonialism
of South Africa has for many years been one of the primary tasks of the United Nations.

82. Such “‘constructive engagement” has one precise goal
common to all those involved in it: that of imposing on the
Africans a neocolonialist solution of the problem of Namibia and of southern Africa as a whole.

76. Twenty years ago, the United Nations abolished
South Africa’s mandate for the administration of Namibia
and demanded that it free that country unconditionally by
granting independence to the Namibian people.

83. It is precisely for that purpose that the colonial
administration in Pretoria has concocted from the puppet
Namibian parties a so-called transitional government of
Namibia.

77. Throughout these 20 years, the people of Namibia
under the leadership of its vanguard and sole legitimate
representative, SWAPO, has waged, and continues to
wage, a heroic struggle for freedom and against the South
African colonialists. That struggle has enjoyed the broad
support of all those who advocate the definitive eradication of colonialism in accordance with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples [resolution I524 (Xv)], the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of which by the General Assembly was
celebrated this year.

84. Now South Africa is obliged to manoeuvre, and it
tries to give the impression that it is replying to yet another
unresolved issue, namely, the question of the electoral system in Namibia. But it is clear that this is yet another
smoke-screen because, at the same time, Pretoria is trying
to blackmail the United Nations by demanding from it the
renunciation of support for and recognition of SWAP0 as
the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people.
Those tactics on the part of the Pretoria regime are quite
unacceptable.

78. During all those years, the United Nations-the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples-has repeatedly and
resolutely condemned the policy of the Pretoria regime in
respect of Namibia and has emphatically demanded the
liberation of the people of Namibia and the granting of
independence to them. The United Nations, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and many other international forums have at
the same time confirmed the legitimacy of the national
liberation struggle of the Namibian people by the use of all
means available to them and have called for all possible
assistance to be given to them for the elimination of the
colonial occupation.

85. Last June, in resolution 566 (1985), the Council condemned the Pretoria regime for having set up in Windhoek
a so-called interim government. It declared that step to be
unlawful and null and void and to constitute a direct
affront to the Council and blatant disregard of the Council’s resolutions. None the less, the representative of South
Africa was so bold as to come here and once again go on
and on about the puppet henchmen in Windhoek. Does
this suggest a serious approach on the part of the Pretoria
authorities to a settlement of the Namibian problem?

79. At the same time, during all those years, South
Africa, protected by the Western Powers, has disregarded
those demands of the United Nations and world public
opinion and has continued its colonial war against the
Namibian‘people,
unceasingly carrying out large-scale acts
of aggression against Angola and other neighbouring independent countries.

87. Our delegation has repeatedly drawn the attention of
the Security Council and the General Assembly to the fact
that this notorious “linkage” is nothing other than a conspiracy between Pretoria and Washington, designed not
only to hamper the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) but also, and simultaneously, to weaken the People’s Republic of Angola by restricting its sovereign right
to selfdefence, which it enjoys under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

80.

Unfortunately,

all this is continuing

86. Apart from anything else, no one has so far heard
from South Africa a renunciation of the notorious “linkage” which has been advanced by it and the United States
as a prior condition for the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978) concerning a peaceful settlement in Namibia.

today.

8 1. Over the last seven years, South Africa has sabotaged
the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978),
which endorsed a plan for the peaceful transition of Namibia to independence, and now Pretoria is again trying to
gain time for continuing its colonial exploitation of Namibia. In its manoeuvring to delay a political solution to

88. It is no mere coincidence that precisely now, when
South Africa is inflicting one aggressive strike after
another on Angola, trying to save its puppet bands of
Savimbi from collapse, the United States Senate has
repealed the socalled Clark Amendment which restricted
United States aid to Savimbi. This opens the way to height-.
7

ened interference in the internal affairs of Angola. These
coordinated actions are also an integral part of the policy
of constructive engagement.

Mr. Gorbachev, on 1 November last, at his meeting with
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Workers Party of Ethiopia, Chairman of the Provisional
Military Administration Council of socialist Ethiopia, Mr.
Mengistu Haile Mariam:

89. It is also appropriate to point out that attempts to
link the Namibian settlement to extraneous issues have
been condemned and unconditionally repudiated by the
Security Council and the General Assembly and by the
Non-Aligned Movement, the OAU and other important
international forums.

“The Soviet Union opposes the transformation of
Africa into an arena of confrontations of any sort, not
to mention military confrontation. We consider that
only the peoples of Africa are entitled to determine the
future of their continent and freely to choose the way in
which their States are to develop. No one must interfere
in their internal ‘affairs and impose systems alien to
them. Africa is not at all the periphery of the developed
capitalist countries, as some have been accustomed to
think since colonial times. The Soviet Union builds its
relations with the African countries on complete equality and strict respect for their independence, equality of
rights and support for the struggle of those countries
against the neocolonialist policy of imperialism.”

90. The entire world community calls upon the Western
Powers to put an end to their support of the racist regime
of Pretoria and stop trying to placate the aggressor to the
detriment of the interests of the people of Namibia and of
Angola and other neighbouring States and also of the
majority of the population of South Africa itself.
91. It is high time to take resolute measures and have the
Council adopt comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions
against South Africa, sanctions which would compel it to
liberate Namibia and refrain from attempts to establish its
neo-colonialist hegemony throughout southern Africa.

97. The position of my country on the question of Namibia is well known. The Soviet Union advocates the
prompt exercise by the Namibian people of their inalienable right to genuine self-determination
and independence on the, basis of the preservation of the unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia, including Walvis Bay and
the offshore islands. We also advocate the prompt and
complete withdrawal from Namibia of South African
troops and the South African Administration,
and we
advocate the transfer of full powers to the people of Namibia in the person of SWAPO, which has been recognized by the United Nations and the OAU as the sole
legitimate representative of the Namibian people.

92. Yesterday, like today, this demand has been heard
with renewed force in the Council in the statements of the
representatives of African and other non-aligned countries.
93. In its decision adopted in June [resolution 566
(1985)], the Council resolutely warned South Africa that
should Pretoria continue to refuse to carry out the Council’s decisions calling for the granting of independence to
Namibia, it would consider adopting appropriate measures under the Charter, including Chapter VII, in order to
ensure that South Africa implements the Council’s
resolutions.

98. The Soviet Union, as in the past, will continue to give
full support to the just struggle of the Namibian people
under the leadership of SWAPO, a struggle which it is
waging to secure its liberation by all the means available to
it. As is well known, this is fully in conformity with United
Nations decisions.

94. The adoption of such decisive measures is long
overdue. The United Nations and, particularly, the Security Council bear direct responsibility for guaranteeing the
attainment of genuine independence by Namibia. It is the
Council’s duty to overcome the obstacles to the liberation
of Namibia, artificially piled up by Pretoria and its accomplices, and to achieve the prompt elimination of that
hotbed of colonialism in southern Africa.

99. At the same time, we wish to emphasize that the Soviet
Union advocates a political solution to the Namibian problem, the prompt implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
and other basic resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. We are prepared to make our contribution to that end. We actively support the. application of
comprehensive and mandatory sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter, precisely because we consider this to be
the shortest route to a comprehensive political settlement of
the problem.

95. Those who are stubbornly impeding the process of
the liberation and independence of Namibia are covering
up their ignoble acts by propagandistic hullabaloo, to the
effect that the conflict in southern Africa, in particular, the
Namibian problem, is a reflection of East-West confrontation. But hardly anyone is likely to be fooled by such
propaganda any more. The African peoples realize full
well that the problem of Namibia is a problem of decolonization. For that reason, the recent Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda
from 4 to 7 September, unambiguously. repudiated all
manoeuvres designed to distract attention from the central
issue of the decolonization of Namibia by invoking EastWest confrontation.
96.

100. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Joseph
N. Garba, Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
101. Mr. GARBA (Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid): On behalf of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, I wish first to express our gratitude to the
members of the Council for the opportunity given to us to
participate in the consideration of the question of Na-

As was stated by the General Secretary of the Central

Committee

of the Communist

Party of the Soviet Union,
8

mibia. I wish also to congratulate you, Sir, .on your
assumption of the ‘presidency of the Council for this
month. I am confident that you will acquit yourself creditably in the discharge of the enormous responsibility
entrusted to you. My congratulations go also to the representative of the United States, Mr. Vernon Walters, for the
able and efficient manner in which he conducted the affairs
of the Council last month.

107. It is a matter of grave concern that one State, supported by a permanent member of the Council, should
continue to defy with absolute impunity the will of the
international community.
108. It is undignified hypocrisy that those that have arrogated to themselves the role of defending democracy, freedom and liberty should turn out to be the itaunchest allies
of the Pretoria regime even when that regime is bent on
destroying the most sacrosanct tenets upon which their
own societies were built.

102. As has happened on countless occasions, the Council is called upon once more to review the stalemate in the
efforts to bring about independence for Namibia. It was
only five months ago, in June, that the Council met to
consider the same question at the request of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and .the Group of African
States. In the course of an exhaustive debate, the Council
heard demands for the adoption of appropriate measures
to compel the racist regime in Pretoria to honour the decisions of the Council. The demands at that time came not
only from among the non-aligned and Eastern bloc countries, which have for a long time advocated such a course
of action, but, significantly and for the first time, from
members of the Western bloc, which added their voices to
this call. This was to underscore the growing frustration at
the behaviour of the pariah racist regime.

109. The continued occupation of’Namibia, the exploitation of its natural and human resourc,es and the subjugation of its peoples, as well as the denial of their most
fundamental human rights, must cease forthwith. The use
by Pretoria of the territory of Namibia as a springboard
from which it perpetrates unprovoked acts of aggression
against the independent African States must similarly be
stopped, for it is a direct threat to the peace and security of
the region.
,
110. The Council must rededicate itself to the noble goal
for which it was created 40 years ago-that of ensuring the
peace and security of the world.

103. The Council, in response to this universal demand,
adopted resolution 566 (1985), which, inter alia, condemned the racist regime for its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, in flagrant defiance of the United
Nations, and for its installation of a so-called interim
government, which the Council appropriately declared illegal and null and void.

111. It is now more than ever time for the Council to
draw the line for the racist regime. It cannot be allowed
further to defy the international community
without
serious repercussions. It is abundantly clear that the
regime has no intention of abiding by the decisions of the
Council. The time has therefore come for the Council to
carry out the threat contained in its resolution 566 (1985).
The effectiveness of the Council and the political will of its
members are on trial at this time. To be taken seriously,
the Council must not be seen to be making empty threats.

104. A more significant aspect of resolution 566 (1985)
was the Council’s threat to the racist regime that failure to
implement it would compel the Council to meet forthwith
to consider the adoption of appropriate measures under
the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII,
as additional pressure to ensure South Africa’s compliance
with United Nations resolutions on Namibia.

112. We in the’ Special Committee against Apartheid
would like to associate ourselves with those who are
demanding that the Council fully invoke the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter. The prevailing situation inside
South Africa itself is graver and requires such a measure.
The argument that sanctions are not effective is no longer
relevant. Those who still advance such arguments do so
only in their own selfish interests.

105. As an interim measure, the Council urged States
Members of the United Nations to take certain specific
measures, as outlined in paragraph 14 of resolution 566
(1985). The Secretary-General has since issued his report
on the implementation
of that resolution [S/Z7&2l. It is
sad to note that, as reported by the Secretary-General, the
racist Pretoria regime will still not co-operate with him to
ensure the implementation
of the Council’s decisions on
this question. That is not surprising, as South Africa’s
record on this issue is replete with broken promises, outright defiance and pretexts, and sheer refusal to co-operate
in implementing the decisions of the United Nations.

113. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Australia.
114. First, I should like to pay a tribute to my predecessor, Mr. Walters, for the effective, efficient and goodhumoured manner in which he conducted the business of
the Council during October.
115. The Australian Government regards South Africa’s
continuing obstruction of Namibia’s &dependence as an
affront to the Council and to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

106. . South Africa’s pretext continues to be insistence on
the so-called linkage or parallelism with the withdrawal of
Cuban forces from the People’s Republic of Angola and
the implementation
of the United Nations plan as
endorsed in Council resolution 435 (1978). This preposterous insistence continues despite its repeated rejection by
the Council as totally irrelevant and extraneous.

116. International attention has this year been focused,
understandably, on the situation in South Africaitself and
the tragic consequences of apartheid. But this justified
9

emDhasis on the evils of azxheid and on the deteriorating
situation in South Africa-itself must not be at the expense
of our continuing emphasis on the essential need to insist
on the earliest possible implementation of resolution 435
(1978) and on the rightful independence of Namibia. It is
timely, therefore, that the Council should meet once again
to discuss Namibia.
1

117. My Government wishes to reaffirm unequivocally
its strong support for the United Nations plan as endorsed
in resolution 435 (1978).
118. Last June, the Council conducted a full debate on
the situation in Namibia which culminated in the adoption
of resolution 566 (1985). That resolution condemned
South Africa for its obstruction of the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) and for its installation of a so-called
interim government in Windhoek. It also mandated the
Secretary-General to resume contact with South Africa on
the remaining issues for the implementation of the United
Nations plan, namely, the choice of the electoral system.
119. We have before us now the Secretary-General’s
latest report [ibid]. My delegation wishes to express its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his efforts. We fully
support his concluding remarks that the continuing delay
in the implementation of the United Nations plan further
erodes the credibility of the South African Government at
the very time when the world is watching with growing
anxiety the increasingly tragic developments occurring in
that area.
120. My delegation has noted the most recent communication from the representative of South Africa [S/Z7627J,
dated 12 November 1985, containing the text of a letter
from the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs about
the choice of an electoral system. We heard the statement
of the representative of South Africa in the Council yesterday [262&h meeting]. My colleague from the United Kingdom has just made some telling points on the matter of
impartiality. I should like to add that, to the limited extent
that the South African Government has accepted responsibility for deciding upon a system of proportional representation as a framework for elections which should lead to
the independence of Namibia, we welcome it. But it is
heavily qualified and attempts to establish the legitimacy
of the so-called transitional government of national unity,
a body which the Council and the Australian Government
have refused to acknowledge as having any legitimacy.
This is not the display of statesmanship and wisdom for
which the Secretary-General appealed in his latest report.

be reached on the modalities for implementing the United
Nations plan, this would still be conditional upon the with:
drawal of Cuban forces from Angola. The Australian
Government rejects the linkage of these two issues. The
independence of Namibia is one issue. The question of
Cuban troops in Angola is another, quite separate, issue.
122. Faced with South Africa’s continuing intransigence
over the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). the international community has turned to consideration of a variety of measures, including sanctions, aimed at bringing
South Africa to live up to its obligations under that resolution. In resolution 566 (1985): the Council urged States
Members of the United Nations that had not done so to
consider taking appropriate voluntary measures against
South Africa. The Australian Government has already
introduced a number of such measures in line with its
conviction that, pending the imposition of comprehensive
economic sanctions, the international community has an
obligation to demonstrate to the South African Govemment in a clear and concrete manner its opposition to the
policies which that Government pursues.
123. For its part, Australia has prohibited all new investment in South Africa by the Government and public
authorities, except for that which is necessary to maintain
diplomatic and consular representation in that country. It
has prohibited any further direct investment in Australia
by the South African Government or its authorities. It has
asked all Australian financial institutions to suspend new
loans to borrowers in South Africa, directly or indirectly.
It has withdrawn the Australian Trade Commissioner
from Johannesburg. It has withdrawn various forms of
official Government assistance for Australians trading in
South Africa. It has banned exports to South Africa of
petroleum and petroleum products, computer hardware
and any other products known to be of use to South Africa’s security forces.
124. It has prohibited the import from South Africa of
krugerrand and all other coins minted there, as well as of
all arms, ammunition and military vehicles. It has placed
an embargo on all new Government contractual dealings
with majority-owned South African companies for contracts worth more than $20,000. It has decided to avoid
Government procurement of supplies from South African
sources, except such procurement as would be necessary to
maintain diplomatic and consular representation in South
Africa. And it has also decided to restrict Government
sales of goods and services to South Africa.
125. It is introducing a code of conduct for Australian
companies operating in South Africa which seeks to ensure
that they do not attempt to exploit the particular circumstances inherent in apartheid. The code, for example, proposes that there should be no racial segregation at the
workplace and that, as in Australia, there should be racial
equality in such areas as recruitment, employment, wages,
training and promotion.

121. The so-called transitional government of national
unity also indicated in its statement issued on 12 November [S/Z7627, annex], that the Security Council “hampers
rather than promotes” the achievement of the independence of Namibia. This is quite false. It is the South African Government which is hampering-obstructing
would
be a more accurate description-the
long-delayed but inevitable independence of Namibia.’ Moreover, in his statement the representative of South Africa made it
abundantly clear once again that even if agreement could

126. During the Council’s consideration of the situation
in South Africa and Namibia earlier this year, Australia
made clear its willingness to support the imposition of
10

comprehensive economic sanctions to bring about an end
to apartheid.

132. It was agreed, moreover, that a group of Commonwealth heads of Government would meet to review the
situation in six-months’ time, and that if, in their opinion,
adequate progress had not been made, they would consider the option of further measures, in addition to those I
have mentioned, against South Africa.

127. The Australian Government welcomes the fact that
the heads of Governments of Commonwealth
States
adopted unanimously the Commonwealth
Accord on
Southern Africa at their meeting held at Nassau from 16 to
22 October last. A copy of the Accord, together with a copy
of the Communique adopted by the heads of Government,
has been distributed as a document of the General Assembly.2 But since the majority of the members of the Council
are not members of the Commonwealth, I should like to set
out briefly the main elements of that Accord.

133. I wish to reiterate that the Australian Government
remains determined to play its part in the General Assembly and the Security Council, and in other international
bodies such as the Commonwealth,
in contributing to
effective measures which will, we trust, lead to prompt and
peaceful change, to the ending of apartheid and to the
independence of Namibia.

128. It calls upon the authorities in Pretoria to declare
that the system of apartheid will be dismantled and that
specific and meaningful action will be taken in fulfilment
of that objective, and it sets out a phased programme of
economic measures to be implemented against South
Africa to ‘induce it to abandon apartheid.

134. Before concluding, I wish to emphasize that Australia understands fully the special importance African countries attach to the earliest independence of Namibia.
Moving and eloquent testimony of this has been given in
the Council during our meetings yesterday and earlier
today. We understand and sympathize, moreover, with the
particular frustrations experienced by SWAPO, which has
committed itself to the United Nations plan. The anger,
frustration and impatience of African countries are fully
shared by the Australian Government.

129. Commonwealth leaders also specifically agreed that
the action which they envisaged in the Accord should be
directed equally towards ensuring South Africa’s compliance with the wishes of the international community on
the question of Namibia.

135. In conclusion, I wish to stress that it is the hope of
my delegation that the Council will be able to agree on the
text of a firm resolution which will attract unanimous support and which will send yet another clear and strong
warning to South Africa.

130. Several measures are to be adopted immediately by
countries which are members of the Commonwealth.
These include: a ban on all new Government loans to the
Government of South Africa and its agencies; a readiness
to take unilaterally whatever action may be possible to
preclude the import of krugerrand; no Government funding for trade missions to South Africa or for participation
in exhibitions and trade fairs in South Africa; a ban on the
sale and export of computer equipment capable of use by
South African military, police or security forces; a banand this is an important provision-on
new contracts for
the sale and export of nuclear goods, materials and technology to South Africa; a ban on the sale and export of oil
to South Africa; a strict and rigorously controlled
embargo on imports of arms, ammunition, military vehicles and paramilitary equipment from South Africa; an
embargo on all military co-operation with South Africa;
and discouragement of all cultural and scientific events,
except where these contribute towards the ending of apartheid or at least have no possible role in promoting it.
131. We commend those measures to Member
which have not yet implemented them.

136. I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
137. Before adjourning, I am sure all members of the
Council would want me to express, on behalf of the Council, our sympathy to the Government and people of
Colombia over the reported widespread and tragic loss of
life and extensive damage that appears to have been caused
by the eruption of the volcano Nevado de1 Ruiz.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

NOTES
’ Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Plenary
Meetings, 52nd meeting.

States

* See A/40/817,

11

annex.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PBOCUBEB LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences d&ositaires‘
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupr&s de.votre libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes. New York ou Genkve.
I&K

I-IOH3JtAHH5l OP~AI-IKJAI@iH
OB’b~IX
HAum
0pKSHli3asRw 06SCAWHeHHbIX Hamiti~OxcHO IQWiTbBlCHU)IIHblXMWa3WHaX
II ZWCSTCTBaX BO BCCX p&iOHtlX
MHpa.
hBOASiTC
QIpaBKA
06 lf3AWliSIX
B BilIIIeM
KHEiCHOM
bmamte mm minxme no apecy: Opramr3m
O6%eAmieHHblx
Hauui, CeKuw( no
M3AiXIiEiX

IIpoAsuKeE3AaHH&Hbm-nope

Hmr~CeAeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIB PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

lmoo

90-61439-March

1995--1,925
