TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

NEW

24 MAY 1967

YORK

CONTENTS
.....................,........

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . .

I

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . I . . .

1

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/1342)

S/W. 1342

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-SECOND

Held in New York on Wednesday,

MEETING

24 May 196’7, at 3.30 p.m.
-

President: Mr. LIU Chieh (China),

ment immediately gave him our full backing. We agreed
with his assessment of the gravity of the situation when he
said on 19 May, in his report to the Council: “the current
situation in the Near East is more disturbing, indeed I may
say more menacing, than at any time since the fall of 1956”

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

[S/7896, para. 191.

5. We, like others in the Council, would normally have
awaited a further report from the Secretary-General before
convening a meeting of the Council. However, since the
Secretary-General made his report-indeed, in the two days
since he departed for Cairo-conditions in the area have
taken a still more menacing turn because of a threat to
customary international rights which have been exercised
for many years in the Gulf of Aqaba. This has led us to the
belief that the Council, in the exercise of its responsibilities,
should meet without delay and take steps to relieve tension
in the area.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 342)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

6. In his report to the Council the Secretary-General
correctly singled out two areas as “particularly sensitive”.
One was the Gaza Strip. The other was Sharm El Sheikh,
which stands at the entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)

7. The position of the United States on these matters was
publicly stated yesterday by President Johnson, and I shall
not take up the time of the Council to reiterate what he
explicitly said.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1341st meeting, this morning, I shall now, with
the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to take places at the
Council table in order to participate without vote in the
discussion.

8. We are well aware, of course, of the long-standing
grievances, some of them of many years’ standing, on all
sides of this complex dispute. Whoever is familiar with the
area knows that, regrettably, these underlying problems are
not going to be resolved tomorrow. The cause of peace
which we here are pledged to serve will not be advanced by
raking over the past or by attempting over-ambitiously to
settle the future. Our objective today should be more
limited, but none the less of crucial importance in the
present circumstances. It should be, very simply, to express
full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General to
work out a peaceful accommodation of the situation.
Accordingly, we should call upon all States to avoid any
action which might exacerbate the already tense situation
which prevailed when the Secretary-General departed on his
mission.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, G. Rafael (Israel)
and Mr, M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have befom
them copies of a draft resolution presented this afternoon
by the delegations of Canada and Denmark [S/790.5/. The
Council will now continue its discussion of the question
which it has included in its agenda.
3. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States strongly supported the request made by
Canada and Denmark last evening for an immediate meeting
of the Security Council. We did so out of our grave concern
over the sharp increase of tension between Israel and its
Arab neighbours since the Secretary-General’s departure,
and out of our belief that the Secretary-General should be
accorded all possible support in the difficult peace mission
on which he is now embarked.

9. Judging from what we heard at this morning’s meeting,
there should be no difficulty in obtaining the agreement of
all members for this course of action by the Council. Surely
it is the plain obligation of the parties, as Members of the
United Nations committed to the cause of peace, to ensure
that there is no interference with existing international
rights which have long been enjoyed and exercised in the

4. When the Secretarv-General announced his intention to
undertake this critically importan .t journey, my Govern1

area by many nations. Such interference would menace the
mission of the Secretary-General and could abort his efforts
to work out a peaceful accommodation.

16. Mr. MATSUI (Japan): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to extend my welcome to you, as the President
of the Security Council for this month of May. You have
already, as the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of China, assumed the Presidency of the Security Council
with great distinction in the past and I am confident that
under your able guidance the Security Council will achieve
fruitful results.

10. We are fully aware, as are all the members of the
Council, of the long-standing underlying problems in the
area. But no problem of this character can or should be
settled by war-like acts. The United States opposition to
the use of aggression and violence of any kind, on any side
of this situation, over the years, is a matter of record. As
our actions over many years have demonstrated, and as
President Johnson reaffirmed in his statement yesterday:
“the United States is firmly committed to the support of
the political independence and territorial integrity of
all”-and I emphasize “all”-“the
nations in the area. The
United States strongly opposes aggression by anyone in the
area, 4n any form, overt or clandestine.”

17, The Japanese delegation has followed with very great
concern the recent developments in the Near East and, as
the Secretary-General described it in his report of 19 May,
the “increasingly
dangerous deterioration
along the
borders” [S/7896, para. l/in that area. We fully share the
deep anxiety expressed by the Secretary-General with
regard to the situation. We believe that it is a matter of
urgency for the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, to discharge its responsibilities.

11. My country’s devotion to that principle has been
demonstrated concretely-not only in the Suez crisis, where
we stood against old allies, but consistently through the
years. In fact, in the most recent debate in this Council
involving that area, we made very clear the United States
commitment to the solution of all problems of the area by
exclusively peaceful means and by recourse to the armistice
machinery.

lg. I have no intention to go into details of the past
history of the relations between Israel and Arab countries. I
only wish to say at this juncture that the presence of the
United Nations Emergency Force has served for more than
ten years in the past as a deterrent and restraining influence
for the preservation of tranquillity in the area. Now that
the order for the withdrawal of the United Nations
Emergency Force has been given, the foremost and most
important consideration is for all Governments concerned
to exercise maximum restraint, scrupulously avoiding any
action of any kind which might lead to further deterioration of the present grave situation in the Near East.

12. Only two days ago many of us here had occasion,
during the debate on the peace-keeping question in the
General Assembly, to speak of the vital interest which all
Powers, great and small alike, share in maintaining an
impartial international instrument of stability-an instrument which, when danger and discord arise, can transcend
narrow self-interest and put power at the service of peace.
That instrument is the United Nations; and above all it is
the Security Council, with its primary Charter responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

19. The confrontations now existing there must not be
permitted to escalate into armed conflict. The utmost
caution and restraint is essential not only with regard to
land borders and air space, but also with regard to the
waterways in the area, The maintenance of international
peace and security in the Near East is not a matter that
concerns only the countries in the area. It is a matter that
concerns the entire world. The Governments directly
involved in the present situation certainly do realize this.
Their responsibilities and obligations under the Charter and
relevant international agreements extend beyond themselves and involve the interests of the entire international
community.

13. The view is sometimes stated that the smaller Powers,
because they are the most vulnerable, are the real beneficiaries of United Nations efforts to maintain peace,
whereas the great Powers “can take care of themselves”. My
country does not accept this view. Nobody questions the
vital interest of the smaller Powers in this activity; indeed,
they have manifested this interest time and time again by
their votes and by their contributions. But neither should
anybody suppose that the exercise by the United Nations
of its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security does not serve the basic interests of the
great Powers also. Great Powers have both interests and
responsibilities in this matter-and the greater the Power
the greater the responsibility.

20. At the same time, all Member States, and particularly
the members of the Security Council, have the responsibility and the obligation to do everything in their power to
help maintain peace in the area, Speaking for Japan, I
pledge our fullest co-operation to this end.

14. In this spirit, I am authorized to announce that the
United States, both within and outside the United Nations,
is prepared to join with other great Powers-the Soviet
Union, the United Kingdom and France-in a common
effort to restore and maintain peace in the Middle East.

21. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): I take the floor briefly
again at this time to introduce and to explain the draft
resolution which has been circulated as document S/7905.
Mindful of the concern expressed by most members of the
Security Council in the discussion so far, about the need to
reinforce the mission of the Secretary-General and to do
nothing to exacerbate an already dangerous situation in the
Middle East, I have been authorized, on behalf of the
Governments of Denmark and Canada, to introduce this
straightforward, impartial draft resolution for the consideration of members of the Security Council.

15. All must join in the search for peace: the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council and the great Powers. Both
separately and together, let us work in this common cause
which so vitally affects our own interests and those of all
the world.
2

22. I think the Council will find that the language is taken
almost word for word from the statement which the
representative of Denmark made earlier today [1341st
meeting],
and it expresses a point of view with which I
fully agree. The draft resolution, like our joint letter
requesting inscription of this item on the agenda of the
Council, is, I believe, clear in language, limited in scope, and
non-controversial in motive.

position of my Government in this matter has repeatedly
been made perfectly plain and has not changed, and I do
not wish or need to repeat it at this time.
30. I wish to speak very briefly today, and I shall ask the
permission of the President to speak again more fully asthe
debate proceeds.
31. I should say straight away that my Government
welcomed and supported the request made by Canada and
Denmark for an urgent meeting of the Security Council.
Here perhaps I might be permitted to speak a very friendly
word to the representative of the Soviet Union, It is
certainly not for me to give advice to such an experienced
and respected representative. But with reference to what he
said this morning, I would say that I was always taught not
to impute bad motives to others, We should never think of
doing any such thing to him; his motives are always crystal
clear. Indeed, his motives are, if I may say so, as transparent
as his proverbs are obscure.

23. In the draft resolution it is proposed that the Council
should, first, express its support for the efforts being made
by the Secretary-General to pacify the situation; second,
request all members to do nothing to worsen the situation;
and third, invite the Secretary-General to report to the
Council upon his return so that we may continue our
consideration of the matter in this forum,
24. We believe that the draft resolution would have a
useful effect in extending the moral influence of the
Security Council, in the present situation, in support of the
Secretary-General’s effort and in support of the preservation of peace in the Near East, while reducing the
possibility of unnecessary controversy among us.

32. No one who has followed the ,events of the past ten
days could possibly doubt either the danger or the urgency
of the situation. Both the danger and the urgency were
made very dear in the reports of the Secretary-Gdneral to
the General Assembly and to the Security Council. They
have certainly been made graver still by subsequent events.
At a time such as this, the Security Council must
immediately accept its responsibility and show at once that
it is determined to discharge it; it is a responsibility denied
by none,

25, I would suggest, therefore, that we should consult
immediately
following this meeting, with the hope that
members of the Council might attain unanimity on this
matter as soon as possible.
26. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French):
France is staunchly devoted to the maintenance of peace in
the Middle East. From the beginning of the present crisis, it
has constantly urged moderation on all the parties involved,
appealing to them to avoid embarking on a process of
escalation and, above all, warning them against the danger
of turning the crisis into a military confrontation fraught
with deplorable consequences for all.

33. Whenever there is a danger of international Conflict,
none of us questions that the Security Council has a duty
to take hold of the situation, to meet without delay and
always to be ready to take action. We rightly pride
ourselves on being able to meet at the shortest possible
notice, and it is difficult to imagine circumstances more
urgent and more menacing, as the Secretary-General has
forcefully reminded us, than those which now demand our
instant attention in the Middle East. We in the Security
Council all have an inescapable obligation.

27. It has to be noted, at the present juncture in the
march of events, that reason and moderation have thus far
not prevailed. Nevertheless, the French Government continues to rely on the senseof responsibility of the leaders of
the countries concerned towards their peoples, and on their
resolve to safeguard peace. The crisis has clearly reached a
new stage with the announcement of the measures taken by
the Government of the United Arab Republic to prevent
the passage of shipping through the Gulf of Aqaba.

34. Moreover, the Secretary-General is today engaged in
vital discussions in Cairo. We welcomed and immediately
supported his decision to make this effort to keep the
peace, to reduce tensions and to search for measures which
can prevent conflict in future. The first aim which he and
we must set ourselves is to counsel restraint and to keep the
peace, so that time can be provided for new plans to be
worked out for the future. It is well that as he pursues his
mission, he should know that he can rely on our support.
Once that first task of holding the situation and preventing
conflict has been accomplished, there will be.many purposes to be pursued, amongst them reduction of confronting forces and establishment of continuing, effective United
Nations measures.

28. As to the role which the Security Council can play,
the French Government recognizes the fact that the
Council can undertake no action so long as the principal
Powers are not .in agreement among themselves. For the
moment, therefore, it can do no more than approach the
parties with an appeal to reason and ask them to refrain
from taking any action that might endanger peace. Assuming that that appeal is heeded, and taking due account of
the position of the Powers which bear primary responsibility for peace in the world, the Council could then
proceed to discuss the means whereby it could help to bring
about a peaceful solution of the present dispute

35. What has been done in the past by the United Nations
Emergency Force, the Mixed Armistice Commission and
the united Nations Truce Supervision Organization has
been proved to be salutary, effective and essential, and we
have paid tribute to all those who have taken part in those
successful peace-keeping endeavours. My Government

29. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Since other
members of this Council have referred to the question of
Chinese representation, I wish merely to say that the
3

.

would pl’efer to see the earliest re-establishment of the kind
of United Nations operation which so successfully operated
in Sinai and in Gaza. But it also believes that alternative
means could be effective. It is to that question that we
should direct our urgent attention,

have nothing to do with genuine concern for peace and
security in the Near East.
41. It is particularly significant that the statements made
here today, from this rostrum, by various representatives of
NATO countries contain a note of obvious disappointment
and nostalgia for a foreign land in which they had quite
recently stationed their troops and from which, alas, in
accordance with the inalienable right of a sovereign State,
they were asked to get out while the going was good.

36. In addition, there is one most urgent and most
dangerous issue of all: the question of the right of passage
for shipping of all nationalities through the Strait of Tiran.
The maintenance of the provisions of the Geneva Convention on the Territorial Sea’ dealing with international
navigation between the high seas and territorial waters is of
the gravest concern to my Government, as it must be to all
engaged in international trade. On this subject my Prime
Minister made an important statement today in which he
reaffirmed what was said by a representative of my
Government in the General Assembly ten years ago. These
are the words he used:

42. The United States representative and, after him, the
United Kingdom representative have used many finesounding words and portrayed their concern for peace in
the Near East in glowing colours; but, all this was merely
verbality, merely paint and paper. We know that their
words’,do not correspond to their deeds. If Washington and
London (really wished to reduce tension in the Near East,
instead of indulging in wordy statements, they should
begin, for instance, by the withdrawal from the Mediterranean of their fleets, which constitute one of the most
serious sources of tension in that part of the world.

“It is the view of Her Majesty’s Government in the
United Kingdom that the Strait of Tiran must be regarded
as an international waterway through which the vesselsof
all nations have a right of passage”.2

43. With regard to the reply of my United Kingdom
neighbour, Lord Caradon-who, owing to circumstances
over which we have no control, happens to be on my left-1
should like to say that it would of course be discourteous
on our part to ignore the distinguished Lord’s receptiveness
to oriental folklore. Needless to say, we noted that despite
the British senseof humour, our United Kingdom colleague
did not allow a smile to appear on his face, evidently
remembering the recent speech made in the General
Assembly by one of our friends, who said that whenever
the lion bares its fangs, it is unreasonable to suppose that it
is smiling,

37. These, then, are the questions that we have to tackle
together. First, how can tension be relieved and immediate
dangers of conflict be removed? Second, how can the
rights of free and unimpeded passage through the Strait of
Tiran be guaranteed and assured? Third, how can effective
United Nations measures and machinery to keep the peace
and prevent violence and conflict throughout the whole
area best be worked out for the future? Fourth, what new
measures and additional action can be taken to prevent
such dangers to the peace from recurring in future years?
38. Those are all matters which we shall discuss as we
proceed with our debate. I do not wish or need to discuss
them immediately. For the present, I wish only to repeat
that, to deal with these problems, we support the efforts of
the Secretary-General, we welcome the calling of the
Security Council to reinforce his efforts, and we undertake
to take a full part in the urgent task on which the Council is
now engaged.

44. This may, of course, indicate that something is lacking
in their education or upbringing, but we all have our
shortcomings. Furthermore, it sometimes happens-and I
should like to have recourse once again to oriental
wisdom-that even monkeys fall from trees.
45. I should now like to draw the attention of members of
the Security Council to the Soviet Union’s position
regarding the situation in the Near East. That position is,
we hope, already well known. Nevertheless, we should like
to take this opportunity to restate it.

39. Never has the United Nations faced a greater challenge
or a greater opportunity. We have an opportunity now, if
we work together in understanding and in good faith, not
only to lift the threat of conflict from the Middle East, but
to restore the trust placed in the United Naiions as an
effective force for keeping the peace of the world.

46. With regard to the recent events in the Near East, the
Soviet Union Government, as everyone knows, made the
following statement on 23 May 1967, and I should now like
to read out the text as issued:

40; Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Repubfront Russian): FeIlowTmembers of the
Security Council, at the beginning of this morning’s
meeting we drew attention to the fact that the Soviet
Union delegation saw no adequate grounds for such haste in
convening the Security Council; and having heard the
statements of the representatives of the Western Powers, we
have even more reason for insisting that certain forces are
artificially heating up the atmosphere for reasons which
1 Convent& on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone,
signed at Geneva,28 April 1958.
lics) (translated

“A situation giving rise to anxiety, from the standpoint
of the interests of peace and international security, has
been taking shape in the Near East in recent weeks. After
the armed attack by Israel forces on the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic on 7 April of this year, Israel’s
ruling circles continued to intensify the atmosphere of
military psychosis in that country, Leading statesmen,
including Foreign Minister Eban, openly called for Israel
to undertake large-scale ‘punitive’ operations against Syria
and to strike it a ‘decisive blow’, The Defence and
Foreign Policy Committee of the Knesset (Parliament), in

2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Sessian,
Plenary Meetings, vol. II, 667th meetitig, para. 13.
4

a decision dated 9 May, granted the Government full
powers to conduct military operations against Syria.
Israel forces were moved up to the Syrian frontier and
placed on a war footing. National mobilization was
proclaimed.

“It is the firm belief of the Soviet Union that the
peoples have no interest in kindling a military conflict in
the Near East. It is only a handful of colonial oil
monopolies and their hangers-on who can be interested in
such a conflict. It is only the forces of imperialism, with
Israel following in the wake of their policy, that can be
interested in it,

“It is quite clear that Israel could not act in this way if
it were not for the direct and indirect encouragement it
had for its position from certain imperialist circles.which
seek to bring back ,colonialist oppression to Arab lands.
These circles regard Israel, in the present conditions, as
the main force against Arab countries that pursue an
independent
national policy and resist pressure from
imperialism.

“The Soviet Government keeps a close watch on the
developments in the Near East. It proceeds from the fact
that the maintenance of peace and security in the area
directly adjacent to the Soviet borders meets the vital
interests of the peoples of the USSR. Taking due account
of the situation, the Soviet Union is doing and will
continue to do everything possible to prevent a violation
of peace and security in the wear East and safeguard the
legitimate rights of the peoples.”

“Israel extremists apparently hoped to take Syria by
surprise and deal a blow at Syria alone. But they
miscalculated.
Showing solidarity with the courageous
struggle of the Syrian people, who are upholding their
independence
and sovereign rights, Arab states-the
United Arab Republic, Iraq, Algeria, Yemen, Lebanon,
Kuwait, Sudan and Jordan-declared their determination
to help Syria in the event of an attack by Israel.

47. Such is the position of the Soviet Union and such is
our assessment of the situation in the Near East.
48. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the United Arab Republic.

“The United Arab Republic, honouring its commitments as an ally for joint defence with Syria, took steps
to contain the aggression. Considering that the presence
of the United Nations troops in the Gaza area and Sinai
Peninsula would in this situation give Israel advantages for
staging a military provocation against Arab countries, the
Government
of the United Arab Republic asked the
United
Nations to pull its troops out of this area. A
number of Arab States voiced their readiness to place
their armed forces at the disposal of the joint Arab
command to repel Israel aggression.

49. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): It is indeed
amazing that when a country like ours exercisesits inherent
rights and discharges its fundamental responsibilitg in
safeguarding its security, defending its people and upholding its obligations towards the Arab nation, it should
become the target of a large and ugly campaign of
distortion and abuse, While this is happening, the world
witnesses, as it has been witnessing for the last several years
and especially very recently, other Powers-in fact, those
same Powers which have engaged during this week in that
campaign of slander-carrying out an intensive and brutal
policy beyond their boundaries and far away from their
own territories, against all human standards and most
definitely against the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of human behaviour.

“AS is known, the Government of the USSR warned the
Government
of Israel, in connexion with the armed
provocation
of 7 April, that Israel would bear the
responsibility
for the consequences of its aggressive
policy. It would seem that a reasonable approach has not
yet triumphed in Tel Aviv. As a result, Israel is once again
to blame for a dangerous aggravation of tension in the
Near East.

50. I need not at this stage remind the Council of those
actions and policies since they are widely criticized and, to
put it mildly, have become the subject of the indignation of
the world community.
51. Being fully aware of the tactics and manoeuvres of
such conniving Powers, we are not surprised by their
reaction; such an immediate reaction on their part can
never be a cause of surprise to us.

“The question arises: what interests does the State of
Israel serve by pursuing such a policy? If they calculate
in Tel Aviv that Israel will play the role of a colonial
overseer for the imperialist Powers over the peoples of the
Arab East, there is no need to prove the groundlessness of
such calculations in this age when the peoples of whole
continents have shaken off the fetters of colonial oppression and are now building an independent life,

52. Meanwhile we cannot but express our feeling of
indignation when we see that other Member States have
been subject to pressuresexerted upon them for the sake of
attaining selfish and derogatory interests. The world never
has entertained and never will entertain any respect for
anyone who agrees to undertake such a task. It is
regrettable that the Governments of Canada and Denmark
sawfit to act on behalf of both the United States and the
United Kingdom. It is indeed ironic that the two countries I
have mentioned-Canada and Denmark-which have championed the submission of this question to the Security
Council in the name of peace and security, have acted
adversely in failing to support the role of the United
Nationa in South West Africa. That position was enjoined,

“For decades the Soviet Union has been giving all-round
assistance to the peoples of Arab countries in their just
struggle for national liberation, against colonialism, and
for the advancement of their economy.
“But let no one have any doubts about the fact that
should anyone try to unleash aggression in the Near East,
he would be met not only by the united strength of Arab
countries but also by strong opposition to aggression
from the Soviet Union and all peace-loving States.
5

-

as we all know, by the United
Kingdom.

60. That was my preliminary intervention. I reserve my
right to elaborate at length on the various aspects of this
problem during the course of the debate.

States and the United

53. The countries to which I refer have led the bandwagon
of hostile propaganda against my country. They render the
situation far worse when they act in full cognizance of our
legitimate and rightful claims, while at the same time
deliberately ignoring the consistent provocations by Israel.

61. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I now call on the representative of

62. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): The Government of Israel has
on various occasions in recent months brought to the
attention of the Security Council its groyhng concern over
the worsening situation in the Near East. A campaign of
ever increasing violence has been carried out against my
country. These acts of hostility are being organized,
supported,
financed and planned by neighbouring
countries. This campaign is accompanied and bolstered by a
ceaseless torrent of threats against the territorial integrity,
the political independence and the very existence of Israel.
This incessant hostility has attained in the past few days
new momentum and dimensions.

54. Do we really need to remind anyone of the threats and
intimidations posed by Israel? Why was the voice of
Canada and Denmark mute when Mr. Eshkol threatened
time and again to invade the Syrian Arab Republic? Where
was the so-called conscious concern of those two Governments when Israel raided and demolished the village of As
Samu in Jordan, inflicting suffering and torture upon its
peaceful inhabitants. 7 Do we need to repeat ourselves by
reminding members of this Council of the violations, the
disrespect and disregard of the numerous resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations, ignored by Israel? The
tragedy of Palestine, the mutilation, uprooting and expulsion of its lawful inhabitants still glare at everyone. It gives
us reason to wonder why such a defiant attitude on the part
of Israel passes unnoticed, while the exercise of our
legitimate rights becomes the subject of such vehement
attacks, Israel prides itself on being in the unique position
of having drawn five condemnations by this important
body.

63. The representative of the Soviet Union has read to the
Council a TASS statement which included a series of
sweeping and unfounded allegations against my country.
My delegation may choose on a later occasion to deal with
that and similar statements. At this stage I will take up only
one point from the list the representative of the Soviet
Union has presented to the Council. He said that Israel had,
prior to the recent Arab troop movements, massed large
forces along the Israel-Syrian borders. The unfounded
nature of that allegation is fully established by the report of
the Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council as
recently as 19 May; paragraph 9 of that report says:

55. Time does not permit me to enumerate the many acts
of aggression committed by Israel against neighbouring
Arab countries, The attacks to which I have referred could
not have been attempted by Israel without outside
encouragement and support. Such support invariably alternates between one source and another. As we see in the
present case, it comes from the United Kingdom and the
United States.

“There have been in the past few days persistent reports
about troop movements and concentrations, particularly
on the Israel side of the Syrian border. These have caused
anxiety and at times excitement. The Government of
Israel very recently has assured me that there are no
unusual Israel troop concentrations or movements along
the Syrian line, that there will be none and that no
military action will be initiated by the armed forces of
Israel unless such action is first taken by the other side.
Reports from observers of the Truce Supervision Organization have confirmed the absence of troop concentrations and significant troop movements on both sides of
the line.” [S/7896. /

56. Speaking in all fairness, would any member sitting
round this table agree to ignore such threats if he were
placed in our position? With this in mind, we find it
unnecessary and uncalled for to remind Member States that
it is our legitimate right, as well as our national obligation
and inescapable duty, to rise up in self-defence in the face
of such overt provocation.
57. By dramatizing the situation today, they are seeking
to create an atmosphere of anxiety to serve their own
interest and to cover up any future designs for intervention.
This is reminiscent of what we have recently read and heard
regarding the desire of the United States to establish itself
as the “international policeman”, to serve its selfish ends.
There have been numerous references to the policies of the
United States in many areas of the world which have been
fittingly described as an expression of the “arrogance of
power”.

64. On the other hand, massive troop concentrations have
been built up in the Sinai peninsula, along the southern
borders of Israel. The United Nations Emergency Force,
which for ten years has assisted in maintaining stability
there, was peremptorily evicted, All these steps were part of
an over-all plan, the design of which is now unfolding. It is
approaching its culmination in the threats of President
Nasser to interfere with shipping in the Strait of Tiran at
the entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba. That announcement was
made while the Secretary-General of the United Nations
was on his way to Cairo on his mission to preserve the
peace. Before the Secretary-General had an opportunity to
meet President Nasser, it has been reported now from Cairo
that Egypt has decided to initiate operational measures to
interfere with the freedom of navigation in the international waterway, the Strait of Tiran. According to these
reports, these measures include laying mines in the inter-

58. This overt provocation to which I have referred makes
it incumbent upon us to face our responsibility and never
to shirk our duty of self-defence.
59. The draft resolution [S/7905/ whish.has been introduced by the representatives of Canada and Denmark is, in
,our opinion, an attempt to saboiage the mission of the
Secretary-General.
6

t

national waterway and opening fire on vesselswhich do not
submit to search,

international reality which has been sustained for ten
years by hundreds of sailings under a great number of
different flags, including the Israel flag, and by the
establishment of a wide and expanding pattern of trade
and communications. The illegal proclamation by the
President of the United Arab Republic to close the Strait
of Tiran is another violation by Egypt of international
law in addition to the long-standing illegal blockade of
the Suez Canal which Egypt maintains in defiance of its
international
obligations and the resolution of the
Security Council of 1 September 1951 (95 (19X)/.”

65. As the Prime Minister of Israel, Mr, Eshkol, stated
yesterday in the Knesset, interference with shipping to and
from Israel, and the Israel port of Eilat, would be an act of
aggression. The Prime Minister said:
“Every interference with the freedom of navigation in
the Gulf of Aqaba and in the Strait of Tiran constitutes a
gross violation of international law, an infringement of
the sovereign rights of other nations and an act of
aggression against Israel,

68. The action of Egypt constitutes a challenge of utmost
gravity not only to Israel but to the whole international
community. My Foreign Minister, Mr. Eban, is on his way
to New York and he himself may wish to acquaint the
Council with the full scope, significance and gravity of the
situation created by the actions of the Egyptian Government. Therefore at this stage I can confine myself to
repeating here what the Prime Minister has stated in
Jerusalem: that Israel’s quest for peace is as ardent as its
determination to defend itself and protect its territory, the
security and freedom of its people and its rights,

“ ...
“From 1957 onwards other Governments, including the
main maritime Powers, publicly committed themselves to
exercise their rights to freedom of navigation in the Strait
of Than and the Gulf of Aqaba. Indeed what is now being
challenged is a solemn : and clear-cut international obligation. Its implementation will have a decisive bearing on
international
security and law. This is, therefore, a fateful
hour, not only for Israel but for the whole world.

69. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to address
a word, very shortly, very frankly and sincerely, to the
representative of the United Arab Republic. In what he said
to us just now, he used such words as “abuse” and
“vehement attacks” which I understood him to suggest
came from my country. If he will be good enough to read
again what I said just now, he will, I am sure, in his fairness,
admit that in what I said there was not one single word
which could come under such a category.

‘1 . . .
“In the face of this situation, the Government of Israel
will maintain the policy which was enunciated in the
General Assembly of the United Nations on 1 March
195 7 by the then Foreign Minister of Israel, Mrs. Golda
Meir.”
66.

Mrs. Meir stated on that occasion:
70. I have indeed today been anxious-as I believe all of us
have been-to say no word of criticism whatsoever,to be
scrupulously careful to avoid anything which might be
called an accusation. Therefore, I must admit that it is a
disappointment to me-having, in the interests of moderate
and helpful debate, spoken myself with such restraint-that
he should nevertheless have felt it necessary to use the
terms which he used just now. I ask him, on reflection, to
understand that in what he said just now, he wasentirely
mistaken.

“The Gulf of Aqaba comprehends international waters
and .I. no nation has the right to prevent free and
innocent passage in the Gulf and through the Strait giving
access thereto, in accordance with the generally accepted
definition of those terms in the law of the sea,
“Israel is resolved on behalf of vessels of Israel registry
to exercise the right of free and innocent passage and is
prepared to join with others to secure universal respect of
this right. Israel will protect ships of its own flag
exercising the right of free and innocent passage on the
high seasand in international waters.

71. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I to0
will be very brief in exercising my right of reply to some
comments made by my friend, the representative of the
Soviet Union, Ambassador Fedorenko. He made some
remarks describing the alleged role of the United States in
the present Middle Eastern crisis. In reply to this, I would
only remind him of the famous story of Alice in Wonderland. I am sure you will all remember what Alice told the
White Queen in Through the Looking-Glass: that one
cannot believe impossible things. To that the White Queen
replied: “I daresay you haven’t had much practice . . .
When I was your age, I always did it for half an hour a day.
why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as six impossible
things before breakfast”.

“Interference, by armed force, with ships of Israel flag
exercising free and innocent passagein the Gulf of Aqaba
and through the Strait of Tiran, will be regarded by Israel
as an attack entitling it to exercise its inherent right of
self-defence under Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter and to take all such measures as are necessary to
ensure the free and innocent passage of its ships in the
GuIf and in the Strait.“3
67. The Prime Minister continued in his statement to the
Knesset yesterday:
“Since that statement was made free passage in the
Strait and in the Gulf of Aqaba has been an established
3 Ibid.,

666th

72. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): In exercising my right to
reply to the words that were spoken, I recognize that there
was some anger on the part of my friend, the representative
of the United Arab Republic. I would only say that I find it

meeting, paras. 1143.
7

continued his studies beyond primary school has of course
studied history as well, and many people will probably
remember the story of the student who asked his teacher,
an ancient sage: “What must we do, how are we to behave
when we perform a certain action? ” That ancient thinker
-this happened in the Orient-replied:
“Do not forget to
look back in order to understand your actions better.”

difficult to see in any of the statements or proposals which
I set before the Council any word of criticism of his
country, any word of advice or admonishment, or anything
else which could justify such an intemperate reply on his
part.
73. As to the role of my country, I have nothing either to
justify or to excuse. For his information, I should be very
glad to make available to him the White Paper of the
Canadian Government entitled: #isis in the Middle East,
October-December
1956, and January-March 1957. ’ We
were very proud to help his country at that time.

80. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will have
taken note of the suggestion made by the representative of
Canada that consultations should be held after this meeting
in an effort to secure agreement on the text of the draft
resolution which has been submitted. I would therefore
suggest that the best procedure at this point would be to
adjourn the meeting in order to facilitate informal consultations among the members of the Council. I would,
however, ask members of the Council to hold themselves
available, in the light of the situation, for an early, further
meeting of the Council. The time of that meeting will be
announced after the consultations.

74, Mr. TABOR (Denmark): The representative of the
United Arab Republic accused me of addressing insults
against his country and vehemently attacking his country.
He also asked the Council to assessthe present situation in
all fairness. I know the representative of the United Arab
Republic very well and I am sure that he too will wish to be
fair to me, If that is the case, I am sure that all his
accusations against my country must be slips of the tongue.
I do not take any offence at them, though they were to me
a personal disappointment. As I said, I take them as
mistakes which we can all commit.

81. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): With regard to your
statement, Mr, President, we hope that you will consult us
in accordance with accepted practice with regard to the
time and date of the next meeting. However, I must put on
record that my delegation will not take part in any informal
consultations with regard to the draft resolution submitted
by Canada and Denmark.

75. I made an entirely impartial statement, without any
attack or any accusation-not one single word against any
country, and certainly not against the United Arab Republic.

82. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have stated our views
and our position this morning and this afternoon on the
question under discussion. We should like to draw the
Council’s attention once again to the fact that we did not
and do not consider it appropriate at the present time to
have any special or urgent meetings-or rushed meetings-of
the Security Council.

76. The representative of the United Arab Republic also
had the nerve to say that my country acted on behalf of the
United States and the United Kingdom. As I said in my
statement this morning, my Government tries, to the best
of its abilities, to act on the basis of its own assessment of
the merits of any particular case.
77. I should have liked to say more. However, I understand the emotions of the representative of the United Arab
Republic, which only too clearly demonstrate the grave
crisis in the Middle East. I listened carefully this morning to
the representative of Ethiopia, when he appealed to us not
to add petrol to the fire. In the light of this appeal, I shall
refrain from further comments on the statement of the
representative of the United Arab Republic,

83. Nor do we see any need to hold any consultations
whatever, much less to continue consultations; and the
statement just made by the representative of India does not
indicate in the slightest that he has any interest in such
consultations.
84. We should like to state that we do not intend to take
part in any consultations.

78. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Fellow-members of the
Council, it was not our wish to prolong these polemics, but
whenever someone makes, remarks about us we always
consider it impolite to ignore them. And since my
distinguished colleague Ambassador Goldberg told the
Council an old story about Wonderland and its strange
characters that peopled it, we should like to say that, of
course, anyone who has attended primary school knows
that story, In fact, gazing in the looking glass is a very
ancient practice. All of us should occasionally do so, and
see a reflection of ourselves and our actions.

85. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States pf America): Mr.
President, I should like to request a short recess for
immediate consultations between myself and certain other
members of the Council.
86. The PRESIDENT: As there is no objection to the
suggestion of the representative of the United States, there
will be a short suspension of the meeting.
The meeting was suspended at 5.35 p.m. and resumed at

6p.m

79. We do not quite understand the point our. United
States colleague was making.’ He expressed himself rather
nebulously, but every fable has a moral. Anyone who has
4 Ottawa,

87, Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): My
understanding, Mr. President, of what you suggested was
that the best procedure at this point might be to adjourn
the meeting now for prompt, informal consultations among
the members, and that you asked the members to hold

Department of External Affairs, Canada,1957.
8

themselves available to the Council, in view of the
seriousness of the situation, for an early, further meeting,
the time of which would be announced after appropriate
consultations,

moment when the Secretary-General is engaged in serious
talks with the Government of the United Arab Republic
and before we know the outcome of his important mission.
Despite our strong misgivings on that score, we bowed to
the better wisdom of the Council and did not make any
formal objection to the continuation of the discussion here,
But when it comes to any specific proposal in the form of a
draft resolution, I have to state very clearly that my
delegation holds the view that it would not be in the
interest of the Security Council, and would not help to
solve the problem that we are faced with, to take any
precipitous action before hearing from the SecretaryGeneral on the outcome of his talks-especially when such
action is likely to cause division and diversion amongst us.

88. That is what I understood you to say, Mr. President,
and I hoped that would meet with the approval of the
Council.
89. The PRESIDENT: I would like to say to members of
the Council that that is exactly what I said and that is
exactly what I meant.
90. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): We have already stated our position this morning
on the item under consideration, and we are now fully
convinced that the futile exercises which some members
have indulged in here have done nothing towards clarifying
the question of the Middle East.

97. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): Mr. President, my delegation
understood you to say that you would be consulting with
members of the Council as to the appropriate time for the
next meeting of the Council. I merely wish to express the
hope that in your consultations you will take into serious
account what is now apparent in the Council-a matter on
which we humbly tried to give some advice at the
outset-that perhaps the discussion we have had today
might have been better timed. So far as the Nigerian
delegation is concerned, we think that a continuation of the
discussion would be even more fruitless than has been the
case today, unless we had before us the results af the work
of the Secretary-General and the consultations he is now
having.

91, I should simply like to say, for the moment, at this
point, that as a member of the Security Council and of the
United Nations, we are always available to the Council and
its members. We are not available for consultations on a
draft resolution or on any other measure that might be
planned, for we do not believe that such action is likely to
be of help in solving the question at the present time.
92. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) {translated jkom Russian): Fellow-members of the
Council, we sometimes hear sounds in the Council without
knowing where they originate or whom they come from.
First, we heard the views of the Indian delegation on the
subject of consultations. But the Indian representative, in
addressing the Council, expressed a completely opposite
viewpoint. A moment ago we heard the voice of America. It
is now becoming clear whose viewpoint this is: sounds again
emerged from obscurity confirming the authentic nature of
these ideas. All this creates confusion in the work of the
Council.

98. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I must
say that I am quite at a loss to understand the statements
that are being made. Representatives are asserting that they
do not wish to consult, but they are consulting openly in
this Council as to their ideas, as to whether or not there
should be future proceedings, They are belying their own
words. When a statement was made, which it was thought
was agreed to by all, that we would recessfor consultations,
that meant that everybody would be free to state in those
consultations what he thought ought to be the subject of
the next meeting, when the meeting should be held, and so
on. But it seems&o me that what we are doing is a complete
contradiction, in terms. We inscribed this item on the
agenda; many representatives have expressed themselves for
or against; we have debated it today; and now representatives are telling us how they would express themselves if
consultations were held,

93. The Soviet Union delegation would like to confirm
once again that we did not and do not see sufficient
grounds for convening a meeting of the Security Council.
Nor do we see grounds for any consultations, let alone
urgent consultations, special consultations, and so on. All
this further supercharges the atmosphere.
94. That is not our approach, and we cannot agree with it.
The Soviet Union delegation is not prepared to take part in
consultations of this kind.

99. The United States, as a member of the Council, will
always consult with our colleagues about anything. We
conceive that to be our duty as a member of the Council,
and we are at a loss to understand the point of view of any
representative on the Council who says that he ,will not
consult with other members of the Council. We do not
know how this Organization can proceed if no informal
consultations are held between members of the Council.

95. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): This
morning,
my deIegation very briefly explained why it
considered this meeting to be inopportune. This afternoon,
before the suspension that has just taken place, my
response, with regard to the suggestion for possible consultations, was that my delegation was not prepared to agree
to such consultations, I wish to reiterate that response here
for the record.

100. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, you made
a certain proposal which you read out with care. It was, in
qffect, as I understooq it, that we would adjourn in order to
permit consultations to take place and would then come
together at a time which seemed appropriate to those with
whom you consulted. At the beginning of the meeting there
were those who suggested that there had not been

96. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): In my intervention this
lnorning I stated the view of my delegation that it would be
better for discussion in the Council not to take place at this
9

Mr. President, and I propose that we should adopt your
good advice,

consultations before the meeting wasconvened, Now when
it is suggested that we should consult and then meet there
seems to be some difficulty. I should have thought that the
most orderly procedure would be to accept the proposal
made by the President-which
seems to be normal
enough-that we should adjourn, should consult one
another, and then meet at an early date, depending on the
nature of the consultations. I do not think that a discussion
about consultations in the open Council will result in any
different conclusion from the one that you have suggested,

101. The PRESIDENT: If there is no further comment,
and if there is no objection, I propose that the meeting
should be adjourned until further notice.
It was so decided,
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

10
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

04029-December

1970-2,100
