A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/168
24 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 98
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/608)]
49/168.

International action to combat drug abuse and illicit
production and trafficking

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/97 of 16 December 1992, 48/12 of
28 October 1993 and 48/112 of 20 December 1993,
Profoundly alarmed by the magnitude of the rising trend in drug abuse
and illicit production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances that threaten the health and well-being of millions of persons, in
particular the youth, in all countries of the world,
Gravely concerned that the illicit demand for, production of and traffic
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances continue to threaten seriously
the socio-economic and political systems and the stability, national security
and sovereignty of an increasing number of States,
Deeply alarmed by the growing violence and economic power of criminal
organizations and terrorist groups that engage in the production of, traffic
in and distribution of drugs, arms and precursors and essential chemicals,
which at times places them beyond the reach of the law, corrupting
institutions, undermining the full exercise of human rights and threatening
the stability of many societies in the world,
Fully aware that States, the relevant organizations of the United
Nations system and multilateral development banks need to accord a higher
priority to dealing with this scourge, which undermines development, economic
and political stability and democratic institutions, and the combat against
which entails increasing economic costs for Governments and the irreparable
loss of human lives,
Convinced of the desirability of closer coordination and cooperation
among States in combating drug-related crimes, such as terrorism, illicit arms
95-76987

/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 2

trade and money laundering, and bearing in mind the role that could be played
by both the United Nations and regional organizations in this respect,
Reaffirming that a comprehensive framework for international cooperation
in drug control is provided by the existing drug control conventions, the
Declaration 1/ and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future
Activities in Drug Abuse Control, 2/ adopted by the International Conference
on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, the Political Declaration and Global
Programme of Action, 3/ adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth
special session, on 23 February 1990, the Declaration adopted by the World
Ministerial Summit to Reduce the Demand for Drugs and to Combat the Cocaine
Threat 4/ and the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse
Control, 5/ and stressing the need for insistent efforts to implement them,
Recognizing the efforts of countries that produce narcotic drugs for
scientific, medicinal and therapeutic uses to prevent the diversion of such
substances to illicit markets and to maintain production at a level consistent
with licit demand in line with the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of
1961, 6/
Acknowledging that there are links, under certain circumstances, between
poverty and the increase in the illicit production of and trafficking in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and that the promotion of the
economic development of countries affected by the illicit drug trade requires
appropriate measures, including strengthened international cooperation in
support of alternative and sustainable development activities in the affected
areas of those countries,
Emphasizing the need for an analysis of transit routes used by drug
traffickers, which are constantly changing and expanding to include a growing
number of countries and regions in all parts of the world,
Underlining the role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as the
principal United Nations policy-making body on drug control issues,
Reaffirming the leadership role of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme as the main focus for concerted international action for
drug abuse control and commending the way in which it has carried out the
functions entrusted to it,
Recognizing that the magnitude of the drug menace requires the
formulation of strategies, approaches, objectives and enhanced international
cooperation to address more effectively the international operations of those

1/
See Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. A.
2/

Ibid., sect. B.

3/

Resolution S-17/2, annex.

4/

A/45/262, annex.

5/

See A/49/139-E/1994/57.

6/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.
/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 3

who deal in the illegal traffic of drugs, arms and precursors and essential
chemicals,
I
Respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and international law in the fight
against drug abuse and illicit trafficking
1.
Reaffirms that the fight against drug abuse and illicit
trafficking should not in any way justify violation of the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
particularly respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations;
2.
Calls upon all States to intensify their actions to promote
effective cooperation in the efforts to combat drug abuse and illicit
trafficking, so as to contribute to a climate conducive to achieving this end,
on the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
II
International action to combat drug abuse and illicit trafficking
1.
Renews its commitment to further strengthening international
cooperation and substantially increasing efforts against the illicit
production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, based on the principle of shared responsibility and
taking into account experience gained;
2.
Urges all States to ratify or accede to and implement all the
provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 6/ as amended by
the 1972 Protocol, 7/ the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 8/
and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988; 9/
3.
Calls upon all States to adopt adequate national laws and
regulations, to strengthen national judicial systems and to carry out
effective drug control activities in cooperation with other States in
accordance with those international instruments;
4.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
to continue to provide legal assistance to Member States that request it in
adjusting their national laws, policies and infrastructure to implement the
international drug control conventions, as well as assistance in training
personnel responsible for applying the new laws;
5.
Supports the focus on regional, subregional and national
strategies for drug abuse control, particularly the master-plan approach, and
urges the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to continue to
complement those strategies with effective interregional strategies;

7/

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.

8/

Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

9/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.XI.6.
/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 4

6.
Reaffirms the danger and threat posed to civil society by drug
trafficking and its links to terrorism, money laundering and the arms trade,
and encourages Governments to deal with this threat and to cooperate to
prevent the channelling of funds to and between those engaged in such
activities;
7.
Acknowledges that there are links between the illicit production
of, demand for and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and
the economic and social conditions in the affected countries and acknowledges
the differences and diversity of the problems in each country;
8.
Calls upon the international community to provide increased
economic and technical support to Governments that request it for programmes
of alternative and sustainable development, in countries affected by the
illicit drug problem, that take fully into account the cultural traditions of
peoples;
9.
Notes the strong support expressed by members of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs for the initiatives of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to establish a dialogue with multilateral development banks
so that they might include a drug control component in lending and programming
activities in interested and affected countries, and requests the Executive
Director of the Programme to inform the Commission of further progress made in
this area;
10.
Stresses the need for effective action to prevent the diversion to
illicit markets of precursors and essential chemicals, materials and equipment
used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances;
11.
Commends the International Narcotics Control Board for its
valuable work in monitoring the production and distribution of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances so as to limit their use to medical and scientific
purposes, and urges increased efforts to implement its mandate under
article 12 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances concerning the monitoring of the
movement of precursors and essential chemicals;
12.
Calls upon the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
to continue providing assistance to Member States that request it in
establishing or strengthening national drug detection laboratories;
13.
Encourages the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
to continue and to seek support from other relevant agencies for its
laboratory research to develop environmentally safe methods for the
eradication of illegal crops from which narcotic drugs are obtained, in
support of national drug control strategies when requested by interested
Governments and, in this context, to promote international quality standards
for such methods, and requests it to report on progress made in this matter to
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its thirty-eighth session;
14.
Calls upon States to consider increasing efforts to eradicate
illegal crops from which narcotic drugs are obtained and to take full
advantage of the efforts of the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme to develop environmentally safe eradication methods;
15.
Emphasizes the need to maintain the capacity of the International
Narcotics Control Board, including through the provision of appropriate means
by the Secretary-General, within existing resources, and adequate technical
support by the United Nations International Drug Control Programme;

/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 5

16.
Reaffirms the importance of achieving the objectives of the United
Nations Decade against Drug Abuse 1991-2000, under the theme "A global
response to a global challenge", by Member States, the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme and the United Nations system;
17.
Recommends to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs that it consider at
its thirty-eighth session, under an existing agenda item, the documents
relating to the social and economic impact of drug abuse and control and to
drugs and development submitted to the Preparatory Committee for the World
Summit for Social Development by the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme; 10/
18.
Welcomes the decision taken by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at
its thirty-seventh session 11/ to request the Executive Director of the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme, in cooperation with the
International Narcotics Control Board and with the support of an ad hoc
intergovernmental advisory group, to prepare an assessment of the issues
covered in paragraphs 9 and 10 (a), (b), (c), (e), (i) and (j) of General
Assembly resolution 48/12, as well as the issue of possible alternative
funding mechanisms for United Nations drug control activities;
19.
Also welcomes the decision of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs 11/
to examine at its thirty-eighth session the issues identified in
paragraph 10 (d), (f), (g) and (h) of General Assembly resolution 48/12;
20.
Takes note with satisfaction of the decision of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs to include in the provisional agenda for its thirty-eighth
session an item on the reduction of illicit demand for drugs, in accordance
with paragraph 10 (a) of General Assembly resolution 48/12;
21.
Invites the Economic and Social Council, while considering the
issue of international cooperation against the illicit production, sale,
demand, traffic and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
at its high-level segment of 1995, to pay special attention to the report of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs requested in paragraph 11 of General Assembly
resolution 48/12;
22.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme,
in its report on illicit traffic in drugs, to include an assessment of worldwide trends in illicit traffic and transit in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, including methods and routes used, and to recommend ways and means
for improving the capacity of States along those routes to deal with all
aspects of the drug problem;
III
Global Programme of Action
1.
Reaffirms the importance of the Global Programme of Action as a
comprehensive framework for national, regional and international action to
combat illicit production of, demand for and trafficking in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;

10/

See A/CONF.166/PC/20/Add.2.

11/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 10 (E/1994/30), chap. XI, resolution 3 (XXXVII).
/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 6

2.
Calls upon States to implement the mandates and recommendations of
the Global Programme of Action, with a view to translating it into practical
action for drug abuse control at the national, regional and international
levels;
3.
Urges all Governments and competent regional organizations to
develop a balanced approach within the framework of comprehensive demand
reduction activities, giving adequate priority to prevention, treatment,
research, social reintegration and training in the context of national
strategic plans to combat drug abuse;
4.
Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, the international financial institutions and other concerned
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with and
assist States in their efforts to promote and implement the Global Programme
of Action;
5.
Welcomes the efforts made by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to facilitate
reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of
Action and encourages them to pursue those efforts so as to increase the
number of Governments that respond;
6.
Notes efforts being made by the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme and other United Nations bodies to obtain reliable data on
drug abuse and illicit trafficking, including the development of the
International Drug Abuse Assessment System, encourages the Programme, in
cooperation with other United Nations bodies, to take further steps to
facilitate the efficient collection of data so as to avoid duplication of
effort, and encourages also the increased and timely provision of updated
information by Member States;
7.
Invites the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to
consider ways of providing assistance to Member States that request it in
their efforts to establish appropriate mechanisms to collect and analyse data
and to seek voluntary resources for this purpose;

IV
Implementation of the United Nations System-wide Action
Plan on Drug Abuse Control: action by organizations of
the United Nations system
1.
Supports the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse
Control 5/ as a vital tool for the coordination and enhancement of drug abuse
control activities within the United Nations system and requests that it be
updated and reviewed on a biennial basis with a view to continuing efforts to
improve its presentation and usefulness as a strategic tool of the United
Nations for the drug problem;
2.
Reaffirms the role of the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme in coordinating and providing effective
leadership for all United Nations drug control activities so as to increase
cost-effectiveness and ensure coherence of action within the Programme as well
as coordination, complementarity and non-duplication of such activities across
the United Nations system;

/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 7

3.
Endorses the agreed conclusions adopted by the Economic and Social
Council at its coordination segment of 1994, 12/ regarding coordination by
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme of drug control
related policies and activities of the United Nations system, including
international financial institutions;
4.
Urges the governing bodies of the United Nations organizations
associated with the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse
Control to help ensure effective follow-up by including drug control in their
agendas with a view to assessing the activities undertaken in accordance with
the Plan and examining how the drug problem is addressed in relevant
programmes;
5.
Invites Member States to inform the Economic and Social Council at
its high-level segment of 1995 on progress in international cooperation,
especially on specific national efforts to engage the United Nations system
and the multilateral development banks in addressing the drug problem;
V
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
1.
Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to implement its mandates within the framework of the
international drug control treaties, the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary
Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, the Global Programme of
Action and relevant consensus documents;
2.
Urges all Governments to provide the fullest possible financial
and political support to the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme, in particular by increasing voluntary contributions to the
Programme, to enable it to expand and strengthen its operational and technical
cooperation activities;
3.
Invites Governments and the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to consider ways and means of improving the coordination of
United Nations drug control-related activities;
4.
Welcomes the work of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
reconvened thirty-sixth session on the programme budget of the Fund of the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme, in accordance with the
mandate contained in section XVI, paragraph 2, of General Assembly resolution
46/185 C of 20 December 1991;
5.
Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the Executive Director
of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to comply with the
approved format and methodology of the programme budget of the Fund, in
accordance with relevant resolutions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
the General Assembly and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and encourages the Executive Director
to continue his efforts to improve the presentation and transparency of the
budget;
6.
Stresses the importance of the meetings of heads of national law
enforcement agencies, and encourages them to consider ways to improve their

12/

See A/49/3, chap. III, sect. B.
/...

A/RES/49/168
Page 8

functioning and to strengthen their impact so as to enhance cooperation in the
fight against drugs at the regional level;
VI
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General submitted under
the item entitled "International drug control"; 13/
2.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a)
To submit an updated report to the General Assembly at its fiftyfirst session on the status of the United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances;
To include in his annual report on the implementation of the
(b)
Global Programme of Action recommendations on ways and means to improve
implementation and provision of information by Member States.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

13/

A/49/139-E/1994/57, A/49/317, A/49/345 and A/49/369.
