S/PV.8915

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8915th meeting

Thursday, 2 December 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Gallagher
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez/Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Phillips
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-36460 (E)
*2136460*

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At the outset, Ambassador Juan Ramón de la
Fuente Ramírez will make a joint statement on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). Following the joint statement,
the Council will hear briefings by the Chairs of
those Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador de la
Fuente Ramírez.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Chairs of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), I have the honour to brief the Security
Council on the work of the three Committees, including
the continuing cooperation among them.
Despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee continued
to cooperate and to coordinate their work, in line
with their respective mandates, in order to ensure an
effective and efficient approach to counter-terrorism
and to combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State Actors. The three Committees
are aware that terrorist groups and their affiliates are
ready to commit extreme violence on a wide scale
and highlight the importance of bearing in mind the
potentially catastrophic humanitarian, economic,
social and political consequences if nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons were to fall into the hands of
non-State actors, in particular terrorists.
2/21

02/12/2021

Since its adoption more than 17 years ago, resolution
1540 (2004) has become a vital component of the global
non-proliferation architecture and a key instrument in
curbing the threat posed by the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, as well as their
means of delivery, by non-State actors. As mandated
under resolution 1977 (2011), the 1540 Committee is
conducting a major comprehensive review of its work
to promote the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by all Member States. Due to the disruption
caused by the pandemic, a number of planned 1540
Committee events were postponed. The comprehensive
review will inform negotiations on its future mandate,
as part of which the Committee intends to hold open
consultations soon with States Members of the United
Nations, as well as relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and, where appropriate,
civil society.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate have maintained a strong partnership
and close collaboration and cooperation with the
1267/1989/2253 and 1540 Committees, as well as relevant
United Nations entities and international organizations,
in addressing the challenges posed by terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. In presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/1, adopted on 12 January 2021 during the
open debate to commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (see S/2021/48),
the Security Council reiterated the need to enhance the
ongoing cooperation among the Committees and their
respective groups of experts, noted the importance of
their ongoing interaction and dialogue with all Member
States and encouraged the Committees to continue to
pursue a constructive and transparent approach.
Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat to
international peace and security. The terrorism
landscape continues to evolve and develop significantly.
Member States face many complex challenges,
including the increase in terrorist attacks and the use
of information and communications technologies
for terrorist purposes. The COVID-19 pandemic has
also created conditions that terrorist groups have
exploited. Such threats and challenges can be dealt
with successfully only through collective efforts and
close cooperation and collaboration among all Member
States and all other actors.
The 1267 Monitoring Team experts also participated
in several open briefings of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to discuss areas of interest and common
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

concern with regard to implementing relevant Security
Council resolutions.
On 18 November, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee held a joint special meeting to discuss
threats and trends related to the financing of terrorism
and the implementation of the provisions of resolution
2462 (2019). Relevant regional and international
organizations also attended the meeting to discuss
challenges and measures taken by Member States to
disrupt terrorist financing, the work of the Financial
Action Task Force to monitor and combat terrorism
financing and coordination mechanisms relating to the
technical assistance provided by the United Nations
and Global Compact entities to support States’ efforts
in that area. The event was an excellent opportunity for
participants to highlight national and regional practices.
There have also been regular exchanges of
information and cooperation within the framework
of the relevant Global Compact working groups and
through joint projects and activities developed in those
working groups through a One United Nations approach.
Relevant Security Council resolutions reiterate
the need to enhance ongoing cooperation among the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1267 and 1540 Committees, including through
enhanced information-sharing, coordination on visits to
countries, coordination on facilitating and monitoring
technical assistance and other cooperative measures
to assist Member States in their efforts to comply with
their obligations under the relevant resolutions.
During the reporting period, the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the 1267
Committee cooperated closely with the CTC and CTED
in the production of mandated reports of the SecretaryGeneral. The reports emphasized that the threat posed
by Da’esh continued to raise serious international
concern and noted the expansion of ISIL activities in
several countries of Africa, as well as Afghanistan,
through the group’s regional affiliates, as well as
through efforts by Da’esh core focused on regrouping
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. In areas that
experienced lockdowns related to the COVID-19
pandemic, especially outside conflict zones, Da’esh
has incited attacks that might have been deferred or
planned for execution when restrictions eased.

S/PV. 8915

The Committees, within their respective mandates,
promote effective measures, such as, in the case
of the terrorism-related Committees, sanctions,
measures countering the financing of terrorism, border
management and law enforcement, international
judicial cooperation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration, countering terrorist narratives
and engaging communities, among others. The
1540 Committee has promoted measures related to
non-proliferation.
The three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
continue to attach great importance to the coordination
and cooperation among them. The Committees
also continue to raise awareness of Member States’
obligations to effectively implement relevant
Security Council resolutions, continue to coordinate
activities, hold joint Committee meetings and enhance
their cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, as well as with United
Nations bodies, including within the framework of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact. Those coordinated activities are very
important to strengthen the Committees’ dialogue
with Member States and to help to improve the overall
understanding among Member States of their distinct,
yet complementary, mandates.
Despite the travel restrictions imposed as a
result of the pandemic, the three Committees have
ensured business continuity by adapting their working
methods to virtual environments. During the reporting
period, the Committees stepped up their regular
joint consultations.
The three Committees and, under their direction,
their respective expert bodies will continue to cooperate
and coordinate their work, in accordance with their
respective mandates, including through joint visits at the
invitation of States, with a view to ensuring an effective
and efficient approach to counter-terrorism and to the
fight against the proliferation of the weapons of mass
destruction by non-State Actors. The Committees and
their respective expert bodies reaffirm their continued
commitment to supporting Member States in those
global efforts by providing guidance and direction to
their expert groups with a view to strengthening their
collaboration and cooperation in accordance with the
requirements of relevant Security Council resolutions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. De la
Fuente Ramírez for his briefing.

21-364603/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

I now give the floor to Ambassador Heimerback.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): In our last joint
Council briefing in November 2020, the prior Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups undertakings and entities, Ambassador Djani,
raised the evolving nature of the threat posed by ISIL,
Al-Qaida and their affiliates under the impact of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic (see
S/2020/1143, annex II).
Today I would like to briefly outline how the
threat from ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates has
evolved over the past year and report on the activities
of the Committee. This briefing will also satisfy the
requirement of resolution 2368 (2017)to report to the
Security Council at least once per year on the overall
work of the Committee.
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team that assists the Committee notes the continuing
threat from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Al-Qaida during the reporting period. Now, nearly two
years into the COVID-19 pandemic, in non-conflict
zones restrictions imposed to address the pandemic
have artificially suppressed the terrorist threat. The
relatively low threat in non-conflict zones, however,
is expected to increase when those restrictions ease.
In conflict zones, the pandemic has more impact on
legitimate authorities than on terrorists, and the threat
has already increased.
The most striking development of the period under
review was the emergence of Africa as the region most
affected by terrorism and in which the largest numbers
of casualties inflicted by groups affiliated with those
designated under the 1267 sanctions regime occurred.
In some regions, especially in parts of West and
East Africa, the affiliates of both groups displayed
gains in supporters and territory under threat, as well as
growing capabilities in fundraising and weapons. The
reporting period was also marked by efforts of ISIL’s
core focused on regrouping in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic.
In Afghanistan, following the Taliban’s sudden
sweep to power in August, no sign of change to the
Taliban’s approach to foreign terrorist fighters was
reported. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
4/21

02/12/2021

retains a presence in the country and remains a concern.
For a more detailed analysis of the threat posed by ISIL
(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida, I would refer Member States to
the periodic reports of the Monitoring Team published
on the Committee’s website.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize that the
analysis provided by the Monitoring Team is to a large
extent based on field visits. In this reporting period,
travel limitations imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic
in various parts of the globe continued, and many
trips previously approved by the Committee could not
take place. However, since May, the Monitoring Team
has managed to conduct important visits to Central
Asia, Africa, Europe and the Middle East, including
Iraq, and convened the Vienna regional meeting of
intelligence and security services of the Middle East
and North Africa.
Following months of informal virtual meetings,
the Committee resumed in-person meetings in July. In
total, in 2021 the Committee held three virtual informal
informals and five in-person meetings, including a
joint special meeting on terrorism financing threats and
trends pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019), organized
together with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The Committee, in partnership with the Secretariat,
continues to dedicate significant efforts to making sure
that its sanctions list is accurate and promptly updated,
as required. In total, there are currently 260 individuals
and 89 entities on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
sanctions list. Since the beginning of the year, the
Committee has agreed to add two individuals to its
sanctions list and approved amendments to the existing
entries of nine individuals. The Committee also
approved the removal of three individuals from the list
following a review by the Ombudsperson. Currently,
four requests for delisting are pending with the Office
of the Ombudsperson. The Ombudsperson, Mr. Daniel
Kipfer Fasciati, resigned and will leave the office by
the end of the year. I hope that his replacement will be
appointed shortly and will be able to assume her or his
duties to ensure continuity.
The Committee has recently concluded the 2020
annual review. The names under review included
those lacking identifiers necessary to ensure effective
implementation of the measures imposed upon them.
Individuals who are reportedly deceased, groups,
undertakings and entities that are reported or confirmed
to have ceased to exist and any other names on the ISIL
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list that have not been
reviewed in three or more years.
The responsiveness of Member States remains
crucial for the successful conduct of these reviews. In
that connection, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Member States that have actively participated
in the review process by providing updated information.
The evolving threat that ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
their affiliates pose to international peace and security
requires timely action from Committee members and
from the broader United Nations membership. Ensuring
the effectiveness of the 1267 sanctions regime remains
a shared undertaking. I encourage Member States
to actively contribute to keeping the ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida sanctions list updated and relevant and
to deploy efforts to fully implement the sanctions
measures against listed individuals and entities within
their jurisdiction.
I also urge those Member States that have not done
so to submit the implementation reports mandated under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. I would like
to thank all Member States for their cooperation with
the Committee, its Monitoring Team, and Mr. Daniel
Kipfer Fasciati and the Office of the Ombudsperson.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Heimerback for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Cherif, on behalf of the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001).
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia): On behalf of the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, I
have the honour to brief the Council on key aspects of
the work of the Committee, supported by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
The past year saw continued evolution in global
terrorism threats and challenges. CTED’s updated
global survey of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions by Member
States and the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) by Member States, respectively,
provide a comprehensive overview of the current global
situation, broken down by regional and thematic areas.
The two surveys were recently issued as documents of
the Council.

S/PV. 8915

The global threats and challenges were, of course,
exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Throughout the pandemic, with
the support of CTED, the Committee has continued to
engage with Member States, United Nations entities,
international and regional organizations, academia and
civil society organizations in order to assist Member
States to address those threats and challenges in
accordance with the relevant Council resolutions on
terrorism. In doing so, the Committee has focused on
four key areas.
First, the Committee assesses the implementation
efforts of Member States. Despite the continued
challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the
Committee has been able to maintain business
continuity, in accordance with its updated assessment
visit framework document and procedures. Acting
on the Committee’s behalf, CTED has conducted the
virtual components of 13 hybrid assessment visits this
year, bringing the total number of visits conducted
since 2005 to 181 and the total number of visited States
to 117.
The visits have continued to provide an effective
vehicle for direct and constructive engagement
and dialogue between the Committee, CTED and
Member States and remain a critical component of the
Committee’s assessment process. Moreover, Member
States continue to indicate that they benefit from
the visits, which enable them to keep the Committee
informed about their implementation progress
and challenges.
CTED has completed the desk review and
assessment of Member States’ implementation progress,
thus enabling the Committee and CTED to gain a better
understanding of each individual country profile.
The Committee also recently launched its enhanced
assessment and stock-taking tool, the electronic
detailed implementation survey, as well as the revised
overview of implementation assessment. These tools
are designed to ensure continued thoroughness,
consistency, transparency and even-handedness in
desk review and stock-taking and will help produce
quantitative and qualitative analysis to inform the
relevant policy decisions of the Committee and the
Council. In that regard, the Committee and CTED and
the other Security Council subsidiary bodies and their
expert groups have continued to work closely together
in accordance with their respective mandates.

21-364605/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Secondly, the Committee is working to facilitate
the delivery of technical assistance to States in need.
In that regard, the Committee and CTED have notably
maintained their close partnership and dialogue with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT). The Committee receives briefings from
UNOCT twice a year and UNOCT observers attend
CTED’s briefings to the Committee on countryassessment visits. High-priority technical assistance
needs identified during the Committee’s assessment
visits, as well as a number of country-visit reports,
are posted on the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact portal for access by
United Nations implementing partners. CTED, serving
as Chair, Co-Chair or Vice-Chair of several Working
Groups of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact, has continued to work closely with UNOCT
and other United Nations entities in order to ensure a
targeted impact on the ground.
Thirdly,
the
Committee
promotes
the
implementation efforts of Member States in an ongoing
manner. In that regard, the policy papers and guidelines
developed by the Committee and CTED, including the
2015 Madrid Guiding Principles on stemming the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters (FTF), its 2018 addendum
on FTF returnees and relocators and the technical guide
to the implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions, have
continued to serve as useful reference tools to assist
States in their implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions, which call on States to take measures in an
increasingly broad range of areas.
Over the past year and as of 19 November, the
Committee held six open and closed briefings on
regional and thematic topics in order to address the
interests and concerns of Member States on counterterrorism CTED’s analytic products, which are informed
by its close cooperation with the member entities of its
global research network. Those briefings have helped
raise the awareness of the Council, the Committee and
Member States concerning emerging terrorism trends
and threats.
The Committee has also continued to address
the human rights and gender aspects of counterterrorism and countering violent extremism and to
remind Member States of the need to ensure that any
measures taken to counter terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
6/21

02/12/2021

law. Further, the Committee has continued to strengthen
its engagement with parliamentarians, civil society
organizations, the private sector and academia within
the framework of its various activities and events.
Fourthly, over the past year, the Committee
commemorated the twentieth anniversary of the
Council’s adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the establishment of the Committee. The Tunisian
presidency of the Council launched the process in
January with a ministerial debate (see S/2021/48) and the
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/1).
The Committee held a special meeting on the topic
on 4 November, at which an outcome document was
adopted that reaffirms the commitment of the CounterTerrorism Committee to address terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, to work with Member States
and other interlocutors and players and to achieve
impactful deliverables and results in the effective
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions.
As the Council is aware, the Committee is currently
considering the renewal of CTED’s mandate within
the framework of the Council’s review pursuant to
resolution 2395 (2017). In that regard, I wish to express
my thanks to the CTED Executive Director, Assistant
Secretary-General Michèle Coninsx, for her leadership.
I also thank her team as well as the Committee’s
Secretary for the support provided to the Chair and to
the Committee over the past years.
I wish to also convey my deep appreciation to
the members of the Committee for their constructive
engagement, which enabled us to efficiently lead
the work of the Committee in full unity, despite the
challenging circumstances imposed by the pandemic.
Finally, I wish to thank my team for its constant efforts
to manage the day-to-day work of the Chair’s Office
over the past two years.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Cherif
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador de la
Fuente Ramírez.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I am
honoured to report on progress made since our last joint
briefing, held in November 2020 (see S/2020/1143). We
fully endorse the joint statement delivered on behalf of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
While the mandate of the 1540 Committee differs
from the other two Committees, there are important
areas of complementarity. Resolution 1540 (2004)
is a vital component of the global non-proliferation
architecture to prevent non-State actors, including
those identified by the Security Council and referred
to in resolution 1540 (2004), from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction. The devastating and
potentially catastrophic consequences that could arise
from the use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
by such actors remain a matter of serious concern to
the international community. Furthermore, the fact that
such actors are ready to use violence in various parts of
the world also remains a serious concern.
States have made significant progress towards
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Nevertheless, as demonstrated by the updated
Committee’s matrices, some gaps remain. As
recognized in resolution 2325 (2016), the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
is a long-term task. Resolution 2325 (2016) also
reiterates the need to enhance cooperation among the
three Committees.
The Committee began to conduct a comprehensive
review in 2019 on the status of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Owing to the disruption caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic to the work of the
Committee, a number of planned activities, including
open consultations, had to be postponed. While the 1540
Committee regards the successful completion of the
comprehensive review as a high priority, the scheduling
of the activities related to the comprehensive review
has been delayed due to the ongoing pandemic-related
restrictions at Headquarters. The Committee continues
to be in contact with the Secretariat and is considering
how best to organize the pending activities.
The Committee held three in-person meetings
during 2021. Furthermore, the Committee continued
to conduct activities to promote the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and to
assist States, upon request, in strengthening national
capacity. The Committee has to date participated in 19

S/PV. 8915

outreach events organized by States and international,
regional and international organizations and relevant
civil society actors.
To date 184 countries have submitted initial reports
to the Committee with information on the measures
they have taken, or plan to take, to comply with
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The
effectiveness of the practical steps taken by States at the
national level to implement the resolution is important.
One of the measures States can consider in that regard
is to develop voluntary national implementation action
plans, as encouraged by paragraph 5 of resolution 2325
(2016). The plans help to identify actions to close any
gaps and vulnerabilities in regulations and national
control frameworks, foster inter-agency cooperation
and identify areas where assistance might be required.
The total number of States that have submitted such
plans to the Committee since 2007 now stands at 35.
The Committee plays an important role in
facilitating assistance to Member States to fulfil
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), by
matching assistance requests from States with offers of
assistance from States or from international, regional
or subregional organizations. States have submitted
three new requests for assistance to the Committee
in 2021, as compared to five in 2020. The Committee
received assistance requests from Botswana, Sierra
Leone and Tajikistan. In addition to assistance provided
by States and international, regional and subregional
organizations, the Committee will continue to
undertake visits to States, at their invitation, to discuss
national reporting, voluntary national implementation
action plans, Committee matrices and assistance on
implementation measures. The Committee continues to
use its website for outreach to the public.
The Committee will continue to enhance
information sharing, coordination on country visits,
technical assistance and other issues of relevance
to the 1540 Committee, the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, as appropriate, and will
continue to brief the Security Council jointly with these
two Committees accordingly every year.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that a spirit of
cooperation and dialogue with Member States continues
to be the basis for the 1540 Committee’s activities.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador De la Fuente Ramírez for his briefing.

21-364607/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank our colleagues for their briefings today.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities;
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) play important
and complementary roles in assessing and countering
terrorist threats and terrorist activities, and in stopping
support for terrorism in general.
Over the past year, the global terrorist threat
evolved, with increased attacks by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), its affiliates and its
supporters. ISIL branches and affiliates have expanded
their influence from Iraq and Syria to now reaching
across the globe. Yet, despite this increase in attacks
and influence, we are disappointed that, since the
beginning of the year, the 1267 Committee has
designated only two individuals. It is important that the
Committee take action to designate ISIL affiliates to
keep them from taking up the mantle of a diminished
ISIL core. With that in mind, we hope the hold placed
on our nominations of Jund Al-Khilafa-Tunisia and
its leader, introduced with the support of our Tunisian
colleagues, will be lifted soon. The work of the 1267
Committee relies on that of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, which takes stock of the
threat posed by ISIL and Al-Qaida. We thank the team
for its reports.
On the 1373 Committee, the upcoming renewal
of the Council’s mandate for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) will further
CTED’s role as a key platform for discussions on
current and emerging terror threats. We continue to
watch closely the untenable situation of approximately
10,000 suspected foreign terrorist fighters and their
associated family members who are in displacement
camps or detention facilities in Syria and Iraq, without
adequate humanitarian assistance or human rights
protections. We call on all Member States to repatriate
and, as appropriate, investigate, prosecute, rehabilitate
and reintegrate their nationals, and to support relevant
efforts in that regard, including in the Office of CounterTerrorism.
8/21

02/12/2021

Another growing threat is racially or ethnically
motivated violent extremism, or REMVE. The
United States Government uses the term “REMVE”
to encompass the potentially unlawful use or threat
of force or violence in furtherance of ideological
agendas derived from bias, often related to race or
ethnicity, held by the actor against others or a given
population group. In the Human Rights Council in
February, Secretary-General Guterres noted that white
supremacy movements, which are a subset of REMVE,
are becoming a transnational threat. We have even seen
some United States-based domestic terrorists attempt
to establish links with like-minded foreign individuals
and organizations, which highlights the need for further
cooperation among our Governments to identify and
put an end to that threat.
Areas of cooperation among the 1267, 1373 and
1540 Committees are explicitly encouraged by the
Council to advance our broader counter-terrorism
efforts. In particular, resolutions 1810 (2008), 1977
(2011) and 2325 (2016) reiterate the need to increase
ongoing cooperation between the 1540 Committee
and other subsidiary bodies, including through
enhanced information-sharing, coordination on
visits to countries, within their respective mandates,
technical assistance and other issues of relevance to all
three Committees. The 1540 Committee is especially
important in that regard since it requires States not
just to prevent terrorists from acquiring assets related
to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), but also to
prevent non-State actors, such as private companies
and individuals who might unwittingly or otherwise
enable terrorist acquisition, from doing so.
During
the
upcoming
1540
Committee
comprehensive review and mandate renewal, the United
States will prioritize the full implementation of States’
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) by improving
the functionality and credibility of the Committee,
empowering its Group of Experts and enhancing its
support to assistance- and outreach-related activities.
The upcoming 1540 Committee mandate renewal also
provides an opportunity to increase areas of coordination
among the three Committees. In particular, we seek to
improve the capacity of the 1540 Committee to assist
States in responding to the rapid advances in science
that would enable non-State actors to acquire, more
easily and more rapidly, related emerging technologies
for WMD-related purposes.
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This regular meeting and sharing of information
regarding current and emerging non-State proliferation
threat trends among the 1267, 1373, and 1540
Committees is extraordinarily important in combating
terrorism, including potential terrorist access to WMDs,
across the globe. The United States will continue to
work closely with our partners on the Council and in
the larger United Nations membership to combat and
end terrorism in all its forms.
Ms. Mbabu (Kenya): I welcome the briefings by
the Chairs of the three subsidiary bodies and commend
them for their excellent leadership. Kenya takes
notes of the challenges the Committees have faced
throughout the year due to the pandemic and welcomes
the measures taken to mitigate its impact to ensure the
implementation of the respective mandates.
Terrorism and the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction
continue to present a grave threat to international peace
and security. We welcome the joint briefings by the
three Committees and their acknowledgement of the
interlinkages of those threats.
We must remain ever-vigilant of the threat of
non-State actors acquiring materials that could enable
the manufacture of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons or their means of delivery. In order to prevent
non-State actors, including terrorists, from acquiring
such weapons or their means of delivery, it is critical
that all States implement their commitments. That
includes delivering capacity-building and other support
to assist States that need it for implementation. Kenya
urges all States to do their utmost to attack the criminal
economies and activities that enable terrorist financing.
We welcome the successful production of
mandated reports of the Secretary-General by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, done in
collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate. Even as we acknowledge
the good work being done by the 1267 Committee, we
urge the Council to act to make this and other sanctions
regimes fit for purpose. They must be equal to the threat
of international peace and security, and they must be
predictably consistent.
Terrorism remains a growing threat in more
countries today than was the case two decades ago. The

S/PV. 8915

fact that there are terrorist groups, such as Al-Shabaab,
that remain unlisted, even as they wreak mayhem as
Al-Qaida affiliates, raises important questions about
the continued relevance of the counter-terrorism
architecture built by the Council. We acknowledge
the concerns of members that certain listings may
negatively impact the delivery of humanitarian aid. We
do not think counter-terrorism and humanitarian aid
are in opposition. If anything, we believe that terrorism
remains one of the leading causes of humanitarian
emergencies. Left unchallenged by the Council, it may
lead to extreme State fragility, and even failure, with
catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
In conclusion, Kenya is committed to supporting
all efforts that fulfil our collective commitments to
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as
well as the non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): International terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
continue to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security. Since the previous joint briefing (see
S/2020/1143), the threats posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) have unceasingly evolved,
despite the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We are concerned about the increased presence
of terrorists in the African region, given the existing
violence, fragilities and conflicts in the region. The
risks of terrorists developing, acquiring, using or
trafficking in weapons of mass destruction threaten
to cause unprecedented consequences. In that context,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) are among the most
important tools available to the Security Council in
countering terrorism and proliferation.
I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Trine Heimerback of Norway, Mr. Cherif of
Tunisia and Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente
Ramírez of Mexico for their exemplary work in their
respective Committees.
I hail the efforts of the three Committees and their
expert bodies in adapting, innovating and maintaining
business continuity during the pandemic, including

21-364609/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

through virtual and in-person meetings, hybrid visits,
dialogue and outreach activities with Member States
and relevant partners, research and analysis of emerging
trends and development of implementation guidelines
and innovative monitoring tools, among others. In
particular, we acknowledge the contribution of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to monitoring and delivering technical assistance to
Member States in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other resolutions.
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee has managed to conduct
visits and engage with Member States to provide a
clearer, updated picture of the situation on the ground.
We would like to pay tribute to the Ombudsperson,
Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, for his dedication and
contribution to the work of the 1267 Committee and
stress the importance of ensuring the continuity of
that work. We also commend the efforts of the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts in coordinating
with the 1267 and 1373 Committees and international
and technical organizations to support Member States
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). I take
this occasion to share the following points.
First, there are clear links between the work of
the three Committees and the frameworks under the
relevant resolutions on combatting terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It is
therefore crucial to further strengthen close cooperation
and coordination among the Committees so as to
effectively respond to threats of terrorism and to prevent
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorist groups.
Secondly, as a developing country with limited
resources, we attach high importance to the provision
to Member States, upon their request, with technical
assistance and capacity-building in the full and effective
implementation of Council resolutions on counterterrorism and non-proliferation. We welcome regional
and international cooperation through the sharing of
intelligence and analyses about terrorists’ movement,
imminent attacks, recruitment and financing, as well as
emerging trends and developments. We believe that the
1540 Committee should continue its awareness-raising
activities to ensure that all States are aware of their
obligations under the relevant resolutions and support
Member States in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
10/21

02/12/2021

Thirdly, the Security Council will soon start
negotiating the renewal of the mandates of the 1267
and 1373 Committees. It is critical to maintain the
Council’s effectiveness, efficiency, unity and solidarity
in combating the scourge of terrorism, much how we
have secured over the past 20 years. My delegation
is committed to participating constructively in
that process.
Fourthly, given the vital role of resolution 1540
(2004) in the global non-proliferation architecture, we
regret that the comprehensive review on the status of its
implementation has been delayed due to the pandemic.
We look forward to a successful review.
As Viet Nam prepares to conclude its two-year
term on the Security Council, I take this opportunity
to reiterate our steadfast commitment to fully
implementing the Council resolutions on counterterrorism and non-proliferation. We stand ready, as
always, to support and work closely together with
United Nations bodies and all relevant partners in
advancing our common fight against terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction on
the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the Chairs of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for their briefings. We appreciate
the efforts and achievements of the three Committees.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction seriously threaten international peace
and security, and the current international counterterrorism situation remains complex and grim. The
ongoing and evolving coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has had a complex impact on international
counter-terrorism efforts, both by heightening
terrorist threats in the medium- and long-term and
amplifying the risk of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The international community should take
the situation seriously and respond effectively with an
integrated approach.
The 1267 Committee is an important counterterrorism and sanctions mechanism of the United
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Nations and the Security Council. Over the past year,
the Committee has continued to carry out activities
within its mandate and enhanced its cooperation with
its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
and the Ombudsperson, playing an important role in
assessing terrorist threats and strengthening sanctions.
China supports the Committee’s efforts to strengthen
its communication with the countries concerned and
deepen its cooperation with regional and subregional
counter-terrorism mechanisms. We hope that, with
regard to such issues as listing, exemptions and
delisting, the Committee will uphold the principles of
objectivity, impartiality and professionalism, based on
solid evidence and broad consensus, so as to maintain
the authority and effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
China commends the Committee’s Monitoring Team
for continuing, during the pandemic, to discharge its
mandate to closely follow the global terrorism situation
and draft reports, all of which informs the work of the
Committee. As noted in the most recent report of the
Monitoring Team (S/2021/655), terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement remain active
and are attempting to take advantage of the instability
in Afghanistan. The Committee should therefore
remain vigilant in responding to those developments.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Over the past 20 years, the CTC and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
have assisted Member States in implementing the
counter-terrorism resolutions of the Council and taken
effective measures in combating terrorist financing,
facilitating information-sharing and promoting judicial
cooperation, among others. Those efforts merit our
recognition. China supports the continued efforts of
the CTC and CTED in improving counter-terrorism
assessment reports, organizing meetings and events
and conducting country visits in order to promote the
full implementation of the Council’s counter-terrorism
resolutions and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We hope that the CTC will focus
on helping developing countries, especially African
States, and countries on the counter-terrorism frontlines
to build up their counter-terrorism capacity and make
integrated use of political, economic and judicial means
to eliminate the root causes of terrorism.
The 1540 Committee is an important part of the
international non-proliferation regime. China supports

S/PV. 8915

the Committee’s work in comprehensively promoting
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in
strict accordance with its mandate. We hope that the
Committee will advance its comprehensive review
of that resolution in a substantive manner as soon as
possible, conduct an objective assessment of Member
States’ implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and
produce feasible recommendations for addressing risks
and challenges in the field of non-proliferation. In that
process, it is important to maintain a Member Statesdriven approach, undertake a balanced consideration of
the international obligations of States and their national
conditions and ensure that the effective voice of all
countries, especially developing countries, is heard.
This year, the First Committee adopted draft
resolution
A/C.1/76/L.55
entitled
“Promoting
international cooperation on peaceful uses in the context
of international security”, which calls for measures
to achieve a balance between non-proliferation and
peaceful uses. The 1540 Committee should also attach
importance to that issue and, in particular, the need
to effectively address proliferation risks and prevent
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, as well as the need to promote international
cooperation and defend the right of all countries,
especially developing countries, to peaceful uses. The
1267 Committee, the CTC and the 1540 Committee
have different portfolios; however, those bodies also
have similarities that warrant closer coordination and
cooperation in the gathering, exchange and sharing of
information. We hope that, going forward, the three
Committees and their respective groups of experts will
continue to strengthen communication and coordination
among each other, seek continuous improvement and
build on their mutual complementarities so as to jointly
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation.
This month, the Council will discuss the renewal of
the mandate of the 1267 Committee’s Monitoring Team,
its Ombudsperson and the CTED. China will remain
engaged with other members of the Council and actively
participate in consultations on the draft resolution, with
a view to making the appropriate arrangements for the
extension of those mandates. China is committed to
combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and firmly opposes the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery.
We will continue to work with the international
community to actively promote international counterterrorism cooperation, improve the international

21-3646011/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

non-proliferation regime and jointly maintain world
peace and stability.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, I would like to thank the Chairs of the three
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council for their
briefings and commend their efforts over the past year.
As we heard in the Chairs’ briefings, terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remain
a serious threat to international peace and security,
despite our ongoing efforts. In recent years, we have
witnessed the ability of terrorist groups, in particular
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Al-Qaida, to adapt despite their military defeat and
continue to exploit crises, conflicts, instability and the
fragility of individuals and societies in order to spread
their terrorist discourse and restore their operational
capacities. In that context, the coronavirus disease
pandemic is one of the crises that terrorist groups
have exploited, especially in conflict zones, and that
continues to contribute to prolonging those conflicts
and making them deadlier.
That means that we share a collective responsibility
to combat terrorism through a comprehensive approach
that goes beyond the limited security-driven approach
and addresses the root causes of terrorism and violent
extremism, with consideration for settling disputes
peacefully, promoting human rights and achieving
development. There is no doubt that if non-State
entities, including terrorist organizations, were to
acquire weapons of mass destruction, especially in the
light of scientific and technological developments, it
would pose an extremely serious threat.
In that regard, I would be remiss if I did not also
highlight the briefing, including findings from an
initial case brief, delivered to the Council this morning
by the Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
(see S/PV.8914). The case brief findings, to be presented
in the next UNITAD briefing, confirm, based on clear
and tangible evidence, that ISIL seeks to develop
chemical and biological weapons and to use them
systematically, possibly even against civilians.
Combating terrorism has always been a key priority
for Tunisia domestically and internationally, particularly
in the context of our membership in the Security
Council and its relevant subcommittees, including
our chairpersonship of the Committee established
12/21

02/12/2021

pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning
counter-terrorism. Tunisia has also strengthened its
international commitments and their implementation,
including by submitting a supplementary report on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
designating national focal points. In that context, we
stress the need to pursue our international efforts,
especially by conducting a comprehensive review of
the status of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and renewing the mandate of the Committee, as
the continued lack of any tangible progress is likely to
weaken the non-proliferation regime.
Cooperation among panels and groups of experts
is important for consolidating approaches from all
United Nations bodies. We reiterate the need for the
international community, especially the Security
Council and its subcommittees, to advance as shared
priorities combating terrorism and preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In
that regard, we urge the Council to swiftly begin its
negotiations on the renewal of the mandates of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups
undertakings and entities. That action is important
because it constitutes an opportunity to adapt our
mechanisms in order to keep pace with new and
emerging trends and respond to them in accordance with
our international commitments. That requires spending
the amount of time necessary to ensure transparent and
inclusive discussions for all Member States, on an equal
footing, with the aim of preserving the Council’s unity
and solidarity in combating terrorism and diverting
it from contentious issues that would prevent it from
renewing those mandates.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Allow me to first thank
each of the Chairs of the three subsidiary bodies for
their excellent briefings this afternoon and express
Ireland’s thanks for their excellent stewardship of their
respective Committees over the past year.
The briefings today underline the fact that
terrorism remains a grave threat to international peace
and security. Recently, we have seen lethal attacks by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan in
Afghanistan, as well reports of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan on the enduring
links between the Taliban and Al-Qaida. Affiliates of
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) have
continued to expand across Africa, and in Western
nations we are experiencing the creeping growth of
violent right-wing extremism.
In such a varied context, the risk that non-State
actors, including terrorists, may acquire, develop,
traffic in or use nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery remains deeply
concerning and poses potentially catastrophic
consequences. Those fears have only been reinforced
following this morning’s briefing by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) (see S/PV.8914), in which the
Security Council received an update on an investigation
into ISIL’s chemical weapons programme.
For Ireland, those developments reaffirm our belief
that counter-terrorism responses cannot be solely
security-driven. Ireland has consistently called for a
comprehensive international response to terrorism that
tackles both cause and effect, in full compliance with
international law. Effective counter-terrorism responses
demand whole-of-Government and whole-of-society
approaches, which are grounded in respect for human
rights, inclusive of civil society and gender-responsive.
Efforts to combat terrorism should never serve
as a pretext for human rights violations or for the
shrinking of the humanitarian space. The targeting
and criminalization of civil society, humanitarian
workers and human rights defenders in the name of
counter-terrorism are never legitimate. Furthermore,
Ireland believes that we must work harder to ensure
that counter-terrorism measures do not impede
humanitarian action. The Security Council has a crucial
role to play in that regard, including by providing for
appropriate exemptions and safeguards in counterterrorism and sanctions regimes, designed to preserve
the humanitarian space.
The work of each Committee addresses key
elements of combatting terrorism at the national,
regional and international levels. Those elements
range from ensuring that non-State actors, including
terrorists, are prevented from acquiring and using
weapons of mass destruction to addressing terrorist
financing, developing effective criminal justice
responses to terrorism, and respecting international
law while countering terrorism. Ireland would like
to underscore the importance of maintaining and

S/PV. 8915

expanding cooperation among all three Committees, as
well as their expert groups. Sharing relevant information
and discussing issues relating to the threat of terrorism
and the risk that non-State actors may acquire, develop,
traffic in or use weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery is vital if each Committee is
to deliver effectively on its respective mandate. That
includes enabling the participation in relevant CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate country visits of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities, and the Group
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to
working constructively with all Council members
over the coming months to advance the principles and
priorities that I have outlined and, in particular, as we
turn our attention to the renewal of several important
counter-terrorism and sanctions mandates.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the briefings on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities; the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We thank the Ambassador of Norway,
Chair of the 1267 Committee, for her able leadership
and readiness to approach issues constructively. We
commend the work of the Committee. We believe it is
one of the most effective Security Council mechanisms
in the area of counter-terrorism. We deem it of primary
importance to effectively implement the Security
Council resolutions related to the counter-terrorism
sanctions regime concerning ISIL and Al-Qaida.
The Afghan wing of ISIL is one of the main factors
destabilizing the situation in Afghanistan. An additional
danger is posed by their expanding ideological
propaganda and recruitment activity with the smart use
of information and communication technologies. We
view the ongoing presence in the country of the group
as a threat to States of Central Asia. The increase in
the number of terrorist attacks using suicide bombs
indicates that the group has the manpower available.

21-3646013/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

02/12/2021

We underscore that we need to keep the focus on
the problem of foreign terrorist fighters who have been
added to anti-terrorist sanctions lists so that to prevent
and curb their criminal activity.

terrorism. I would like to thank Ms. Michèle Coninsx
for her fruitful work as the Executive Director. We
are also grateful to the Mexican chairmanship of the
1540 Committee.

We support the effective work of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. Its reports
are an important part of the work of the Committee.
We urge Member States to cooperate closely with its
experts. We trust that the reports of the Monitoring
Team will be as objective as possible and that they will
rely solely on credible sources of information. Country
visits by the Monitoring Group constitute another
important aspect. We therefore expect that priority will
be given to countries in a state of armed confrontation
against international terrorism, as well as countries that
are severely impacted by the phenomenon of terrorism.

We are pleased with the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which remains the only
universal international instrument in the area of
non-proliferation. Resolution 1540 (2004) obliges all
countries to create effective national control systems
to prevent weapons of mass destruction, their delivery
systems and associated material from falling into
the hands of non-State entities. Achieving that and
implementing the resolution fully by all States is our
shared aim. The 1540 Committee should play the role of
coordinator of global efforts in that area. A priority of
its work continues to be to provide technical assistance
to countries in implementing the provisions of the
resolution when dealing with the relevant requests.
We deem it extremely important that resolution 1540
(2004) remain an instrument of cooperation in the area
of non-proliferation.

We would also like to express our gratitude to
the Tunisian chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) for their effective leadership of that
body. We understand how difficult that was during
the coronavirus disease pandemic. The Committee
successfully adapted and continued to carry out its
important role of assessing the implementation by States
of the relevant Security Council resolutions. We thank
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
for preparing the global surveys on the implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).
In the light of the pandemic-related restrictions,
temporary procedures are in place for conducting hybrid
visits. That means that some meetings are conducted
virtually. We trust that there will be a gradual return to
the Committee’s normal way of working. We welcome
the resumption of CTC in-person meetings. We hope
there will be more active involvement by CTED in
addressing organizational matters. It would be good in
future to avoid frequent postponements of meetings and
documents being sent for approval by members of the
Committee at the last minute. A good example in terms
of organization was the joint special meeting of the
CTC and the ISIL and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
on terrorism financing that took place on 18 November.
We note the high-quality expert support to the
Committee provided by CTED, which continues to
play a significant role in tackling varied challenges
facing the Committee and the entire Security Council
in countering terrorism. It is important that CTED
maintain its status as a political mission and its
exclusive remit to assess efforts of States to combat
14/21

Given the gradual return in the United Nations
to working in person, we trust that there will be a
significant uptick in the Committee’s work in this
area, and in particular with respect to soon carrying
out the comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was due to take place
in 2020.
Mr. Phillips (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes today’s joint
briefing of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities;
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We thank the
Chairs of the three Committees for their invaluable
and informative briefings. We also especially thank
Ambassador Ladeb and his team for their hard work
and dedication to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee over the past two years.
The current international security landscape is
dominated by transnational challenges, including
the scourge of terrorism and the nuclear threat. To
successfully confront terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, counter-terrorism
efforts must be conducted on a multilateral basis, in
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

partnership with international, regional and subregional
organizations, academia and civil society organizations.
We must continue to fully utilize international policy
instruments and enforcement mechanisms to keep pace
with those evolving threats.
Our delegation notes that, despite the continued
challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the three Committees and their respective expert
bodies have been able to coordinate and cooperate,
in accordance with their respective mandates. To that
end, we appreciate the work of the Committees under
the stewardship of Mexico, Norway and Tunisia.
Moreover, we encourage the Committees to enhance
information-sharing through joint briefings like this
and to enable their associated expert bodies to further
improve their cooperation.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee, supported
by its Executive Directorate, plays a critical role in
promoting the coordination and coherence of all United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines welcomes the recent launching of
the Committee’s updated electronic assessment and
analytics tools. We encourage the Committee to further
enhance its engagement with the Office of CounterTerrorism and other United Nations agencies to
develop and promote well-informed counter-terrorism
responses and to avoid the duplication of effort, and
through the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to
continue its engagement with Member States to address
outstanding issues of high priority, in particular the
provision of technical assistance.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply
concerned about the evolving threat to international
peace and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), also known as Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates, particularly on the African continent.
Those threats require timely action from the members
of the 1267 Committee and from the broader United
Nations membership. Moreover, we encourage Member
States to take action to fully implement the sanctions
measures against listed individuals and entities within
their respective jurisdictions.
We are also concerned about the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, including in the hands of
terrorists. We continue to encourage all Member States
to cooperate and engage with international, regional
and subregional organizations to support the work of

S/PV. 8915

the Committee and its Group of Experts to implement
resolution 1540 (2004) effectively.
In conclusion, we call upon all Member States
to redouble their efforts to combat terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons at home and abroad by
analysing the threat, sharing that information with
partners and integrating all instruments of national
power to ensure unity of effort.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank my colleagues
for their briefings here today.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon. Therefore, a
multilateral strategy is key to a successful response.
The United Nations plays an indispensable role in
that regard as the only global forum to strengthen,
coordinate, monitor and evaluate our collective efforts.
Each component of the United Nations counter-terrorism
architecture fulfils a distinct yet complementary
function. We must draw upon each entity’s comparative
advantage while creating synergies through their
cooperation and partnership.
That is true also of the Council’s subsidiary
bodies. The Counter-Terrorism Committee plays
a crucial role in implementation. Its mandate to
monitor Member State compliance with the Council’s
counter-terrorism resolutions is key to ensuring the
fulfilment of our collective obligations. The Committee
receives valuable support from the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in that work, and
Norway looks forward to the upcoming renewal of
the Directorate’s mandate to further strengthen its
efficiency and transparency.
Sanctions are an important tool at the disposal
of the Council to put its decisions into effect. In the
context of the 1267 regime, they are also crucial for
depriving affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida of the means to plan and carry out
attacks. To ensure both the efficiency and legitimacy of
sanctions measures, it is imperative that they be applied
in accordance with due process. In that regard, Norway
strongly supports the Office of the Ombudsperson in
that regard.
The prospect of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their use by non-State actors
is a real and continuous concern. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is a vital
component of the global non-proliferation architecture,
and the work of the Committee is as important as ever.

21-3646015/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Norway looks forward to engaging constructively
with the Chair and other Committee members for the
comprehensive review. We are eager to ensure that the
review is conducted in an appropriate and meaningful
way. This process is key to ensuring that the 1540
Committee continues to fulfil its obligations and takes
stock of progress moving forward.
In order to be both effective and sustainable, the
work of these three Committees, and the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture as a whole, should be
grounded in a holistic perspective — one that recognizes
prevention as the most effective counter-terrorism
strategy; one that addresses the underlying drivers of
radicalization; one that employs a gender-responsive
perspective; and one that protects and promotes human
rights as an integral part of all successful counterterrorism measures.
In conclusion, Norway values this opportunity to
take stock of the work of and cooperation among these
three Committees, which form the backbone of the
Council’s counter-terrorism efforts. We support efforts
towards a more coordinated, coherent and effective
counter-terrorism architecture, delivering as one
United Nations.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to thank the delegations of Norway
and Tunisia for their work at the head of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, respectively.
The pandemic certainly continues to affect the
work of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council.
However, it has diminished neither the intentions
nor the activities of non-State actors, especially
terrorist groups, aimed at perpetrating attacks, while
Governments fight to contain the coronavirus disease.
Regarding the 1373 Committee, we recognize
the progress that has been made in resuming visits
to States through hybrid formats, which has allowed
the Committee’s work to continue. The Office of the
Ombudsperson in the case of the 1267 Committee
deserves the same recognition for the continuity of its
work. I take this opportunity to thank Ombudsperson
Daniel Kipfer Fasciati for his work. We hope that there
16/21

02/12/2021

will be a smooth transition for his replacement, given
the great relevance of the role of that Office.
We also emphasize the importance of the fact that
this month the Council has before it the renewal of the
mandates of both the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the 1267 Committee. That
will offer an important window of opportunity to make
structural improvements to both bodies. We hope to
have the draft resolutions as soon as possible to allow
time for their careful consideration.
As regards the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), and as other delegations have
pointed out, we must draw attention to the fact that the
threat of non-State actors acquiring weapons of mass
destruction has not diminished. The comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) will provide an
opportunity for Committee members and the rest of the
membership to make proposals on how to strengthen
the Committee to meet current challenges and make it
more efficient.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I join others
in thanking the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, for their briefings.
At the outset, I would like in particular to
commend Tunisia’s action at the head of the CounterTerrorism Committee. Over the past two years the
Tunisian chairmanship has succeeded in carrying
out the programme of work despite the well-known
sanitary emergency, while also giving rise to several
major reflections on the future of the counter-terrorism
architecture. I am referring in particular to the
anniversary meeting concerning resolution 1373 (2001)
and the meeting on the implementation of resolution
2462 (2019), which was jointly prepared by the 1267
and Counter-Terrorism Committees.
In that regard, I reiterate the importance of
coordination among the Committees. The CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), whose
mandate we will renew at the end of the month, as
my Mexican colleague has just pointed out, makes
it possible to assess the implementation of Council
resolutions by States. That work must be done in concert
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

with the work of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team. Beyond the regular schedule of visits,
the Directorate must thus be able to respond to the
evolution of this threat as assessed by the Monitoring
Team, which means going where it will be most useful.
I am thinking in particular now of the terrorist threat
emanating from Afghanistan and across the world
from Al-Qaida affiliates that feel empowered by the
victory of the Taliban. CTED must be able to help the
neighbouring countries of Afghanistan to assess their
capacities to respond to the threat and recommend the
areas for necessary improvement within the framework
of its current mandate and in line with the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council.
All the tools are at our disposal, and we must use
them as efficiently as possible. That is the case with
the 1267 sanctions regime, which we will be renewing
this month as well. Sanctions are an essential tool of
the Security Council. These sanctions have proven their
effectiveness and should be maintained. In so doing, we
must ensure that the procedures respect human rights.
As we consider the mandate of the 1267 Committee
Ombudsperson, I would like to reiterate France’s
commitment to this mandate.
Finally, we wise to reiterate that resolution 1540
(2004) remains a pillar of the non-proliferation
architecture and of our collective security system.
There is a high risk of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems falling into the hands of
terrorists. The channels and financing of proliferation
are expanding. The role of the 1540 Committee and
its Group of Experts, to which we must give increased
autonomy, is essential. France fully supports the
comprehensive review process for resolution 1540
(2004) currently under way. We hope that the review
can be completed quickly and in a constructive spirit.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): Estonia thanks the
Ambassadors of Tunisia, Norway and Mexico for
their briefings and for their excellent chairmanship
of their respective Committees. Their leadership has
been crucial in guiding the work of the Committees
through the difficulties posed by the pandemic, as
well as by austerity measures. We would also like to
commend the good and critically important work of the
expert groups: the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Group of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Together, the Committees and their expert

S/PV. 8915

bodies remain essential components of counterterrorism and non-proliferation efforts.
The global terrorist threats persist and evolve and
continue to spread violence. The robust implementation
of sanctions measures is one of the key elements in
combating terrorism. In that regard, standards of due
process and human rights need to be respected for
sanctions regimes to remain effective. We reiterate
our firm position that all counter-terrorism measures
must be carried out in accordance with international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Counter-terrorism
measures cannot be used as a justification for human
rights violations.
Estonia reiterates its full support for the work of
the Ombudsperson and regrets the difficult decision he
made to resign. Estonia hopes that a new Ombudsperson
will be appointed shortly and that the status and
conditions of service of his Office will be reviewed to
guarantee its independence and full functioning.
We welcome that the Council has recognized the
different impacts of terrorism on the human rights of
women and girls and their frequent targeting by terrorist
groups. That includes sexual and gender-based violence
used as a tactic of terrorism. The recognition of the
importance of women’s leadership and participation is
key to developing counter-terrorism strategies.
The past year saw the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Council’s adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
held a special meeting and adopted an outcome
document wherein all the Security Council members
reaffirmed their commitment to addressing terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and to work in an
open manner with all stakeholders to achieve effective
results in implementing Security Council resolutions.
As we are in the process of negotiating the renewal
of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, we hope that we can keep that
commitment and consensus in mind.
We appreciate that, despite the roadblocks set
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the CTC has
managed to find consensus on the working methods
pro tempore, which enable it to undertake hybrid visits
to Member States. As of today, there have been 13
virtual visits in total, including to Estonia. From our

21-3646017/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

02/12/2021

point of view, virtual dialogues could be here to stay,
and we encourage keeping them in the CTC’s toolbox in
post-pandemic times as well. They enable the Security
Council and the Committee to be more flexible and
efficient in their work.

which we will use, working with the private sector,
to bolster national efforts to counter proliferation
financing. We would be pleased to work with partners to
tackle that risk internationally and would welcome more
focus on the issue in the context of the 1540 Committee.

Resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the key
instruments in addressing the emerging threats
from weapons of mass destruction. The use of
chemical weapons in recent years in a number of
different countries shows that those threats have been
growing and remain acute. We fully support the 1540
Committee’s assistance and outreach efforts to ensure
that States have put in place appropriate measures to
prevent nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological
weapons from falling into the hands of non-State actors,
including terrorists. We welcome the active cooperation
with regional and international organizations, the
private sector and civil society that the Committee and
its Group of Experts have shown. We hope that the
1540 Committee can finalize its comprehensive review
soon and that, in renewing its mandate, it will also take
into account the threats posed by the malicious use of
new technologies.

We also welcome the work of 1540 Committee
on a comprehensive review of the resolution under
which it operates, despite the constraints posed by
the coronavirus disease pandemic. That review is a
key opportunity to raise Member States’ awareness of
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), which
we urge Member States to fulfil. We extend particular
thanks to the 1540 Committee Group of Experts and
especially value their detailed assessment of how States
are implementing that resolution.

In conclusion, we welcome the Council’s efforts to
enhance cooperation among the 1540 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. Multilateral and
multi-stakeholder engagement is essential in preventing
and countering terrorism and violent extremism.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee Chairs for their excellent briefings today.
Many thanks also go to Tunisia, Mexico and Norway
for the leadership they have shown in the Committees
this year.
Let me begin my remarks on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
The goals of resolution 1540 (2004) are clear and
unarguable. Preventing the proliferation of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons is essential work for all
of us. It is therefore critical that the Committee be able
to carry out its work unhindered. We must ensure that
the architecture established by resolution 1540 (2004)
promotes its full implementation.
We have been pleased to play our role in upholding
that goal through our chairing of the Global Partnership
against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction. This year, we also conducted our first
national risk assessment of proliferation financing,
18/21

Turning to the important work of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), and resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, the United
Kingdom reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms. But despite our global efforts, there remains
a serious threat in many parts of the world, as we have
heard. We must remain agile in responding to emerging
trends such as terrorist misuse of technology and the
rise of terrorism in new geographies, such as in parts of
sub-Saharan Africa. We must also ensure that counterterrorism measures comply with international human
rights obligations and engage, wherever possible, with
civil society partners.
In that context, United Kingdom strongly supports
the work of the 1267/1989/2253 Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team and of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
In particular, we welcome the work of CTED on the
interrelationship between counter-terrorism and
international humanitarian law and the valuable
insights of its global implementation survey.
In conclusion, the continued range of threats that
we face means that the work of all of these Committees
remains vital. Terrorism and proliferation are global
issues, and we need a united, global response to them.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente
Ramírez, Mr. Ali Cherif and Ambassador Trine
Heimerback for their briefings. The three Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

(2004), respectively, are the pillars of the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism architecture.
In the past two decades, the Council has taken
several measures to counter the threat of terrorism,
including by adopting landmark resolutions — such
as resolution 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014), 2462 (2019)
and 2482 (2019) — as well as resolution 2593 (2021),
during India’s presidency of the Council in August
this year, to ensure that Afghan territory is not used
for sheltering, training, planning or financing terrorist
acts. However, despite those efforts, the threat of
terrorism continues unabated.
The biannual reports of the Secretary-General and
by the Analytical Support Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the 1267 Committee this year continue to report the
expansion of terrorist groups in several countries of
Africa. Recently, that concern increased in our own
neighbourhood of South Asia. India strongly condemns
the attacks at Kabul, Kunduz, Kandahar, Nangarhar
and in various other provinces of Afghanistan. Such
acts of terrorism cannot be tolerated. Those reports also
highlight misuse of new and emerging technologies,
such as social media and cryptocurrencies, by terrorist
groups for propaganda, recruiting cadres and raising
and transferring funds.
The recent global survey of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001), adopted by the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) on 4 November, also
paints a mixed picture. In South Asia, for example,
the 1373 global survey mentions that the overall threat
level remains high, with several States having suffered
terrorist attacks since the previous global survey in
2016. Terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant — such as
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed and Harakat
ul-Mujahidin — remain active in the subregion and
have been launching cross-border terrorist attacks on
India. The global survey also notes that listed terrorist
entities continue to raise funds to finance terrorism
through front organizations, including through the
misuse of non-profit organizations through a variety of
means, such as charities, donations and crowd-funding.
We can no longer afford such gross neglect
of international obligations by certain Member
States — and they need to be held accountable for
their actions. It is appalling that the perpetrators of
the Mumbai terrorist attacks continue to be at large
to date and enjoy State hospitality. The international

S/PV. 8915

community must collectively call out and hold
accountable such States that are clearly guilty of not
just double-speak but also of aiding and supporting
terrorism and wilfully providing financial assistance
and safe havens. There should be zero tolerance against
such selective approaches.
We appreciate the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) in assessing and
finding gaps in the implementation of the Council’s
counter-terrorism resolutions by Member States and
facilitating technical assistance to those that need it.
We look forward to assuming the chairpersonship of
the CTC next year and will contribute constructively
towards the effective implementation of the mandate of
the Committee.
The United Nations sanctions regimes, including
the one established by resolution 1267 (1999), are
pivotal to the international efforts in preventing terror
financing, terrorist travel and access to arms by terrorist
organizations. However, the implementation of those
measures remains challenging. The recent report of the
Monitoring Team regarding asset freeze exemptions
procedures pursuant to resolution 2560 (2020) points
to the lack of such measures by Member States, partly
due to deficiencies in the existing guidelines of the
Committee. We hope that the upcoming mandate
renewal will address those deficiencies.
It is critical that all sanctions regimes established
by the Council ensure due process in their working
procedures and decision-making. The decision-making
process and listing and delisting measures should
be swift, credible, evidence-based and transparent.
Besides, the Monitoring Team should examine the
trans-border threat posed by Al-Qaida affiliates
such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed and
Harakat ul-Mujahidin and the linkages between
those organizations and other listed terror networks,
objectively, and highlight them in their periodic reports.
The threat of terrorists acquiring weapons of
mass destruction is no longer in the theoretical realm,
as shown by the recent report of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). Preventing terrorists from
acquiring those weapons should therefore continue
to be among the key priorities of the international
community. It was also reflected in the consensus of

21-3646019/21

S/PV.8915

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the First Committee of the General Assembly in its
adoption of draft resolution A/C.1/76/L.8, put forth by
India, entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction”.
Let me reaffirm that my delegation accords high
importance to resolution 1540 (2004) and the work
of the 1540 Committee, including its ongoing review.
We would like to encourage all steps towards the
timely completion of the comprehensive review by the
1540 Committee. We also recognize the role of the
Committee in facilitating assistance to Member States
in implementing their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). I would like to conclude by reiterating our
full support to the three committees in their collective
pursuit to address the threat posed by terrorism
and the illegal possible proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and
1540 (2004), concerning the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, for their briefings. I would also
like to congratulate the members of the expert groups
of those three Committees for all the progress they have
made in carrying out their mandates under particularly
difficult working conditions over the past two years due
to the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. My delegation is pleased with all the
innovation and adaptation efforts made by the expert
groups to conform to the health environment imposed
by the COVID-19 pandemic in order to ensure the
continuation of their activities and the strengthening of
the capacities of the Member States.
The three Committees, whose briefings we just
heard, constitute the most important mechanism that
the United Nations has in the fight against terrorism.
They provide a framework of reference and guidance
for national strategies to prevent and deter the planning
of any acts of terrorism on the territories of States, cut
off sources of financing for terrorists, prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and bring
terrorists to justice. Those Committees have clearly
20/21

02/12/2021

enabled many challenges to be met and successes
achieved in the fight against terrorism. However, we
also see the doggedness of terrorists who continue to
massacre and kill innocent groups of people in several
parts of the world, namely, in Asia, the Middle East
and Africa, particularly in the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin. That therefore means, regrettably, that the results
of our work seem to fall very short of the legitimate
expectations placed in us by the millions of people
around the world who are exposed every day to the
atrocities of this scourge.
At a time when we cannot reach agreement on the
reasons for listing or delisting individuals or entities
from the 1267 sanctions Committee, and while we
have seen draft counter-terrorism texts be abandoned
by their initiators because they could not satisfy
or reconcile diametrically opposed points of view,
terrorists nevertheless do not concern themselves with
debates and formalities. Rather, they continue to carry
out murderous attacks against civilian populations
and even military groups. In very little time, ISIL has
managed to export its atrocities to Africa despite having
been defeated militarily in Syria and Iraq. The countries
of the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin region have now
become the epicentre of global terrorist activity.
That rapid export of the terrorist threat from the
Middle East to the African continent is proof enough of
global ISIL’s resilience and adaptability as it continues
to pursue its goal of conquering and sweeping away
territory from which it aims to reconstitute its
operational capacity for possible large-scale terrorist
acts. It also bears mentioning that, in that process
of rapid expansion, ISIL has taken advantage of the
weakness of defence systems. There are several other
factors that increase the vulnerability of the countries
on the African continent, including poverty, famine,
insecurity, lack of knowledge and youth unemployment,
to name but a few.
Winning the fight against terrorism will also entail
the implementation of development programmes and
the creation of opportunities for young people, so as
to eliminate possibilities of recruiting new fighters.
It cannot be said often enough: terrorists recruit from
among the most vulnerable and disadvantaged segments
of the population.
As it has been said several times in this Chamber,
the fight against terrorism requires a global approach
that takes into account the social, economic and
21-36460

02/12/2021

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

political reasons for the shift towards extremism
and radicalization. Only that global approach will
enable us to effectively combat ISIL, Al-Qaida and
their ideologies.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reaffirming
my delegation’s conviction that, just as ISIL has been
defeated in Iraq and Syria, it could also be defeated
in the Sahel. For that to happen, however, there must
be the same commitment and mobilization on the
part of the international community. For its part, my
country, the Niger, which will conclude its term on the

S/PV. 8915

Security Council in a few days, will continue to work
with Council members with the same commitment
and determination in fighting to eradicate the terrorist
threat in Africa and everywhere else in the world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

21-3646021/21
