S/2005/230

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 April 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 6 April 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 4 April 2005,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-30089 (E) 130405

*0530089*

S/2005/230

Annex
Letter dated 4 April 2005 from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
operations covering the period from 25 January 2005 to 7 March 2005. I would
appreciate you making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

S/2005/230

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
A.

Introduction
1.
Resolution 1510 (2003) of the United Nations Security Council requested the
leadership of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports
on the implementation of its mandate. This is the sixth such report by NATO and it
covers the period from 25 January to 7 March 2005.
2.
As of 7 March 2005, ISAF total strength was 8,374 personnel from 26 NATO
nations plus 272 from 10 non-NATO nations. The steps towards full implementation
of ISAF expansion, Stage 2, is witnessing a progressive but moderate rise of ISAF
Forces through the build-up of new provincial reconstruction teams (PRTs) and the
establishment of the Herat Forward Support Base.

B.

The security situation
Security in the ISAF Area of Operations
3.
During the reporting period the level of violence in Afghanistan was reduced.
The month of February saw the lowest levels in two years. Bad weather conditions
may account for this reduction in violence to a certain extent.
4.
The ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process,
combined with the shortage of trained Afghan National Police (ANP) and Afghan
National Army (ANA) forces, has resulted in security gaps and rising crime levels
in the Afghan provinces. Although the Afghan Militia Forces are largely
demobilized, irregular militias, which are reliant on illegal activities for funding, are
adopting a higher profile. However, with ISAF support, the ANP is gaining more
confidence to act against these criminal elements.
ISAF Operations
5.
ISAF coordinated with Afghan authorities for the recovery of bodies and
wreckage resulting from the Kam Air Boeing 737 crash on 3 February. ISAF has
continued to support the Government of Afghanistan during the recovery and
investigation phase of the crash, although poor weather has made flight conditions
difficult to the point that half the scheduled air departures had to be cancelled.
6.
On 2 March ISAF conducted Operation SNOW WHITE II, in which Afghan
civilian patients and medical teams were airlifted from remote villages in
Badakshan province to Feyzabad.
7.
Two operations, SHELLY and SUKUR were conducted in the Kabul area of
operations and resulted in the seizure of significant weapons caches. Operation
SUKUR was led by the Afghan Ministry of Interior with ISAF support.

3

S/2005/230

Support to Security Sector Reform (SSR)
8.
The DDR programme remains one of the primary challenges for the
Government of Afghanistan (GOA). With the presidential election successfully
conducted, the GOA and the international community decided to decommission all
remaining AMF units in two phases: Main Phase 3 (October 2004-March 2005) and
Main Phase 4 (March-June 2005). The process to reintegrate ex-combatants will,
however, be extended beyond this deadline. The number of cantoned weapons has
now reached more than 7,800. Afghanistan’s New Beginnings Programme (ANBP)
assess that the remainder of the material to be cantoned is composed mostly of
isolated weapons that pose no real threat. As far as DDR is concerned, while
approximately 32,000 men have entered the process, up to 59,000 have been taken
off the payroll (de-financed) and 121 units have been decommissioned. The
following points are of interest:
9.
ANBP also assess that these figures could make up to 60 per cent of the real
strength of the AMF units. The major concerns are in the Central area, where some
units are not compliant with the process. With the completion of the DDR process,
the focus will move to the issue of irregular militias. These groups are outside the
payroll of the Ministry of Defence, are spread throughout the country, and may
include ex-combatants from decommissioned units who did not enter the DDR
process.
10. A recently created Ammunition Working Group (hopefully to become
subordinated to DDR) is dealing with the huge amounts of excess ordnance. ISAF
will support the DDR and Heavy Weapon Cantonment (HWC) programmes until
their completion and will also support any new initiatives.
11. Although not a pillar of Security Sector Reform (SSR), Heavy Weapon
Cantonment (HWC) is inextricably linked with DDR. ISAF is strongly committed to
supporting the Afghanistan Ministry of Defence in this process. In Kabul, HWC has
been successful with 100 per cent of declared heavy weapons cantoned by the end of
December 2004. This sets the conditions for successful HWC countrywide, which is
currently at 94 per cent.

C.

Support to Afghan Government and to the United Nations
Assistance Mission to Afghanistan
12. The ANA has made significant progress towards becoming an effective
military force. In terms of recruiting, training and fielding of units, this pillar of
SSR has met or even exceeded the target objectives. Although the United States has
the lead for the training of the ANA, NATO/ISAF is very keen to contribute to this
process and the NATO training support concept is in its final stage of preparation.
13. ISAF is contributing to ANP training in the Kabul area of operations on a caseby-case basis, making best use of the capabilities of the Kabul Multi-National
Brigade. In addition to military police assets, PRTs in Konduz, Mazar-i-Sharif and
Meymaneh have embedded civilian police advisers to liaise with, provide support
to, and mentor local police elements. Training and other activity is coordinated
through HQ ISAF with the German Police Project Office.
14. HQ ISAF has established links with the Ministry of Counter Narcotics (CN),
the Counter Narcotics Directorate of the Ministry of Interior (MoI), the British

4

S/2005/230

Embassy (as representative of the G8 lead nation), the United States Drug
Enforcement Agency (DEA), Combined Forces Command Afghanistan (CFC-A)
and, through the Counter Narcotics Steering Group, with the departments, agencies
and organizations, both national and international, which are involved in the Afghan
National Counter Narcotics Strategy.
15. The final SSR pillar, judicial reform, has made only modest progress. The
GOA, with support from Italy as the lead nation, has faced challenges in extending
its influence beyond Kabul in this critical pillar. Current reform efforts have been
only marginally effective and greater coordination and increased involvement of the
international community is urgently required. To date, the Justice Project Office has
not formally requested ISAF assistance. ISAF Headquarters is nevertheless involved
in the dissemination of judicial reform to the provinces. It has also been agreed that
PRTs will attempt to assist the progress of reform through:
(1)

Information gathering in Balkh and Konduz.

(2) Information operations by preparing the provinces for GOA training
programmes.
(3)

Providing indirect assistance during the training periods.

(4) Monitoring and feedback: Providing an assessment of effect after the
training programme has been completed and the provision of ongoing support after
the Task Force has relocated.
Kabul Afghanistan International Airport (KAIA)
16. The ISAF mission and the ability to meet NATO expansion requirements are
dependent upon successful air operations. In order to continue effective
management of the Air Point of Disembarkation/Embarkation (APOD) and airport,
NATO has established a number of airport service contracts, which has allowed a
reduction in military personnel at KAIA. This outsourcing is expected to be in place
by no later than April 2005. The long-term objective for KAIA remains to transfer
the airport management and operation to Afghanistan authorities. NATO is currently
training Afghan fire-fighters, who are scheduled to graduate mid-2005. Air traffic
controllers are currently training in India. However, a comprehensive training plan
still has to be developed to enable Afghan authorities to take over KAIA airfield
operations and allow ISAF to scale down its responsibility to running the APOD
section.
17. A common approach of the international community with respect to KAIA’s
rehabilitation has been established under the term “Clearing House for KAIA”. Air
activity, both military and civilian, has further increased to approximately 34,000
aircraft movements per year. The instrument landing system should be certified
soon. Even though some progress has been achieved, there is a critical need to
improve civilian airport and military APOD capacity.
18. Although the runway surfacing project was initially delayed, the first phase of
the runway surfacing was completed by the first week of December. The second and
third phases, however, had to be put on hold owing to adverse weather conditions.
These phases are expected to be completed by May 2005.

5

S/2005/230

D.

Conclusion
19. ISAF continues to fulfil its United Nations mandate to support the Government
of Afghanistan in the creation of a safe and secure environment within its area of
operations.
20. In addition to framework security and directed operations, ISAF continues to
execute a supporting role to SSR, focused on DDR and HWC, and to other pillars
within means, capabilities and constraints. Coordination between the Coalition,
GOA and non-government agencies continues to improve, providing a synergy of
efforts in pursuit of a secure environment and the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

6
