Following consultations held earlier with the members of
the Council, the President made the following statement at the
same meeting, on behalf of the Council: 297

Decision

At its 3084th meeting, on 12 June 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in Cyprus: report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Cyprus (S/24050 and Add.1)". 43

''The Council recalls the oral report presented on 24
June 1992 on the Secretary-General's mission of good
offices in Cyprus. It welcomes the separate meetings which
the Secretary-General had with the leaders of the two
communities from 18 to 23 June. lt notes with satisfaction
that the discussions focused on the issues of territorial
adjustments and displaced persons and that the other six
issues that make up the set of ideas on an overall framework agreement were also reviewed. The Council is unanimous in expressing its full support of the procedure
adopted by the Secretary-General for implementing
resolution 750 (1992) of 10 April 1992.

Resolution 759 (1992)
of U June 1992

The Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 31
May and 10 June 1992 on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus,296

"The Council reaffirms its endorsement of the set of
ideas as an appropriate basis for reaching an overall
framework agreement as mentioned in paragraph 4 of
resolution 750 (1992).

Taking note also of the recommendation by the SecretaryGeneral that the Security Council extend the stationing of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a further
period of six months,

"The Council notes with satisfaction the acceptance by
the leaders of the two communities to resume on 15 July
1992 their meetings with the Secretary-General and to
remain for such reasonable duration as may be necessary
to complete the work.

Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that in
view of the prevailing conditions in the island, it is necessary to
keep the Force in Cyprus beyond 15 June 1992,

"The Council considers that the forthcoming meetings
represent a determining phase in the Secretary-General's
effort and calls on both leaders to be ready to take the
necessary decisions to reach agreement on each of the
issues as dealt with in the set of ideas as an integrated
whole on an overall framework agreement.

Reaffirming the provisions of resolution 186 (1964) of 4
March 1964 and other relevant resolutions,
1. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force established under resolution 186 (1964) for a further period ending on 15 December
1992;

"The Council endorses the Secretary-General's
intention to invite the two leaders to a joint meeting as
soon as the proximity talks reveal that the two sides are
within agreement range on the set of ideas; and, subject to
the successful completion of the work at the joint meeting,
to convene an international high-level meeting to conclude
the overall framework agreement.

2. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting the
troop-contributing Governments as envisaged in paragraph 56
of bis report, to submit specific proposais to the Security
Council no later than 1 September 1992 on the restructuring of
the Force, such proposais to be based on the realistic options
available in current circumstances;

"The Council calls upon ail concemed to fulfil their
responsibilities and cooperate fully with the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the success of these meetings.

3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his mission
of good offices, to keep the Security Council informed of the
progress made and to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution by 30 November 1992;

"The Council reaffirms its decision to remain seized of
the Cyprus question on an ongoing and direct basis in
support of the effort to complete the set of ideas and to
conclude an overall framework agreement.

4. Calls upon ail the parties concemed to continue to
cooperate with the Force on the basis of the present mandate.
Adopted unanimously al the 3084th
meeting.

"The Council requests that the Secretary-General
provide it with an ongoing assessment of the progress
being made at the meetings beginning on 15 July so as to
enable the Council to determine, as the talks unfold, how
it might best lend its full and direct support.

Decisions
At its 3094th meeting, on 13 July 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in Cyprus".

"The Council looks forward to receiving at the
conclusion ofthese meetings a full report from the Secre93
