S/PV.8893

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8893rd meeting

Friday, 29 October 2021, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani/Mrs. Toroitich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2021/844)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-31275 (E)
*2131275*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8893

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2021/844)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/844, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr Wane (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
members for this opportunity to join the Security
Council in assessing the situation in Mali.
First of all, I would like to express my appreciation
for the Council’s visit to Bamako last week, which not
only underscored the Council’s continued support for
Mali at this critical juncture but also demonstrated
its unwavering support for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The tribute paid to the 243 fallen
MINUSMA peacekeepers was a stark reminder of the
sacrifices made over the past eight years in the quest for
peace in Mali. The tribute also enhanced our resolve to
ensure that every one of those lives lost was not in vain.
(spoke in English)
As members heard at first-hand during the visit, the
situation on the ground remains extremely challenging.
We confront a context marked by increased insecurity
in northern, central and, now, in parts of southern
Mali and a worrisome humanitarian situation, with
4.7 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
and some 400,000 internally displaced persons, half
2/14

29/10/2021

of whom are displaced in the central region of Mali.
Attacks targeting both Malian and international forces,
including MINUSMA peacekeepers, have continued
unabated. Just yesterday, our camp in Aguelhok came
under indirect mortar and rocket fire. Six projectiles
were fired at the camp by unknown assailants, two of
which landed inside the camp. Luckily, there were no
casualties or damages. In addition, political uncertainty
persists, as Mali grapples with the completion of the
ongoing transition.
Against that backdrop, the Government seized the
opportunity of the Council’s visit to clearly express
its concerns and priorities. Various Government
interlocutors highlighted the deteriorating security
situation as the main concern for the average Malian — a
concern I have heard time and again, along with a plea
for the delivery of basic services, during my own
interactions with local communities in Gao, Menaka,
Mopti, Douentza, Bandiagara, Aguelhok, Tessalit and,
most recently, Timbuktu, where I was on Monday.
They also insisted on the need for profound political
and governance reforms to create the conditions for
credible elections and lasting stability.
In that context, it is needless to reiterate that
MINUSMA remains crucial in Mali. The Mission
operates under robust rules of engagement and uses
all the means at its disposal to implement its mandate,
including in coordination with the Malian authorities
and other international partners. The Mission has
also significantly adapted to the evolving and highly
complex threat environment in Mali to protect civilians,
including in the centre of the country.
Today we conduct our operations with more tailored
units, including explosive-ordinance disposal teams,
quick reaction forces and intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance capabilities. We have also established
temporary operating bases and launched long-range
reconnaissance patrols. These include the conduct of
daily patrols in the circle of Douentza, in central Mali,
to prevent attacks by terrorist armed groups against
villagers; patrols along main roads to ensure freedom
of movement and deter further terrorist attacks on key
infrastructure, including bridges; and the stationing
of a temporary operating base in Ogossagou, in
central Mali, to prevent further violence between
local communities. This temporary operating base has
also enabled the civilian components of MINUSMA
to undertake mediation and reconciliation activities,
which culminated, a few weeks ago, in the signing of
21-31275

29/10/2021

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8893

a comprehensive peace agreement between 12 villages
that provides for the free movement of people, the
resumption of livelihood activities and the return of
social services. We are also holding our ground in Mali’s
far north, with our camps in Aguelhok and Tessalit, and
doing so under difficult conditions. These efforts have
been recognized by the Malian authorities and have
reassured the population, especially in central Mali.

its protection-of-civilian efforts. The strategy is
expected to focus on the fight against radical groups
and to prioritize reconciliation, as was done recently in
Ogossagou, the return of State authority, the provision
of basic services and the strengthening of the resilience
of the local populations, including women and youth. I
commend the Government of Mali for the commitment
displayed towards the development of that strategy.

We are also doing our best to support the Malian
authorities in their efforts to address the deteriorating
security situation. Between May and October of this
year alone, we have responded to many requests for
support from the Government of Mali and the Malian
Defence and Security Forces for rations, fuel, ground
and air transport and engineering services, among
others. Support for medical and casualty evacuation
provided by the Mission have also proved crucial for the
Malian Defence and Security Forces in their operations
across the country.

Regarding the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation on Mali, progress has been frustratingly
slow on the key provisions as they relate to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), institutional
reforms and development in the north. However, in recent
weeks there have been some encouraging developments.
Earlier this month, the Government tabled a forwardleaning proposal on DDR, most notably the integration
of 13,000 combatants of the signatory movements
before the end of the year and the integration of an
additional 13,000 over the next two to three years. In
our view, this is a significant step forward in a process
that has largely been at a standstill for the past six years.
The international community should welcome that
proposal and encourage the parties to engage in goodfaith discussions, including by convening the envisaged
high-level decision-making meeting in order to agree
on a way forward. In the meantime, the accelerated
DDR, for which 1,800 of 3,000 combatants have been
integrated, should be completed without any further
delay. I also note the recent signing of a convention
for the 16 projects elaborated as part of the sustainable
development fund, as well as the steps being taken by
the authorities to involve the signatory movements in the
institutional reform process. Moreover, the signatories
are now more open for international mediation — under
the leadership of Algeria — to play a more active role,
including through arbitration.

However, we are overstretched. Indeed, all of
these activities are being undertaken with our current
resources alone. It is in that context that the SecretaryGeneral recommended an augmentation to our
operation, including additional assets such as attack
and utility helicopters, and it is up to the Council to
decide on the way forward, taking into consideration
the concerns of our Malian host.
Meanwhile, let me insist on the fact that, irrespective
of numbers, significant gaps remain in requirements for
enabling capabilities, which are critical to ensure greater
mobility and flexibility of the existing MINUSMA
uniformed component. Those gaps include mediumutility military helicopter units, forward surgical
teams, infantry quick reaction force units and aerial
intelligence-collection assets, manned or unmanned,
without which our effectiveness in delivering on our
priority tasks will continue to be severely constrained.
I therefore renew my call on countries in a position to
do so, to help mobilize the required resources to make
MINUSMA even more fit for purpose.
Although I have spent some time on detailing the
military and security response to the crisis in Mali, it
should be clear that the answer cannot be purely military.
It can never be emphasized enough that addressing
insecurity in Mali also requires a political response.
In central Mali, MINUSMA is supporting
Government efforts to finalize a comprehensive strategy
for the stabilization of the centre while enhancing

The transition has reached a critical stage. As they
have indicated to the Council, the transition authorities
hold the view that improving the security situation
and initiating some fundamental reforms, including
operationalizing the single electoral management body
and responding to their people’s aspirations to better
governance, accountability and justice, are key to the
holding of credible elections and ensuring that the
return to constitutional rule and stability is not short
lived. In that respect, we must note the annual revision
of the electoral roll, launched on 5 October, the ongoing
work on the draft electoral law and the issuance of
three decrees concerning the Assises nationales de

21-312753/14

S/PV.8893

The situation in Mali

29/10/2021

la refondation, including its terms of reference and
appointment of members to be involved in oversight
and organizing committees.

its approach in order to adapt to the evolving situation
and better support the Malian people’s aspiration for
democracy, peace and stability.

In the light of the current challenges facing
Mali, it is critical that Mali’s partners, in support of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), make renewed efforts to help the Malians
foster consensus, both on the reforms to be undertaken
and on the conditions for the holding of credible
elections that would mark the return to constitutional
order. For its part, MINUSMA is already providing
substantive support to electoral management bodies
through the Organization’s integrated electoral team,
comprised of relevant Mission components, the United
Nations Development Programme and UN-Women,
and is prepared to provide holistic support to other
ongoing processes. Moreover, through my good offices
and in conjunction with ECOWAS and the African
Union representatives in Bamako, we will continue to
advocate for constructive dialogue among the Malian
stakeholders in order to arrive at political consensus
on the way forward, while also working to ensure a
greater synergy of efforts between Mali and its partners
towards the shared goal of return to constitutional rule
and the promise of lasting stability.

The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.

(spoke in French)
Finally, I would like to say that what the Council
heard from the Malian authorities during its visit
should also be seen as a plea for a shared vision on
how to put Mali back on a path to peace and stability.
Despite our collective efforts and those of the Malian
protagonists, the reality is that the security situation
has unfortunately, continued to deteriorate and the
crisis is deepening.
That said, hope is not lost. We have an opportunity
to reflect together and develop a common understanding
of the situation we are facing, revisit what we have
been working on together so far, and further clarify our
respective roles and responsibilities, including ensuring
greater accountability on the part of all actors involved.
I am convinced that if we adopt this approach, we can
provide a vision shared by Mali and its partners, which
would form the basis of an even more coordinated
international strategy to help restore security, promote
inclusive dialogue and complete the transition, as well
as the full implementation of the 2015 Peace Agreement.
For our part, I would like to assure the Council
that MINUSMA will continue to assess and recalibrate
4/14

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Maman Sani (Niger) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well
as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), I thank
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane for his constant efforts aimed at
stabilizing Mali through the effective implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
despite the various challenges.
Our visit to Mali allowed us to appreciate the
sacrifice and commitment of the men and women who,
despite their diversity, continue to support the Malian
people in their journey towards stability and prosperity.
We also had the opportunity to learn about the kind
of environment in which peacekeepers operate, with
the constraints imposed by us, the States Members of
the United Nations. This is why the upcoming United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul will be an
excellent opportunity for all of us to come together and
make tangible commitments aimed at ensuring that the
peacekeeping mission is fully equipped.
The visit also allowed us to observe the measures
taken by the transitional Malian authorities to address
the deteriorating security situation in the north and
centre of the country, as well as the social and political
climate. We encourage the authorities to continue these
efforts in order to meet Malians’ legitimate expectations
and aspirations for peace and prosperity.
However, the long-awaited stabilization, to
which I referred earlier, will require the holding of
credible, inclusive and transparent elections within the
allotted time frame. In this regard, the authorities and
stakeholders have a historic responsibility to urgently
agree on the effective implementation of priorities in
the light of the road map drawn up by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It
is also urgent that the most recent decisions of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee be implemented,
in particular on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and on the decentralization and
development of the north.
21-31275

29/10/2021

The situation in Mali

Like the rest of the Sahel, Mali is plagued by
security, development and climate change challenges,
which have been exacerbated by the impact of the
coronavirus disease. This is why, in terms of security,
the A3+1 believes that it is incomprehensible to criticize
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel for
lacking autonomy and the Executive Secretariat of the
Group of Five for the Sahel for not having the capacity
to maintain it, while at the same time refusing to
provide adequate support to meet this challenge. We
again call on the Security Council to show greater
flexibility when it comes to implementing the options
it has proposed.
In conclusion, as a first step and in accordance
with the options proposed by the Secretary-General,
the creation of an advisory office within the Executive
Secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel would
certainly help accelerate the implementation of this
joint initiative, which we do not have the luxury to
let fail.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Wane, for his briefing. The
energy that he has brought to his role is commendable. I
would like to express our gratitude to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations staff for
their important work in Mali, which I witnessed firsthand this week.
Ireland fully supports the work and leadership
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Mali. The announcement of the expulsion
of the ECOWAS special envoy, Mr. Hamidou Boly,
from the country is a very worrying development.
The completion of the political transition in Mali
and a return to constitutional order remains imperative.
It is clear that the electoral calendar is in doubt. It is
disappointing that the necessary preparations for the
elections have not been made. Good governance creates a
secure society, which depends on the political transition,
as well as a return to constitutional order. We need to
work closely with the African Union and ECOWAS to
achieve progress on this matter. Renewed commitment
to the Peace Agreement is essential. All actors should
respect their responsibilities and obligations.
We hope that the appointment of 15 women to
the monitoring mechanisms of the Agreement will
be completed. Women’s participation creates and

S/PV. 8893

strengthens peace — and makes it sustainable. The
independent women’s observatory will be an important
tool for ensuring that women are fully engaged in the
political and peace process.
(spoke in English)
As we heard during our recent visit, the humanitarian
situation in Mali, worryingly, is deteriorating. We
find the persistence of humanitarian access issues in
this context inexcusable. We see it as essential that
all parties respect international humanitarian law,
support much-needed humanitarian action, honour
humanitarian principles and facilitate humanitarian
access. We join the Secretary-General in calling on the
Malian authorities to continue to extend its cooperation
with MINUSMA in order to enable the Mission to fully
implement its mandate and assist the Malian people.
It is clear that, in such trying circumstances,
civilians are bearing the brunt of insecurity. As
the human rights situation continues to be of real
concern, civilians need to be protected. We call on
the Malian authorities to investigate all the allegations
of human rights violations and abuses regardless of
perpetrator. We consider the Security Council to have
a responsibility for making sure that that happens.
Ending impunity will be integral to breaking the cycle
of conflict in Mali and strengthening the import social
contract between the Malian people and their State. We
welcome the work that MINUSMA is doing to establish
a mechanism to monitor the implementation of the key
recommendations of the International Commission of
Inquiry for Mali.
Before concluding, I wish to reiterate Ireland’s
support for the sanctions regime set up by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) and appreciate the essential work being
done by the Panel of Experts. We look forward to the
appointment of experts and hope that delays to this
process will end swiftly.
We all saw on the ground in Mali this week that
the political transition, on which so much depends, is
very fragile. Delayed action will only serve to add to
the political and social instability and allow extremist
groups to expand their control, exacerbating the
suffering of the Malian people. None of us wants to
see that.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): My delegation
wants to join other Council members in thanking,

21-312755/14

S/PV.8893

The situation in Mali

Madam President, your Permanent Representative and
the Permanent Representatives of France and other
countries, as well as other United Nations colleagues,
for organizing a successful visit to Mali and the Niger.
I thank Special Representative Wane for his
briefing today. I want to begin by praising his work
and that of the brave peacekeepers of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in supporting the Malian
transitional Government to implement the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, carry out elections
and protect civilians.
The United States is deeply concerned by the
deteriorating security situation in Mali, as evidenced
by the increasing audacity, frequency and severity
of attacks against civilians, national security forces,
international forces and MINUSMA. It is imperative
that the protection of civilians remains a top priority
for the transitional Government and for MINUSMA.
Furthermore, the transitional Government must
continue to take credible steps to combat impunity
and to ensure that its citizens have a political channel
through which to express their concerns.
As the Security Council, we continue to stand
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in calling for the Malian transitional
Government to strictly adhere to the timetable for
transitioning to a democratically elected Government
and the holding of presidential elections on
27 February 2022.
We also join ECOWAS in calling on the Mali
transitional Government to release an election calendar,
in line with the ECOWAS demands, and to make concrete
progress towards organizing elections. That will help
international partners to develop plans for supporting
the elections. While we agree that governance and
corruption issues lie at the heart of Mali’s insecurity,
the reforms that the transitional Government initiates
should either be completed within the agreed transition
time frame or be turned over to an elected Government
to continue.
We also support the parameters outlined by
ECOWAS and reflected in Mali’s Transition Charter
that preclude the President and Prime Minister of the
transitional Government from participating, under
any circumstance, as candidates in the forthcoming
presidential election.
6/14

29/10/2021

It is critical that the February 2022 elections be
free and fair and administered transparently. We
urge the transitional Government to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in the
elections, including ensuring that women are both on
the ballot and registered to vote. We also emphasize the
importance of domestic election observer groups as a
critical tool for facilitating free and fair elections.
The transitional Government must create conditions
for stability and for addressing social grievances. That
requires the full implementation of the Agreement. We
welcome Algeria’s appointment of Boudjemaa Delmi
as Chair of the Agreement Monitoring Committee. The
United States also calls for the meaningful inclusion
of women and women-led civil society organizations in
the implementation of the Agreement.
The United States welcomes efforts to support the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to advance the
peace, stability, development and security of the Sahel
region. We continue to have doubts that the United
Nations, regardless of the mechanism, is an appropriate
or effective vehicle through which to provide logistical
support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We look forward
to discussing the Secretary-General’s letter, requested
pursuant to resolution 2584 (2021), on support options
for the G-5 Joint Force, as well as to working with
our fellow Council members to identify additional
non-United Nations bilateral and multilateral options.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): At the outset, I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Wane, for his briefing, and express support for
his work.
After having returned from the Security Council’s
visit to Mali and the Niger just two days ago, I would
like to add a few of my own observations and remarks
to the summary provided by the co-leads of the visit,
that is, France, Kenya and the Niger.
First, the preparations for credible, inclusive and
transparent elections must continue. It is crucial that
the transition period be just that — a transition to
civilian rule and the return to constitutional order in
accordance with the agreed transition road map.
Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in all political and peace processes needs to be
emphasized every step of the way. It is regrettable
that the representation of women in the transitional
21-31275

29/10/2021

The situation in Mali

Government remains at 21.4 per cent, which is below
the 30 per cent legal requirement.
Secondly, the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains the basis of the peace
process in Mali. The modest progress in the agreement’s
implementation is very concerning. We call on all
Malian parties to refocus their attention and continue
efforts to take concrete steps in the implementation
process. Estonia reiterates its full support for the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, including its ongoing
technical, logistical and financial support to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform processes in Mali. However,
international efforts can succeed only if the Malian
authorities will fully commit to achieving peace and
stability in the country. That includes adopting and
implementing a comprehensive strategic approach on
restoring and maintaining an effective State presence
across the territory.
It is important to note that all those obstructing
the peace process in Mali need to be held accountable.
At the request of the Malian Government, the Security
Council adopted a sanctions regime to support that
objective. In that connection, I reiterate Estonia’s
support for the work of the Panel of Experts on Mali,
and hope that the Panel will soon be fully operational
in order to continue their valuable work in assisting
the Security Council on the implementation of the
sanctions measures.
Thirdly, the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in Mali needs to be addressed.
The constant stream of human rights violations and
abuses can be reduced by establishing an effective
State presence, including police and judicial presence.
In that regard, establishing accountability and fighting
against the culture of impunity are central elements. We
strongly urge the Malian authorities to follow through
with all announced investigations.
Finally, international and regional cooperation
to support the peace process in Mali remains crucial.
Estonia welcomes the engagement of the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
in supporting the political transition in Mali.
For Estonia, today’s Security Council quarterly
discussion on Mali is our last opportunity for a while
to engage as an elected member of the Council.
Nevertheless, Estonia will continue its contributions

S/PV. 8893

to support peace efforts in Mali and in the wider
Sahel region. We will continue contributing through
multilateral training missions and counter-terrorist
efforts, as well as through the peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention initiatives.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): First, let me thank
you, Mr. President, and the Permanent Representatives
of France and the Niger for leading our visits last
weekend. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Wane, for
his support, as well as the two country teams and the
Secretariat. We are grateful to the Governments of Mali
and the Niger for their welcome.
We heard first-hand, at the weekend, about the
scale of the challenges facing Mali and the region. We
met heroic United Nations staff in both countries. We
heard the commitment of civil society leaders — men
and women — to national dialogue and peacebuilding,
and the commitment of Mali’s neighbours to working
together for the stability of the Sahel. But we received
some worrying messages from Mali’s transitional
authorities about their commitment to the transition
and to regional cooperation.
The United Kingdom shares concerns voiced today
at the lack of progress made by the transitional authorities
in preparing for elections. The United Kingdom supports
the mediation efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and endorses its call
for an election timetable to be published without delay.
We all recognize the need for reforms aimed at
governance, security and justice, but the authorities
should focus on steps required for timely political
transition. Broader reforms are the job of a
democratically elected Government.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
increasing violence against civilians, restrictions on
humanitarian access and continued allegations of
human rights violations and abuses, including against
children. There must be an end to impunity for such acts.
The United Kingdom remains committed to doing
what it can do to help address those challenges. As part
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), United
Kingdom troops are demonstrating how strengthened
civilian-military coordination and more proactive
peacekeeping can provide better protection for
communities in hard-to-reach areas. The United

21-312757/14

S/PV.8893

The situation in Mali

Kingdom’s Long Range Reconnaissance Group
has supported United Nations human rights teams
to investigate abuses, enabled United Nations and
Malian civilian efforts to visit local communities, and
piloted models for better intelligence-gathering ahead
of operations.
MINUSMA alone cannot fix Mali’s complex
challenges, however, absent the right political
environment. In the coming weeks, we should keep
developments in Mali under close review, in the hope
that the transitional authorities deliver the timely return
to constitutional rule promised to ECOWAS and to the
Security Council. Should they fail to do so, there
should be consequences. As many said in the Council
event yesterday, we should follow the relevant regional
bodies — in this case, ECOWAS.
In closing, I would like to share the concerns raised
by others regarding the holds placed on the Mali Panel
of Experts and a number of other panels. In the current
context, it is vital that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali
and the Panel of Experts be able to operate without
hindrance, report on developments on the ground and
inform Council decision-making.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
El-Ghassim Wane, for updating us on the mandate
implementation of the mission and the most recent
political development in Mali. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of Mali in
today’s meeting.
Today’s meeting is taking place against the
background of the Security Council’s visit to Mali a
few days ago. We thank our colleagues from the Niger
and France for coordinating the visit and the President
of the Council for leading us.
We had important meetings with the transitional
authorities in Mali, including the President of the
transition and the Malian stakeholders. The Council
also visited the headquarters of MINUSMA and the
command centre of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) in Bamako. The interactions were indeed helpful
to understand the gap between the expectations of the
international community on the transition phase and
the political and security realities on the ground. In that
regard, let me offer the following observations.
8/14

29/10/2021

The developments in recent months indicate that the
transition process may go beyond February 2022 — a
commitment that was made by the transition authorities
to the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). It is important that transitional authorities
be constantly encouraged to undertake political and
institutional reforms and hold elections in line with
their understanding with ECOWAS.
The mediation and good offices role of regional
and subregional organizations in Africa remains vital
in resolving armed conflicts, political impasses and
helping the countries in their political transitions.
We urge the transitional authorities to cooperate with
ECOWAS.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali is an important factor in bringing
stability to the northern regions. The transitional
authorities and signatory parties need to work in
good faith to implement the provisions of the peace
agreement. Towards that end, we welcome the active
engagement of Algeria, including the appointment of
the Special Envoy.
It is evident that the security situation in Mali has
worsened in recent months, particularly in the northern
and central regions. Terrorist groups, such as Jama’a
Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, have increased their attacks. The
MINUSMA camp in Kidal has come under repeated
attacks, as have the convoys. The situation in central
Mali has deteriorated, with extremist groups continuing
to take advantage of the administrative and security
vacuum. What we could assess from the visit to Mali
and discussion with various stakeholders is that a
strong counter-terrorism response is needed to defeat
the terrorist groups.
The solution lies not in providing MINUSMA a
more robust mandate, but in strengthening national
and regional security forces and providing them with
adequate capacity-building, financial and technical
assistance so that they can effectively deal with those
challenges. In that regard, we would like to reiterate
our call for greater United Nations support for the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, including by providing
the Joint Force with the necessary financial support
through United Nations-assessed contributions. The
Secretary-General’s recommendation of a dedicated
United Nations support office in the Sahel to provide
21-31275

29/10/2021

The situation in Mali

support of necessary logistics to the Joint Force could
be a good model to begin with.
On the peacekeeping front, MINUSMA continues
to operate in a complex and challenging environment.
We fully support MINUSMA’s role and efforts in
stabilizing the security situation in Mali and its
capacity-building assistance to strengthen civil and
military institutions.
While there may be grounds for increasing the
troop ceiling of the Mission, it is important that
this decision be calibrated with the strengthening
of Malian security forces. The tendency to burden
peacekeepers with responsibilities that go beyond the
scope of peacekeeping and the skewed approach to get
more out of limited resources can lead to further fatal
consequences for MINUSMA.
MINUSMA is one of the missions that have
started implementing the Comprehensive Planning and
Performance Assessment System. We call for a holistic
implementation of the framework, taking into account
the assessment of all components of the mission.
The increasing attacks on MINUSMA camps and
peacekeepers underscore the urgent need to upgrade
the security infrastructure of the camps. We also call
for the implementation of the provisions of resolution
2589 (2021) to bring to justice perpetrators of attacks
against MINUSMA peacekeepers.
I conclude by reiterating that the Malian people
deserve solutions to the political and security challenges
that they have now been facing for a decade. We should
encourage the Malian stakeholders to take ownership
of the priority tasks of undertaking reforms and raising
electoral polity by implementing the election road
map and the peace agreement. The Security Council
should also consider its support in finding practical and
regional solutions to the security situation in Mali.
India remains committed to supporting the
people of Mali in overcoming the present political and
security crisis.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, El-Ghassim Wane, for his briefing
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
situation in the country as a whole. We thank the Kenyan
presidency, the Niger, France and our colleagues from
the Secretariat for organizing the Security Council

S/PV. 8893

mission to the region. We are grateful for the hospitality
extended to us in Bamako and Niamey, as well as the
candid and substantive dialogue about the situation in
the Sahel.
It is clear that improving the situation in
Mali, implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, eradicating terrorism and
improving the socioeconomic situation depend above
all on internal political stability. Further upheavals
related to a struggle for power could lead the country
into an impasse.
The Council’s contacts with the current transitional
leadership of Mali revealed the latter’s interest in
stabilizing the situation. A broad dialogue is being
carried out with various social and political forces,
including in the context of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, with a view to implementing longoverdue Government reforms. Despite the delays, a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is under way and reformed armed forces are being
deployed in the north, with measures to restore peace
and overcome intercommunal conflicts.
No one is going back on their commitment to
restoring constitutional order, but that must be in the
light of realities on the ground, which have their own
logic and sometimes require the introduction of certain
corrections. We would, of course, prefer the electoral
timetable to remain the same, but we understand the
difficulties that the Malian authorities face in preparing
for the elections. We agree that, without the restoration
of State control in many regions of the country, it will
be difficult to consider the election results reliable.
That would, in turn, constitute a direct path to further
political destabilization, which is what happened in
Mali after last year’s elections.
The security situation remains challenging.
Extremists continue to terrorize the local population
and to carry out attacks on Malian military forces
and United Nations peacekeepers. The Malian armed
forces and MINUSMA Blue Helmets continue to suffer
casualties and losses. We believe that, despite all the
disagreement about the current situation, it would be
irresponsible to leave the country to its own devices,
including by reducing military assistance. The stakes
are too high when it comes to the security of Mali
and of the region. In that connection, we believe that
the Malians have every right to interact with other
partners who are willing to cooperate with them in

21-312759/14

S/PV.8893

The situation in Mali

29/10/2021

the field of strengthening security. Criticism of such
actions is hypocritical and disrespectful towards a
sovereign State.

community. The top priority now is to maintain the
political stability of Mali and create conditions for the
Malian people to cope with the challenges ahead.

It is imperative to continue pursuing close
cooperation and coordination between the Malian parties
and MINUSMA. We share the view that it is necessary to
complete adaptation measures for MINUSMA as soon
as possible. We support peacekeepers’ efforts to assuage
intercommunal conflicts and to protect the civilian
population. We believe that decisions concerning the
modalities of MINUSMA’s presence, including the
number of troops, should be taken with due regard for
opinions from Bamako. No one can relieve the Malians
of their primary responsibility, as they must play the
primary role in overcoming existing difficulties.

China supports the Malian Government in advancing
the political transition and restoring constitutional order
in an orderly manner. We welcome actions taken by
Mali to strengthen unity through dialogue and enhance
the inclusiveness of the Government. At the same time,
Mali’s political transition timetable must be in line with
realities on the ground.

Our approach to a settlement in Mali must be based
on the guiding principle of finding African solutions
to African problems. In that context, we support the
mediation efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union on the basis of the
principle of non-interference in internal affairs.
The situation in Mali is certainly a key factor for
regional security. We hope that the decisions made by
the countries of West Africa in 2020 and 2021 to step
up the fight against terrorism will be implemented. The
proposal of the African Union Commission to deploy
African standby forces in the Sahel region merits
detailed consideration.
We confirm our readiness to cooperate closely with
Mali and all international players in order to stabilize
the situation in the country and the region as a whole.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Wane for his briefing.
I also wish to thank the representatives of Kenya,
the Niger and France for briefing us on the Council’s
mission to Mali and the Niger at the previous meeting
(see S/PV.8892).
During its visit, the Security Council conducted
in-depth discussions with the Governments of the two
countries, which helped us to understand the situation
on the ground and the challenges they face, thereby
enabling the provision of better targeted help.
China appreciates what was done by the
Governments of the two countries to receive the
mission. For a long time, Mali has faced multiple
challenges. That necessitates bold efforts on the part of
all parties in Mali and the support of the international
10/14

China supports the continued mediation efforts
by the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States and encourages regional
organizations to strengthen communication with the
Malian authorities so as to increase mutual trust and
form synergies.
China is concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Mali. It is necessary to promote
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and strive to achieve more
results on issues such as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, the redeployment of military forces
and the northern development zone.
Efforts must be made in the political, economic,
legal and social spheres to help Mali restore State
authority throughout the country, reduce poverty and
remove the root causes of conflict. The international
community and partner countries should continue
to support Mali in the fight against terrorism, the
maintenance of stability and the protection of civilians.
Relevant countries should enhance their communication
and coordination with Mali in the reorganization and
drawdown of military deployments in Mali in order
to avoid a security vacuum that could give rise to
negative effects.
China commends the efforts of Special
Representative Wane to overcome difficulties and
actively fulfil his mandate. Since the beginning of the
year, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali has faced a significant
increase in security risks and has been frequently
attacked by terrorist forces. The loss of Egyptian
peacekeepers in the attack last month is distressing.
It is necessary to implement resolution 2518 (2020)
and, based on the situation on the ground, identify the
weak links in the security and safety of peacekeepers
and address the most challenging problems in that
21-31275

29/10/2021

The situation in Mali

respect. Active steps and targeted measures should be
taken to enhance situational awareness, protection of
camp sites, emergency response and rescue capabilities
in peacekeeping operations and address the threats
posed by improvised explosive devices.
China is ready to work with the Secretariat and the
Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers and will undertake active efforts
to that end.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I too would like to thank
Special Representative Wane for his briefing, not least
his insights and valuable support during our visit to
Bamako. We touched upon a lot of issues during the
trip, so I will keep my remarks brief.
Our main takeaway from the visit was the urgent
need for the current leaders to move in the direction of
constitutional Government and rule of law. The need
for political and institutional reforms is also apparent,
but in order to keep the foundations for peace, it will be
key to keep the transition process on track.
After two coups, the transitional leaders now
have a huge responsibility towards the Malian people.
Their political decisions will also be consequential for
the security situation of the broader region. Let me
highlight two issues: the democratic transition and the
protection of civilians, in particular children.
First, with regard to the democratic transition, the
only way to ensure legitimacy for key political reform
is to hand over power to a civilian-led Government. We
would strongly advise Mali’s transitional authorities
to never lose sight of that fact. That means putting
forward a credible plan for how and when elections will
take place. The Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union, the Council and Mali’s own
Transition Charter have all been clear on the issue.
In addition, the Algiers Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali was signed by all parties and
must be respected. We call on all actors to speed up and
scale up its implementation across the whole country.
Building on some positive examples, inclusivity must
also continue to be enhanced, including for women.
Secondly, concerning the protection of civilians,
Norway is alarmed by increasing attacks against
civilians and human rights violations and abuses. The
number of internally displaced people in Mali has
also quadrupled in two years. Thanks not least to the
strong leadership of the Niger, earlier today the Council

S/PV. 8893

adopted resolution 2601 (2021), on the protection of
education in conflict. Let me stress that close to half
a million children in Mali alone are affected by almost
1,600 schools remaining closed. Without schools,
children are more vulnerable to abuse and recruitment
and use by armed groups. We welcome the fact that
all signatory parties have now joined the Action Plan
Against the Recruitment and Use of Children in Armed
Conflict. We also commend Mali for signing the Safe
Schools Declaration. The Declaration was the topic of
an international conference in Abuja this week. Norway
stands ready to further support Mali’s efforts on those
important issues.
Finally, let me also express our support to the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) concerning Mali and its Panel of Experts.
It is important that its work, which is mandated by
the Security Council, be allowed to continue. We are
concerned about the delayed appointments of new
Experts and encourage a swift resolution of that issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the exemplary manner in which
Kenya, your country, is presiding over the Security
Council in the month of October, and to assure you of
Mali’s full support.
I would also like to highlight the recent visit by
members of the Council to Mali and the Niger. I would
like to thank members for taking the opportunity to visit
our countries and listen to us talk about the numerous
challenges faced by our countries and the Sahel.
Lastly, allow me to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his continued commitment to
peace and stability in Mali and the Sahel.
The Malian delegation takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Mali (S/2021/844).
I would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his
briefing. I also take full note of members’ observations
and concerns.
Just five days ago, members of the Council were
in Bamako and had the opportunity to meet and have
discussions with transitional authorities and all Malian

21-3127511/14

S/PV.8893

The situation in Mali

parties about the political, security, humanitarian and
human rights situation in the country. Members were
able to hear about the multiple challenges that Mali
continues to face, as well as expectations for the weeks
and months ahead.
As members know, repetition can be a useful
pedagogical tool. Therefore, I will attempt to reiterate
some of the major concerns and observations of the
Malian Government, not only concerning the report of
the Secretary-General but also with regard to the recent
Council visit to Bamako.
Logically, I shall begin with the security situation.
The President of the transitional Government, His
Excellency Colonel Assimi Goïta, and the Head
of Government, Choguel Kokalla Maïga, and all
Malian interlocutors whom Council members met
were unanimous in acknowledging that, regrettably,
the security situation in Mali is deteriorating day by
day, despite our efforts at the national level and the
considerable international military presence, in our
country since 2013.
Malians need security. They demand that their
Government take rigorous measures to protect them
against barbaric and indiscriminate attacks. That is
why the transitional authorities remain committed to
efforts to recruit, train, equip and build the operational
capacities of the Malian Defence and Security Forces,
as we firmly believe that it is our main responsibility,
and we will continue to do so.
However, I must also state that the exasperation of
my fellow Malians, caused by the deterioration of the
security situation, is also directed at Malian partners,
including MINUSMA, the French Operation Barkhane
and others. I underscore that we are not opposed to
international forces. On the contrary, Malians are
very grateful for the considerable human, material
and financial sacrifice made by the international
community to restore peace in our country.
Nonetheless, the Malian people demand that we
work together to allow the Malian State to restore its
authority across the national territory. It is a prerequisite
that will enable Malians to live in security and dignity,
in their cities and rural areas alike.
Through such dynamic cooperation, Malians
will be better able to understand the value-added of
MINUSMA and other international forces. In those
conditions, we can make a major contribution to
12/14

29/10/2021

improving the humanitarian and human rights situation
in Mali. Lastly, it is also the best strategy for containing
the threats and manifold security challenges and
preventing their spread to other countries of the region.
During the visit of Council members to Bamako,
my authorities explained in detail the disastrous
consequences of the deteriorating security situation in
Mali. Hundreds of thousands of my fellow nationals
have been forced to flee their areas of origin and seek
refuge in neighbouring countries, which I thank here,
or are internally displaced in large cities in Mali. The
destruction and occupation of school infrastructure,
which several speakers mentioned earlier today, have led
to the closure of 1,300 schools in northern and central
Mali and the dropout of thousands of children. More
than 9,000 teachers are also out of work. Basic social
services no longer provided in the areas concerned
and public administration has had to retreat for
security reasons.
The worrisome security situation exacerbates the
humanitarian crisis in Mali. In areas of the country
with the best agricultural and other productivity, the
working population is prevented by various criminal
groups from engaging in crop and livestock farming,
fishing and trade.
At the same time, Malians are hungry for political
and institutional reform that can guarantee lasting
institutional stability and a better future for our people.
That legitimate demand from our fellow countrymen
and women has received positive feedback from the
leaders of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), who, in October 2018, following
their information-gathering mission on the postelectoral crisis, recommended that in-depth reform be
undertaken in Mali.
Members can see that ECOWAS is of the view that
political and institutional reforms are vital. It is true
that the Government remains aware of the commitments
made and the stated time frames. However, transitional
authorities remain resolved to lay the foundations
for some reforms — not all of them, in particular
those that can guarantee inclusive, transparent and
credible elections. That is a necessary step if we want
to spare Mali new pre- or post-electoral crises, with
unpredictable consequences for lasting stability in the
country and for the stability of institutions. That is the
purpose of the Assises nationales de la refondation, the
national reform dialogue, to be held from November
21-31275

29/10/2021

The situation in Mali

to December 2021. The Panel members of the Assises
nationales, as well as those of the national organization
commission were appointed and instated on 26 October.
At the end of the Assises nationales, an electoral
timetable will be presented to ECOWAS. I note that
the Government is already working hard to ensure
the proper preparations for the upcoming elections,
particularly through the establishment of the single
electoral management body, whose members are
expected to be appointed in November; the revision of
the electoral rolls, which began on 1 October 2021 and
will continue until 31 December 2021; the special voter
registration operations, including in Mali’s diplomatic
and consular missions; and, above all, the adoption of
the electoral law by the National Transition Council
next month.
On the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation on Mali, which emerged from
the Algiers process, I would first like to recall that
the transitional Government is fully aware that the
sustainable stabilization of Mali also depends on the
Agreement’s implementation.
The forty-fifth session of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, held in Bamako on 5 October,
offered the Malian parties the opportunity to renew
their commitments to the completion of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In that
regard, I recall that out of 3,000 ex-combatants to be
reintegrated under the signatory movements and for
the sake of inclusiveness, 1,840 have already been
integrated into the reconstituted national army. The
Government intends to integrate the remaining 1,160
as soon as it receives the list of representatives of the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad.
In addition, the Government of Mali remains
willing to soon integrate other ex-combatants of the
signatory movements into the country’s armed and
security forces, civil service and the paramilitary
bodies, provided the funding is available within the
national budget. In addition, we have taken steps
to increase the representation of women in all the
mechanisms for the implementation of the agreement.
As of today, nine women are already on the Agreement
Monitoring Committee and three more are expected to
join them, bringing the number of women to 12.
With regard to the current situation in central
Mali, it is important to note that it is an extension
of the instability created in the northern regions.

S/PV. 8893

To address it, the Government is finalizing a new
integrated management strategy for central Mali. The
strategy includes political and security measures, in
particular the strengthening of the security apparatus
in the centre and planned dialogue with moderate
compatriots in order to remove them from radical,
often foreign, extremist groups. We believe that these
measures are likely to create a favourable environment
for the return of administrative and social services to
the abandoned areas.
On the question of increasing the number of
MINUSMA troops and police, I would like to stress
once again that there is no anti-MINUSMA sentiment
in Mali. However, there is a strong desire for peace
and a thirst for security among the Malian people,
who demand the effectiveness of the political and
military instruments put in place. Mali has become
an overmilitarized country, but it is paradoxically
very vulnerable to terrorism and other forms of
organized crime.
That is why the Government of Mali is requesting
intensive consultations, especially at the operational
level, to better appreciate the relevance of the MINUSMA
troop surge initiative. We want to better understand its
added value, its effectiveness and its coordination with
our own forces on the ground; and we call for more
joint actions and operations on the ground. I would like
to stress the need to adapt MINUSMA’s mandate to the
real security needs of Mali. In that respect, we call for
the deployment of rapid intervention brigades capable
of carrying out operations to protect the population
against extremist threats.
I would like to stress that the Government remains
firmly committed to respecting and ensuring respect for
human rights, both for national and international forces.
To that end, the Malian justice system is automatically
informed of all reported human rights violations. The
Court of Assizes in Bamako is currently holding a
session specifically devoted to cases of terrorism and
human rights violations is currently being held in
Bamako. Similarly, just a few months ago, the Mopti
Court of Assizes convicted 12 individuals implicated
in the attacks in Koulogon Peuhl, in the Bankass
cercle, which resulted in the death of 37 people. This
shows the Malian Government’s commitment, despite
the many challenges, to spare no effort in the fight
against impunity.

21-3127513/14

S/PV.8893

The situation in Mali

It is true, however, that the security situation on
the ground, the absence of competent public services
in certain localities and the lack of expertise in
certain areas do not allow for the rapid completion of
certain procedures. I therefore take this opportunity
to call for more support — in the form of training,
equipment, expertise and adequate funding — from
the international community in order to help Mali meet
these challenges.
The Government remains concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Mali due to growing insecurity. We are saddened to
see hundreds of thousands of Malians in refugee camps
in neighbouring countries or in camps for internally
displaced persons. This humanitarian situation could
be further aggravated by this year’s poor rainy season
and the growing insecurity in the central regions of the
country, which are the primary production areas. With
the support of bilateral and multilateral partners, the
Government is working to create the right conditions
for the safe and dignified return of our people and
to alleviate their suffering, including with a view to
ensuring their participation in the upcoming general
elections in Mali.
Speaking of the regional dimension, the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), with its
two pillars of security and development, constitutes a
comprehensive, adequate and sustainable response to
the multiple challenges of our common space.
That is why we reiterate our call to the Security
Council for a robust mandate — under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and for predictable
and sustainable financing of the Joint Force, including
through the United Nations, in order to ensure the full
operationalization of the Joint Force. We also support

14/14

29/10/2021

the proposal to create a United Nations support office
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Certain Council members made reference to and
lamented the departure of the ECOWAS representative
from Mali. I note that the Government was forced to take
that extreme measure against the individual in question
because his actions and behaviour were contrary to his
mandate. ECOWAS leadership had been informed of
the situation several months prior and the individual in
question was issued a warning by Malian authorities.
The Council will note that in its 27 October
communiqué, the ECOWAS Commission recognizes
that the recall of its representative had already begun
in order to put a stop to his actions. Unfortunately,
in the interim, the representative continued his
destabilizing actions. I would like to underscore that
these were individual, personal measures taken against
the relevant person and that we will continue to pursue
close cooperation with ECOWAS.
In conclusion, I would like to emphatically state that
the Government and the people of Mali reiterate their
appreciation and gratitude for the Security Council’s
tremendous contribution to ongoing stabilization
efforts in my country and beyond, in the Sahel region.
I would also like to reiterate the gratitude of the
Government and the people of Mali to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to all
regional and international organizations and to all the
troop-contributing countries for their sacrifices in
order to reach a definitive and lasting solution to the
Malian crisis.
I pay tribute to the memory of all the victims
of this crisis — civilian and military, foreign and
Malian — who have fallen on the field of battle in Mali.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

21-31275
