VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Chairmen with regard to exchange of information among
their respective bodies, co-ordination of guidelines for the
submission of the reports of States parties, advisory serv­
ices and assistance for States parties to the various conven­
tions on human rights, and other matters; 195
3. Expresses the view that the presence at the above­
mentioned meeting of the Chairmen of all bodies con­
cerned with reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations conventions on human rights would have
further contributed to the review of problems experienced
in the functioning of reporting procedures;
4. Acknowledges that common problems have arisen in
the functioning of the reporting procedures, thus indicating
the necessity of considering them within the overall frame­
work of reporting obligations of States parties under the
various conventions on human rights;
5. Decides to keep under consideration the problems
that have arisen from the coexistence of several different
reporting systems, in particular the proliferation of report­
ing obligations under the various instruments, as well as
the serious delays which have occurred in the submission
of reports;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, to that effect, to
submit to the General Assembly at its fortieth session a
report containing:
(a) Updated information on the general situation of
the submission of reports of States parties to all conven­
tions which are already in force, thus enabling the General
Assembly to take an overview of the fulfilment of all
reporting obligations and to consider how to achieve an
improvement, particularly in the interest of States parties
with limited technical and administrative resources;
(b) A consolidated text of the guidelines of the various
bodies entrusted with the consideration of the reports of
States parties on the implementation of all United Nations
conventions on human rights;
7. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to con­
sider, in the context of its standing item concerning advi­
sory services in the field of human rights, the suggestions
made by the Chairmen;
8. Decides to consider the question of reporting obliga­
tions of States parties to United Nations conventions on
human rights in the light of the report of the Secretary­
General to be submitted in accordance with paragraph 6
above and to consider also the eventual convening of
another meeting of the Chairmen of the bodies entrusted
with the consideration of the reports of States parties;
9. Invites the bodies concerned to give particular atten­
tion to the present resolution when they next meet;
10. Decides to consider the question at its fortieth ses­
sion, in the light of the report of the Secretary-General to
be submitted in accordance with paragraph 6 above.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/139. Second International Conference on Assist­
ance to Refugees in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/197 of 18 December 1982
and 38/120 of 16 December 1983,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Second International Conference on Assistance to
I 95 Ibid., sect. V.
196 A/39/402 and Add. I and 2.

227

Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July
1984, 196
Welcoming the results obtained by the Conference, in
particular the adoption of the Declaration and Programme
of Action, 197 which provide the international community
with a collective strategy to achieve lasting solutions,
Gravely concerned at the persistent and serious problem
of large numbers of refugees on the African continent,
A ware of the economic and social burden borne by
African countries of asylum on account of the presence of
these refugees and its consequences for their national
development and of the heavy sacrifices made by them,
despite their limited resources,
Recognizing the universal collective responsibility of
sharing the urgent and overwhelming burden of the prob­
lem of African refugees through effective mobilization of
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of the
refugees and to strengthen the capacity of countries of asy­
lum to provide adequately for the refugees while they
remain in those countries, as well as to assist the countries
of origin in the rehabilitation of voluntary returnees,
Emphasizing the vital importance of the complementar­
ity between refugee aid and development assistance,
Noting with satisfaction the wide participation of Mem­
ber States, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, and the commitments
and pledges made at the Conference,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the Organ­
ization of African Unity, the United Nations High Com­
missioner for Refugees and the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme for their com­
mendable effort in organizing the Second International
Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa;
2. Endorses the Declaration and Programme of Action
of the Second International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa; 197
3. Expresses its deep appreciation to African host
countries, which are the biggest donors, for their generous
contribution and continuous efforts to alleviate the plight
of refugees in spite of their critical economic situation;
4. Expresses once again its appreciation to the interna­
tional community and, in particular, to all donor
countries, specialized agencies, regional organizations and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
for their support and initial response to the projects sub­
mitted to the Conference;
5. Urges the international community to maintain the
momentum created by the Conference and to translate
into reality the projects submitted as well as the principles
in the Declaration and Programme of Action agreed upon
by the Conference;
6. Emphasizes the vital importance of the complemen­
tarity of refugee aid and development assistance and of
achieving durable solutions to the problems of refugees in
Africa through the voluntary repatriation or local integra­
tion of refugees and the necessity of providing assistance
for the strengthening of the social and economic infra­
structures of African countries receiving refugees and
returnees;
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to keep the situation of refugees
in Africa under constant review with a view to providing
197 A/39/402. annex.

228

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

adequate humanitarian assistance for relief and expanded
durable solutions;
8. Calls upon all pertinent organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as relevant regional, intergovern­
mental and non-governmental organizations, to lend their
support, within their respective spheres of competence, to
the realization of the goals of the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the Declaration and Programme of Action, to monitor, in
consultation and close co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity and, in particular, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme, the follow-up to the
Conference;
I 0. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Eco­
nomic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/140. Report of the United Nations High Com­
missioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office,1 98 as well as the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the High Commissioner on the work
of its thirty-fifth session, 199 and having heard the state­
ment made by the High Commissioner on 12 November
1984, 200
Recalling its resolution 38/121 of 16 December 1983,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner,
Deeply concerned that refugees and displaced persons of
concern to the High Commissioner continue to face dis­
tressingly serious problems in all parts of the world,
Stressing the fundamental importance of the High Com­
missioner's international protection function and the need
for States to co-operate with the High Commissioner in
the exercise of this essential function, particularly in view
of the continued and persistent violations of the basic
rights of persons of concern to his Office,
Welcoming the additional accessions by States to the
1951 Convention201 and the 1967 Protocol2°2 relating to
the Status of Refugees,
Particularly concerned that in various regions the safety
and welfare of refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be
seriously jeopardized on account of military or armed
attacks, acts of piracy and other forms of brutality,
Emphasizing that voluntary repatriation or return
remains the most desirable solution to problems of refu­
gees and displaced persons of concern to the High
Commissioner,
Emphasizing also the importance for the international
community to continue to provide assistance and resettle­
ment opportunities for those refugees for whom no other
durable solution may be in sight, particularly in regions
198 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 12 (A/39/12).
199 Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/39/12/Add.l).
200 Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Third Committee, 36th meeting, paras.
1-12.

where countries of first refuge continue generously to
receive refugees arriving by land or by sea,
Noting with deep appreciation the valvable support
extended by many Governments to the High Commis­
sioner in carrying out his humanitarian task,
Noting with satisfaction the positive results achieved by
the Second International Conference on Assistance to Ref­
ugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984,203
as part of a continuing process of increasing international
interest in the situation of refugees in Africa and support
for those refugees,
Welcoming the progress made by the High Commis­
sioner in improving the management of his Office and urg­
ing him to pursue his efforts in this direction in line with
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and deci­
sions of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
High Commissioner,
Taking note of the decision of the Executive Committee
on the inclusion of Arabic, Chinese and Spanish among
the official languages of the Executive Committee,204
I. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for the dedicated and efficient
manner in which they continue to discharge their
responsibilities;
2. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental nature of the
High Commissioner's function to provide international
protection and the need for Governments to continue to
co-operate fully with his Office in order to facilitate the
effective exercise of this function, in particular by acceding
to and fully implementing the relevant international and
regional refugee instruments and by scrupulously observ­
ing the principles of asylum and non-refoulement;
3. Condemns all violations of the rights and safety of
refugees and asylum-seekers, in particular those perpetrat­
ed through military or armed attacks against refugee
camps and settlements and other forms of brutality and by
the failure to rescue asylum-seekers in distress at sea;
4. Urges all States, in co-operation with the Office of
the High Commissioner and other competent interna­
tional bodies, to take all measures necessary to ensure the
safety of refugees and asylum-seekers;
5. Also urges all States to support the High Commis­
sioner in discharging his responsibility to pursue durable
solutions to the problem of refugees and displaced persons
of concern to his Office, primarily through voluntary
repatriation or return, including assistance to returnees, as
appropriate, or, wherever appropriate, through integration
in countries of asylum or resettlement in third countries;
6. Expresses deep appreciation for the valuable mate­
rial and humanitarian response of many receiving
countries, in particular those developing countries that,
despite serious economic crises and limited resources, con­
tinue to admit, on a permanent or temporary basis, large
numbers of refugees and displaced persons of concern to
the Office of the High Commissioner, and, reaffirming the
principle of international solidarity and burden-sharing,
urges the international community to assist receiving
countries in order to enable them to cope with the addi­
tional burden created by their presence;
7. Notes with satisfaction the initiatives taken by the
High Commissioner in developing the concept of develop­
ment-oriented assistance to refugees and returnees,
201 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
202 Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
203 See A/39/402 and Add. I and 2.

204 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty- ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 12A (A/39 I 2/ Add. I), para. 185.
