Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2840 (XXVI) of 18 Deeember 1971 and 3020
(XXVII) of 18 December 1972,
Taking into account the special need ~or internati~nal
action in order to ensure the prosecution and pumshment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity,
Having considered the draft principles of inte.I"?ational co-operation in the dete~tion, arrest, e~trad1t1on
and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, 24
Declares that the United Nations, in pursuance of
the principles and purposes set forth in the Charter
concerning the promotion of co-operation between peoples and the maintenance of international peace and
security, proclaims the following principles of int~r?ational co-operation in the detection, arrest, extrad1t1on
and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and
crimes against humanity:
1. War crimes and crimes against humanity,
wherever they ,are committed, shall be subject to
investigation and the persons against whom t!tere
is evidence that they have committed such cnmes
shall be subject to tracing, arrest, trial and, if found
guilty, to punishment.
2. Every State has the right to try its own nationals for war crimes or crimes against humanity.
3. States shall co-operate with each other on a
bilateral and multilateral basis with a view to halting and preventing war crimes and crimes against
humanity, and shall take the domestic and international measures necessary for that purpose.
4. States shaH assist each other in detecting,
arresting and bringing to trial peTsons suspected of
having committed such crimes and, if they are found
guilty, in punishing them.
5. Persons against whom there is evidence that
they have committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity shall be subject to trial and, if found
guilty, to punishment, as a general rule in the countries in which they committed those crimes. In that
connexion, States shall co-operate on questions of
extrnditing such persons.
6. States shaU co-operate with each other in
the collection of information and evidence which
would he,lp to bring to trial the persons indicated in
paragraph 5 above and shall exchange such information.
7. In accordance with article 1 of the Declaration on Territorial Asylum of 14 December 1967, 25
States shall not grant asylum to any person with
respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed a crime against
peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity.
8. States shall not take any legislative or other
measures which may be prejudicial to the international obligations they have assumed in regard to the
detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of
persons guilty of war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
9. In co-operating with a view to the detection,
arrest and extradition of persons against whom there
is evidence that they have committed war crimes
and crimes against humanity and, if found guilty,
their punishment, States shall act in conformity with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
24See A/9136.
25 Resolution 2312 (XXII).

79

and of the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. 26
2187th plenary meeting
3 December 1973

3134 (XXVIII). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its ,resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 on the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, the General Assembly has emphasized, in the programme for the Deoade,
the need for universal ratification of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 27 as well as the need for giving full
effect to all the provisions of the Convention,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the fourth
year of its activities, 28 submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Noting the decisions of the Committee contained
in chapter X of its report,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing participation of StaLeS Parties to the International <;onve_ntion on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination in submitting their reports to the
Committee and by sending representatives to the Committee when it considers their reports;
3. Endorses the Committee's request in its decision
2 (VIII) of 21 August 1973 concerning specific information to be made available to the Committee by
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples under article 15 of the
Convention, on Trust Territories, Non-Self-Governing
Territories ,and al! other Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 applies, and draws to the attention of these organs the conclusions and recommendations set out in
the report of the Committee20 concerning information
submitted by them;
4. Takes note of the Committee's decision 4 (VII)
of 25 April 1973 relating to information supplied by
the Syrian Arab Republic and, in this connexwn, recalls its endorsement of thi.: Committee's decision 4
(IV) of 30 August 1971 in ~eetion llJ of (icneral
Assembly resolution '2784 ('(XVI) of 6 Decc.·rnbcr
1971; 5. Endorses the request of the Committee cont.."ncJ
in its decision 5 (VII) of 4 May 1973 ccnccmlng th(;
holding of one of its sessions in 1974 at Geri !V'a;
26 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.
~. Rcsnlution 2106 A (XX), annex.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, T,venty-e: 6 i11/i
Session, Supplement No. I 8 (A/9018).
~9/bid.,pnr, 115.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

80

6. Expresses the ·conviction that the Committee, by
fulfilling its Tesponsibilities under the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, will contribute to the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3057 (XXVIII) relating to the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination;
7. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention as soon as possible.

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3135 (XXVIII). Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 3060 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 relating to the observance of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the General Assembly invited States
which had not yet done so to ratify, inter alia, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 30
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 31
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports conecrning the state of ratifications of the Convention in
accorlance with its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21
December 1965.
2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3136 (XXVIII). Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2841 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1237 (XLII) of 6 June 1967,
Taking note of the deliberations of the General
Assembly, since its twentieth session, on the item entitkd "Creation of the post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights",
Taking note also of the note by the Secretary-Gen:.:ral on the question,:;z
Bearing in mind the Proclamation of Teheran of 13
J\fay l 968. 3 ~
Having regard to the existing machinery and procedmcc:, within the United Nations system for the implement1tion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
to the J)rncecdings of th-: various organs and bodies of
:i(,

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

the United Nations and to the various modalities suggested in the course of the deliberations of those bodies
for the more effective implementation of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing the hope that the International Covenants
on Human Rights: 14 will enter into force in the near
future,
I. Reaffirms its conviction that further measures
should be considered to ensure universal realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all with:mt
distinction of any kind;
2. Decides to keep under review the consideration
of alternative approaches and ways and means within
the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Decides accordingly to include in the provisional
agenda of its thirtieth session an item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the
United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3137 (XXVIII). Question of the elderly and
the aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2842 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 on the question of the elderly and the
aged,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1751
(LIV) of 16 May 1973 on the aged and social security,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which emphasizes respect for the dignity and
worth of the human person, especially article 25 thereof,
Bearing in mind also that the protection of the rights
and welfare of the aged is one of the main goals of
the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, 311
Recognizing the growing interest for developing and
developed societies alike in the fuller participation of
the elderly in the mainstream of national societies,
Noting that the status of the elderly in society varies
from country to country,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and the aged:10 and
the recommendations contained therein,
Concerned about the growing magnitude of the problems of the aged accompanied by changes in the age
structure of societies and the consequent increase in the
proportion of the older sector of populations in a
growing number of countries,
1. Expresses appreciation for the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and
the aged::o and the note prepared by the World Health
Organization on the health concerns of the elderly and
the aged;n
2. Draws the attention of Member States affected
by the problem to the need for short-term and longterm policies and programmes for the elderly;

·11 A-"l\39.

:c A 1 9074.

Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.
:13 Final

34 Resolution 2200 A

35 Resolution 2542

(XXI), annex.
(XXIV).

so A/9126 and Corr.I.
87 Ibid., annex Ill.
