c-

-

P-P-

U.Xl?E-D NATIONS

URITY
FFICIAL
THIRTY-SECOND

CO

CIL

RECOR
YEAR

nd
MEETING: 9 DECEMBER 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2052) .........................
Expression of thanks to the retiring President ...................

.

.

.

.

1
1

,....

1

The question of South Africa:
of the
Letter dated 5 December 1977 from the Permanent Representative to
the
United Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations addressed
I
.
.
..
President of the Security Council (S/ 12470) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

.................................

Page
.. . .

SIPV.2052

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

20’52ND MEETING
‘Held in New York on Friday, 9 December 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
Presi&nt:

Mr. Radha Krishna RAMPHUL (Mauritius).

The question of SouthAfrica:
Letter dated 5 December1977 from the Permanent
Representativeof the UnitedRepublic of Cameroon to
the United Nationsaddressed
to the Pwident of the
Security Council(S/12470)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

4. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform the members
that a letter hasbeenreceivedfrom the representativeof
the United Republicof Cameroonin whichhe requeststo
be invited to participatein the discussion
of the question
on the agenda.In accordancewith the usualpractice, I
piopose, with, the consentof the Council, to invite that
representativeto participatein the discussion,
without the
right to vote, in conformity with the provisionsof the
Charterandrule 37 of the provisionalrulesof procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2052)
1, Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 December 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Cameroon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 12470)

5. In iiew of the limited numberof pi&esavailableat the
Council table I invite tke representativeof the United
Republicof Cameroonto take the placereservedfor him at
the sideof the Councilchamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

At the inviiaiion of the President,Mr. Oyono (United
Republic of Cameroon)took theplacereservedfor him at
the sideof the Councilchamber.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: It gives me the greatest pleasure, as I
preside over the first meeting of the Security Council for
the month of Deceniber, to express to Ambassador Mansur
Kikhia of the Libyan Arab’ Jamahiriya the deep appreciation felt by all the niembers of the Council for his services
as President of the Council during the month of November.
Both during the formal meetings and in the course of the
Council’s consultations, Ambassador Kikhia demonstrated
qualities of patience, courtesy, skill and wisdom. I am
happy to be in a position to pay him a well-deserved tribute
for his dedication and impartial leadership.

6. The PRESIDENT: I wishto inform themembersof the
Council that 1 have receiveda letter dated 9 December
1977 from the representatives
of Benin,the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriyaand Mauritiuswhichreadsasfollows:
“We, the undersigned
members
of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that during its current
meetingsdevoted to considerationof ‘The questionof
South Africa’, the Security Councilextend aninvitation,
under rule 39 of its provisionalrulesof procedure,to
Mr. M. J. Makatini of the African NationalCongress.“l

2. I cannot fail also to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Rikhi Jaipal of India, who served as President
of the Council during the month of October.

7. If I hear no objection, I shalltakeit that the Council
agreesto this requestand,at the appropriatemomentin the
Council’sproceedings,I shallinvite Mr. Makatini to make
his statement.

3. The active and fruitful results of the patient diplomatic
skill of my two predecessors were of the greatest significance in leading to the Council’s adoption of resolution
418 (1977), which is being followed up at today’smeeting.
Their outstanding exampleof the applicationof the highest
standardsin the conduct of the presidencyof the Council
will be a model I shall do my utmost to emulate.

It wassodecided.
8. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today in
responseto the requestmadeon behalf of the group of
African Statesin a letter dated5 December1977 from the
representativeof the United Republicof Cameroonacting
in his capacity asChairmanof the African Group for the
monthof December[S/12470/,

Adoption of the agenda

1 Subsequently circulated as document S/12480.

Theagendawasadopted.
1

9. Members of the Council have before them a draft
resolution sponsored by Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and Mauritius [S/124 77j.

18. There can be no question that, in the aftermath of the
electoral farce that has just been enacted in South Africa
and that has strengthened the contempt, arrogance and
cynicism of Vorster through the massive display of blind
confidence given him by the white minority, the apartheid
regime will become even more brutal vis-&is the nonwhites and the neighbouring independent African States. In
this new context, international pressure on the regime must
similarly be more determined and more tenacious.

10. The first speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Cameroon who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the African Group for the
month of December. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
11. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation j?om French): Mr. President, first of all I should
like to extend to you my warmest and most fraternal
congratulations on your accession to the high office of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Knowing and appreciating your qualities as a
man and as a diplomat, we are sure that you will conduct
our work to a successful conclusion.

19. The draft resolution that is going to be presented to
the Council on behalf of the African countries by the
African members of the Council, and that is an extension of
resolution 4 18 (1977) is thus intended to set up machinery
to provide the Secretary-General with an additional means
of discharging the difficult and delicate mission entrusted
to him under paragraph 6 of that resolution.
20. In requesting the Council to set up such a body, it is
no part of our intention to cast doubt either on the good
faith or on the political will of certain of its members
regarding the implementation of the provisions of resolution 418 (1977), which, for that matter, they adopted
unanimously. In so doing, what we want is, quite simply, to
create, in accordance with rule 28 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Council and of the practice already
established in the Council, a subsidiary ‘body of the
Council: a Committee, consisting of all the members of the
Council, within the framework of resolution 418 (1977),
whose role will be to seek from all States further
information regarding the action taken by them concerning
the effective implementation of the provisions laid down in
resolution 418 (1977), to study ways and means by which
the mandatory arms embargo could be made more effective
against South Africa and to make recommendations to the
Council, and to examine the report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General on the progress of the implementation of
resolution 418 (1977).

12. I take this opportunity to pay a well-deserved tribute
also to your predecessor, Ambassador Kikhia of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, who enjoys our respect, confidence and
friendship for the way in which he directed the Council’s
proceedings last month.
13. Finally, I take pleasure in expressing my deep gratitude to members of the Council for having been so kind as
to agree to meet at my request, made in my capacity as
Chairman of the African Group for the month of December, to consider ways and means of making the application
of resolution 418 (1977) far more effective.
14. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council,
on 4 November last, adopted resolution 418 (1977), in
which it determined, having regard to the policies and acts
of the South African Government, that South Africa’s
acquisition of arms and reIated matkiel constituted a threat
to international peace and security.
15. The African countries welcomed that decision, while
expressing their regret that it came so late, inasmuch as
South Africa has had for years now, thanks to the
co-operation of the Western countries, an impressive military arsenal and the means to manufacture under licence all
the types of arms that it needs.

21. We hope that the adoption of this draft will not
present difficulties for members of the Council and that it
will be unanimous.
22. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretatiorz from French):
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to extend to you our
warm
and brotherly congratulations on your accession to
the presidency of the Council for the month of December.
It is with genuine pleasure that we see you assuming the
responsibilities of that important post at a time when the
Council is considering once again what is happening in
South Africa. Your competence, ability and flexibility have
made you one of the most esteemed and influential African
diplomats. The battle we have waged at your side has
cemented our solidarity and helped to strengthen our unity
of action. You have contributed very often, by your
diplomatic wisdom, to the formulation of the strategy for
our action. We have found you at our side at our most
difficult moments, so I feel bound to express special
gratitude to you. I can assure you that Benin will also
continue to give you its militant support outside the
Council.

16. All in all, in our opinion the virtue of this resolution
lies in the fact that it has at last alerted public opinion in
the Western countries to the gravity of the situation in
southern Africa and to the real threat to international peace
and security that is growing ever more serious in that_ part
‘.
of the world.
17. Furthermore, that decision opens up new prospects
for the expansion and strengthening of measures of more
substantial and far more energetic external pressure against
the racist minority at Pretoria. We welcome the statements
made and the measures taken by certain States to prohibit
the actual delivery of arms that had previously been
ordered by South Africa. It is to be hoped that such
initiatives will continue and that they will extend to the
establishment of a total embargo that will include strategic
products such as petroleum, without
which the war
machine of the white racist minority would be ineffectual
against the black people of South Africa.

23. Allow me to say a few words about the relations
between our two countries. As you know, t.hey are good,
2

and we are pleased by the strengthening of these relations
within the fremcwork
of the African unity which is so
valuable for the triumph of our common cause.

work of the Committee consists furthermore, and above all,
of seeking further information regarding the action taken
by States concerning the implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolution 418 (1977).

24. You have succeeded Ambassador Kikhia, a comrade jn
arms, an indefatigable militant, who, during the month of
November, admirably directed the work of the Council. We
wish to th3nk hill1 OIlCe 3&h for the total support he has
always given to our delegation.

31. More precisely, regarding the information referred to
in subparagraph c of paragraph 1, obviously the Committee
must on no account neglect other reliable sources of
information, particularly if this comes from individuals or
organizations rather than States. Information on the implementation of the resolution is important for measuring the
degree of sincerity of the States which have made statements of intent in this regard. The search for this
information from all reliable sources is a vital part of the
work of the Committee as is the assistance to be provided
by the Secretary-General.

25. To turn to the question before the Counc& we have
just heard the Chairman of the African Group give the
reasons and serious misgivings which led to our joint
request for the establishment of a Council Committee to be
charged with the implementation of resolution 418 (l977),
which decreed a mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa.

32. The importance of this information is reflected again
in operative paragraph 2, which calls upon all States to
co-operate sincerely with the Committee in the provision of
such information.

26. It will be recalled that, on 4November /Z&$&h
meeting], after the adoption of resolution 418 (1977), my
delegation, on behalf of the other African States on the
Council, expressly requested the establishment of an
appropriate body to follow up the implementation of that
resolution which, as members of the Council will recall with
me, is limited in scope, since it does not cover all means of
supplying weapons and facilities to the Vorster r6gime.

33. It is clear that if the Committee is to function
efficiently, it will need the technical support of an
appropriate unit or office of the Secretariat. It is another
legitimate desire of Africa to have the Committee assisted
by a permanent team of staff and experts sufficient in
number and adequate in competence. Operative paragraph 3 gives complete latitude to the Secretary-General,
who has our full confidence, to set up this unit within the
Secretariat as soon as possible by seeking the services of
available staff and recruiting new personnel. This paragraph
takes fully into account the difficulties which this new task
will cause the Secretariat asregards recruitment of staff.

27. At this stage, I shall confine myself to introducing to
the Council the draft resolution in document S/12477,
which is sponsored by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius and my country, the People’s Republic of Benin.
This draft, which has been the subject of laborious, difficult
and protracted informal meetings of the Council and
numerous consultations, is a compromise text which is now
accepted by all the members. We should like to thank all
concerned for the co-operation that made it possible to
arrive at this agreement. In particular, we wish to express
our gratitude to our non-aligned and other friends on the
Council for their militant support of the African cause.

34. These are the main preoccupations of Africa concerning the guarantees for the adequate and complete implementation of resolution 418 (1977). I believe that this
compromise text will be adopted unanimously and I
propose that the procedure followed for the adoption of
resolution 418 (1977) should be applied in this case also.

28. Africa’s aim is to secure all necessary guarantees that
resolution 4 18 (1977) will be effectively implemented. The
compromise draft before us is in a very simple form and
there can be no confusion about the tasks of the Corn.,
mittec.

35. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Benin
for his statement, for the kind words he has addressed to
me and for the reference he has made to the good relations
existing between Benin and Mauritius.

29. The first and second paragraphs of the preamble are
closely linked to resolution 418 (1977). The sponsors wish
thereby to keep close the concern of Africa to employ aI1
possible means to ensure the effective implementation of
the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa.
30. Operative paragraphI, which establishesthe Committee, is clearly within the legalconcept of rule 28 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council. This means
that the establishmentof this Committeeis no mereflight
of fancy, but is in accordance with United Nations
procedures.The tasks of the Committeeareclearly defined
in subparagraphs
a, b and c of this paragraph.Thesetasks
are to examine and closely follow the progressachievedin
implementing resolution 418 (l977), to study ways and
meansby which the mandatory embargomay be made
more effective against South Africa and to make recommendationsto the Security Council in this connexion.The

3

36. I should like to inform members of the Council that a
letter has been received from the representative of Saudi
Arabia, in which he requeststo be invited to participatein
the discussion,
in conformity with the provisionsof Article
31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisionalrulesof
procedure.I therefore propose,with the consentof the
Counciland in accordance
with the usualpractice,to invite
the representativeof Saudi Arabia to participate in the
discussion,
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took the placereservedfor him at the sideof the
Councilchamber.
37. The PRESIDENT:1 invite the representativeof Saudi
Arabia to take a placeat the Counciltableandto makehis
statement.

38. Mr. BARGODY (Saudi Arabia): I thank you,
Mr. President, and members of the Council, for allowing me
to make a few remarks on the draft resolution on which
you will soon vote. I feel impelled to make these remarks in
view of my. humble experience of an arms embargo.
39. Parenthetically, Sir, I was remiss not to say how
heartened I am to seeyou in the Chair but;considering you
as a brother, I thought it would be embarrassing to laud
you very much. Indeed, since you first came here,you. have
acted like a brother; once in a while we have had a few tiffs,
but this happens between brothers.
40. I think this draft resolution is very laudable. A
Committee would be formed of all members of the Council
to monitor the situation to find out whether any State,
whether a Member or not, is smuggling arms. I am sure al1
States agree on’what is happening in South Africa and will
prevent any dribble of arms from reaching South Africa. I
have faith, at least in the higher echelons of Governments.
Having drawn this to the attention of the Council, 1 should
like to refer to my humble experience.

44. These things actually happened. I received the infor.
mation when I appeared on the platform for an appeal to
raise money for the Ethiopian Red Cross and the Inter.
national Red Cross. I appeared, not knowing that Sylvia
Pankhurst would be one of the speakers. Afterwards I was
introduced to her and she told me about the policy of the
British Conservative Government. It was then that I was
tapped on the shoulder by two Scotland Yard men, asking
me about my passport. That was at Tottenham Court Road
station. The hall where I spoke on behalf of the Ethiopians
was near the British Museum in Bloomsbury. Sylvia
Pankhurst was a Socialist. I do not have to tell the Council
who she was: everyone knows how much work she and her
mother and sister did for women’s franchise in England and
the great impact that had on the women’s movement.
45. It might seem that my statement is too personal, and
one might question how it applies to this draft resolution in
front of us. It has a great bearing on this draft resolution,
because at that time many of us were also fighting-not
with arms but by activism-the mandates in the Middle East
and we were conscious that, whether through Syria or, to a
lesser extent, through Iraq-because then the British had a
better grip on Iraq than the French had on Syria-a great
many arms were being smuggled to the Middle East under
the very noses of the French and the British.

41. When I was in Europe between 1929 and 1939, that
was a critical period in Europe, and an African State,
Ethiopia, was involved in a war. I met the late Emperor of
Ethiopia-may his soul rest in peace-when he wasa fugitive
in England. It so happened that I was a. friend of the
Ambassador of Ethiopia and his sons in London. During
that war, when Mussolini invaded Ethiopia, the Ethiopians
had very few arms to repel the invasion, and this was
communicated to me personally by my good friend the late
Ambassador of Ethiopia, Mr. Martin. He wasan Ethiopian,
but during the war that was waged against Ethiopia in
1898, he was found ,by British missionaries’in the, streets of
Addis Ababa’ and taken by them to India, and they gave
him the name of.Martin. His two sonswere lost in the war.
He sent them and I sawthem off at Victoria Station. They
were’ young men and they learned to be pilots and then
they were shot down by Mussolini’s forces. So,1 felt very
deeply about this matter and my friend the Ambassador of
Ethiopia asked if, I could be of any help in procuring, arms
for them. I said I was not in the arms business but that I
would be on the look-out.

46. Then I got interested in those upheavals and in those
matters and, as I mentioned before /2037th meeting], I
was fortunate to have read in those days-in the 1930s-the
book called in French Les marchands de mort, of which Sir
Basil Zaharoff was the hero, so to speak, or the central
figure.
47. I am sure there will be a lot of smuggling-more than
we envisage-even with the setting up a Committee to
monitor and intervene ,with the various States that produce
arms or in which there are arms merchants or smugglers. By
the same token, I might mention the narcotics business and,
here too, I want to be a little personal.
48. In Paris, at the Palais de Chaillot, when we succeeded
in ,drawing up the Convention on narcotics-I happened to
be a participant-we did some research and found that the
higher echelons of Governments were all against narcotics
but that there was collusion-and I think there still
is-between the so-called lower echelons of Governments
and the narcotics manufacturers, without the knowledge of
the Government leaders. And the smuggling that took place
in those days was petty compared to what is going on now.

42. It so happened that the Greek Government wanted to
get rid of some arms that were perhaps outmoded and they
were looking for customers. This I had learned in the City
of London and I passed on the information to the
Ethiopian Ambassador, Of course, my good friend
Mr. Richard will not take issue with what I am going to say
because it was a Conservative Government that wasthen in
power. I was told by Scotland Yard that, as I was a
resident-because I had a business there-but had no licence
or permission to deal in arms, I therefore had better not do
sd, otherwise, they gave me to understand, 1 would be
persona non grata. Anyway, we managed to send some of
the arms through Europe, but they came too late.

49. In order not to exacerbate matters, I will not name the
sources from which narcotics were then-and now still, I
believe-smuggled from one country to another. However,
here at the United Nations, we are still seized of this: the
United Nations is prevailing on certain cultivators of opium
to ceasegrowing it, although opium is an organic product, a
plant, not like heroin, which is synthesized in Europe. In
the Third Committee, we drew attention to the fact that
opium was a mere bagatelle compared to cocaine and the
other allied synthetic substances that have been manufactured in Europe and smuggled by certain gangsters or
whatever you want to call them in collusion with certain
members of the police or with municipal authorities of

43. At the same time, Mr. Chamberlain wrote to his
sister-in-law who was living in Rome to tell her-and this
surprised me-that the British would close their eyes
provided Mussolini did not aIly himself with Hitler.
_. .

4

.,I
I

whatever city it was where those nefarious narcotics were
being manufactured and smuggled.

that I shall not be misunderstood as on another occasion
when you, Mr. President, misunderstood me and I had to
reply and explain to you, I do not want to cite examples
from my humble experience of what happened in my own
region. Most of the blacks in South Africa are workers; they
constitute the proletariat. Some of them may have risen to
management posts, but, as our American friends say, they
have not yet developed the know-how to run industries, not
becausethey are incapable, but becausethey have not had a
chance to do so.

50. What is the bearing of this on the subject? Are we
going to have another kind of proliferation whereby all
those here enlist others to try to monitor the situation?
Yet, what is the alternative? That is why I say this draft
resolution is commendable, laudable. But there is one point
which may have been thought of but which no one has
aired in the Council: have we taken into account the fact
that, if the monitoring is successful, South Africa will fmd
itself compelled to import scientists from wherever it can,
scientists who are perhaps specialists in devising weapons of
mass destruction? That would be rather dangerous. They
will do so anyway, one might say.

57. I am not saying this is so, but let us assume that the
South African whites, like the proverbial Bedouin, would
fold their tents and steal out into the night overnight. Do
representatives realize that there would be a lot of trouble
when many of those workers who run the mines and
industries-the real proletariat-were out of jobs and that
they would overthrow their black leaders? What, then, is
the alternative?

51. I will not say we should not take into account the
laudable effect that this draft resolution will have when
adopted, but I do not think it will solve the problem, Here,
even an economic boycott would not have been valid, for
the simple reason that smuggling couId be intensified and,
as I said in a previous statement in the Council, there are
many pressure groups inside the industrialized countries
that will make sure that their Governments do not make
them suffer by not exporting to or importing from South
Africa the particular commodities or manufactured goods
in which they deal.

58. That is an analysis of what might happen, and believe
me, neither Saudi Arabia nor I have an axe to grind. I
consider myself a member of the United Nations and my
loyalty to it should transcend even my loyalty to the
country I represent, becauseafter all our aim is to become
one family. The idea is Utopian at this stage,but eventually
we either have to become one family in the world or human
beings will bring about their own end,

52. The reason I asked to be alIowed to speak is not to be
cynical, but to draw your attention to the fact that an
economic boycott would be equally ineffective. You might
then ask “What shall we do: all remain with arms folded
and do nothing? ” Nol This is a step in the right direction,
but it will not solve the problem.

59. Therefore these factors that I have adduced should be
taken into consideration. First, the Committee to be
appointed should make sure that no scientists or specialists
will be covertly imported, Scientists have skills but unfortunately they may not be of such moral stature as to resist big
salaries for trying to invent arms. Secondly, the Committee
must make sure that it keeps its eyes open for smuggling,
and I say smuggling cannot be controlled no matter how
much people patrol the oceans. I have cited narcotics and
the smuggling of arms in the 1930s into many countries. I
need not mention which countries now because some of
them may be represented here in this chamber.,

53. Then, without deviating from the arms embargo
matter, I want, as I mentioned to some of my African
brothers who are fighting for their independence in
southern Africa, to say this: let us assume-and this is only
an assumption-that the white people there are cornered.
And here the ancient Arabic proverb applies: “You had
better not corner a cat, because then it will act like a tiger”.
If we corner the South Africans too closely, although they
are not cats, they may, in desperation, act like that
cornered cat and spring, not on us members of the Council
or Members of the United Nations, but on our African
brothers wherever they may be. We have to take that into
account.

60. I thought I would unburden myself. I must make
myself explicit, Perhaps some might think I am foolish to
expressthoughts that had better be kept to oneself, but this
would not be the United Nations if we did not come out
with what we thought should be adduced. If we did not,
then all our work would be platitudinous. We would have
draft resolutions without action-in the case of disarmament we launched about 30 of them in the First Committee.

54. It is not a question of surmounting difficulties-I wish
we could-by such resolutions, although, I say again, they
are laudable in their intent. It is a sort of consolation to our
African brothers to have them; that wasthe maximum they
could get. On the other hand, we should not, economically
or by an arms embargo, cause the South Africans to
develop an arms industry that may ravage all Africa and
create more turmoil there than it finds itself in today.

61. Having said that, I do not want representatives to
think that I made my remarks in a spirit of destructive
criticism or just to act contrary to other people. I am sure
many representatives are thinking along the same line as I,
but somebody like myself who has nothing to gain or lose
should come out with those facts and expressthe thoughts
that go through our minds,

55. Let us speak out aloud. All the representatives here are
intehigent and maybe these things have crossed their minds.
They should be expressed, and no one should be afraid of
expressing them, because we want peace in South Africa.

62. One last word to our African brothers, whether
members of the proletariat or leaders: make sure and learn
the know-how from the white man. Find a solution so that,
while you are struggling to get your political rights, South

56. I mentioned a third point to my African brothers,
especially those fighting for their independence-and I hope
5

African industry-the minerals or whatever the resources
afford for making a reasonably good standard of living-Will
not be jeopardized, lest you leaders there are toppled, as 1
have seen happen in other parts of the world, and there is
anarchy instead of law and order and a good life for
everybody.

the crime of torturing to death the black nationalist leader
Steve Bike. In addition, it has continued its cruel repression
of the Namibian people and supported the Smith racist
rdghe in Rhodesia in flagrantly launching another large.
scale armed invasion of Mozambique. All this showsthat
the evil Vorster racist regime iS implacably inimical to the
Azanian people and the entire African people.

63. I am concerned about the innocent. We so-called
people in the seat of power come and go; parties,
ideologies, all things change, but our concern at the United
Nations should be for the common man; for the people of
South Africa just as for people everywhere in the world
who are denied a decent standard of living-not necessarily
accompanied by luxuries, but a decent standard of living.

70, The open contempt shown by the Vorster authorities
for resolution 418 (1977) has also found expression in the
many wanton clamours made by Defence Minister Bcths
before and after the adoption of the resolution. He said
that “efforts to weaken South Africa militarily through the
application of mandatory embargoes shall not succeed’.
Referring to the practical results of the Council sanctions
against Rhodesia as an example, he said arrogantly: “A
total boycott is a dream; as long as we have the money
there will always be supplies”. Nevertheless, the clamours
by Vorster and his ilk have driven home, by negative
example, the truth that what is written on paper is not yet
real, that the earnest implementation
of the Council
resolutions is by no means an easy thing, but involves a
seriesof grave struggles.

64. I thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Council for having afforded me an opportunity to make
my remarks as a Member of the United Nations, regardless
of my representing Saudi Arabia in the Organization.
65. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has always
been privileged to draw from the experience and wisdom of
Ambassador Baroody. Personally, I have certainly benefited
tremendously from the knowledge and guidance of my
elder brother-even if we have had one and a half
misunderstandings on relatively minor procedural issues
over the last nine years. As the representative of Mauritius,
I have always shared the views of Ambassador Baroody that
the interests of the international community transcend
national interests, except on very specific issues.

71. In this sense, we support the proposal of African
States on the establishment of a body, such as a Committee
under the Security Council, to examine and supervise the
progress of the mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa. This would be conducive to the implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions. But, in the light of
historical experience, particularly the experience of the
sanctions against Rhodesia, we consider it imperative to
urge all States Members of the United Nations and, first and
foremost, all permanent members and other members of
the Security Council themselves, strictly to implement
those resolutions, in order to have resolution 418 (1977)
truly implemented and not reduced to a mere scrap of
paper. At the same time, it is imperative to enable the
Committee that has been established to exercise effective
supervision over the implementation of the resolution and
also to consider the application of economic sanctions
against South Africa. Otherwise, there would be a dangerof
bringing about the opposite results,

66. I understand that members of the Council are ready to
vote on the draft resolution in document S/12477. Accordingly, I now put it to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.2

67. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on representatives
who have requested to speak at this stage of the debate.
68. Mr, CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
On 25 October [2037th meeting], during the consideration

72. In the last analysis, the final solution to the question
of South Africa can only be achieved by relying on the
entire Azanian people’s persevering in protracted struggle
and using revolutionary violence to overthrow the evil racist
regime with the support and assistanceof the entire African
and world people. Only thus can the Azanian people attain
their national liberation. The fact that the black leader
Steve Biko, known as an advocate of non-violence, fell s
victim to the racists’ counter-revolutionary violence serves
as a convincing lesson by negative example taught by
Vorster and his ilk to the Azanian people. At present, the
people of South Africa are becoming increasingly
awakened. They are combining closely the struggle against
racism and colonialism with that against hegemonism. we
are convinced that they will further overcome super-Power
interference and sabotage and finally overthrow the bloody
rule of the racist regimes and achieve national liberatic*r
through the daily broadening armed mass struggle.

of the question of South Africa, the Chinese delegation
expounded in a comprehensive way our position and views
on related matters and voted in favour of resolution
418 (1977).
69. Since the adoption of that resolution, the Vorster
racist regime of South Africa has totally ignored the
relevant Council resolutions, and instead has stepped up its
brutal repression of the Azanian people’s just struggle
against racism and for national liberation. Recently, the
regime has stage-managed the so-called general election
which excluded the black and Coloured people, comprising
83 per cent of the total population of South Africa, and
subsequently the ugly farce of the sham independence of
Bophuthatswana. At the same time, it arrested a large
number of black people, including schoolchildren, in a
sweep through Atteridgeville-Faulsville township and other
regions. It is also trying hard to shirk its responsibility for

73. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, since this is the
first time I have had the opportunity to speak since Your’

2 Seeresolution 421 (1977).
6

--

-

--

assl**WtiO~~ of the office of President, 1 should like to
%Press the Pleasure of my delegation at seeing you in the
Chair and seeing Mauritius taking responsibility for presid.
ill&! over our efforts this month, I know that, under Your
wise guidance, we can be sure of accolnplishing the difficult
tasks that 1 how lie ahead of us, as has been evidenced by
the Ileg~)tiaths which have been successfully concluded on
the question that we are discussing today.

I--_

obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. For its
Part, the United States intends SCN~U~OUSJY
to observe the
arms embargo and urges all other States to do likewise.
7g. We are grateful for the excellent work of all involved
in drafting and negotiating the resolution that the Council
hasjust adopted.
80. The United States will participate fully in discussions
on the procedures to be used by the new Committee.

74. 1 should also like to say how much we appreciated the
magnificent job done by your predecessor, the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 1 realize that his term
of office is drawing to a close and we shall miss him very
much on the Council,

81. Mr. van WCHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
It gives me genuine and great pleasure to greet you, Sir, as
President Of the Security Council during today’s degbera.
tions. We both joined the Council at the beginning of this
Year and have worked together since then-you as spokesman of the African Group, and I as a simple member.
During our common term, I have admired your straightforwardnessin matters of substanceregarding the interests
of Africa and your diplomatic skills in negotiating towards
universally acceptable solutions within the Council. These
qualities were displayed during our particularly difficult
deliberations in March and April, and they have been
proved once again during the last few days, devoted, as is
only appropriate, to a problem of Africa.

75. We supported the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 418 (1977), which established a mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter. We similarly support the decision which the
Council has just taken to establish a Committee to examine
the progress of the implementation
of the measures
envisngcclby the provisions of resolution 418 (1977).
76. In its response /S/I24621
to the note which the
Secretary-Gcncral circulated to States pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 418 (1977), the Canadian Government, on 28 November, advised the Secretary-General that
Canada had, iu 19G3, voluntarily placed an arms embargo
on the sale of arms and military equipment to South Africa
and had, in 1970, cxtendcd that embargo to include the
sale of spare parts for such equipment, in accordance with
the relevant Security Councif resolutions. Our reply noted
that Canada had voted in favour of resolution 418 (1977)
making this voluntary arms embargo mandatory and would
faithfully implcmcnt’its provisions.

82. I should also like to addressour sincere thanks to the
retiring President, Ambassador Kikhia of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, who made such a remarkable contribution to
the achievement of a consensuson resolution 418 (1977), a
historic step which led us to the present decision.
83. The Federal Republic of Germany voted in favour of
the resolution which hasjust been adopted, establishing, in
accordance with rule 28 of the provisional rules of
procedure, a Committee of the Council to examine the
Secretary-General’s report on the implementation of resolution 418 (1977), to study ways and means to ensure the
effectiveness of the mandatory arms embargo and to seek
further information from States regarding their action
towards this aim.

77. In deciding now to establish a Committee in relation
to resolution 418 (1977), the Council has followed the
precedent of the establishment of a similar committee by
resolution 253 (1968) on the subject of the mandatory
sanctions against Southern Qhodesia. 1 realize that this is
not the time to discuss the question, but 1 should like to
put on record our belief that, when the Committee just
created begins its work, it, should adopt procedures similar
to those whjch have been evolved over the years for the
Committee on Sanctions against Rhodesia and move ahead
in dealing with the main tasks established for it, as defined
in paragraph 1 of the resolution we have just adopted. The
Canadian Government has co-operated fully with the
Committee established lmder resolution 253 (1968) and has
respccled the workmanlike procedures that have been
developed in that Committee to encourage and ensure
cts.operation with it by all Member States. It will be our
intention to support in Iike fashion the activities of the
Committee on the iruplerncntatiotl of the arms embargo
against South Africa.

84. Today’s decision is the consequenceof the decision
which we took on 4November and which we expect to
have the effect of diminishing the potential for conflict and
bloodshed in southern Africa. As the members of the
Council are aware, my delegation took an active part in
bringing about that decision, especially Since my Government has been observing the voluntary arms embargo
regarding South Africa since 1963.
85. We hope that the Committee which we have juti
established will be able to work in a businesslike atm*
phere, as that which recently has prevailed also in the
meetings
of the Committee that already exists under rule
28 of the provisional rules of procedure, that is, the
Committee on Sanctions against Southern Rhodesia established by resolution 253 (1968). The precedents set by that
Committee should be followed. As far as my delegation is
concerned, we are willing to co-operate fully and ConstNctively h the new Committ,ee during our term of membership in the Council.

78. Mr. PETREB (United States of America): The United
States agrees on the need to establish appropriate machinery to oversee the progress of resolution 418 (1977)
establishin the arms embargo against South Africa adopted
unanimousIy by the Security Council on 4 November last.
Of course, final responsibility for observance of that
enlbargo rests with individual States, consonant with their

86. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr.PreGdent, I
should like to join in the congratulations that have already
7

been expressed to you today. We are delighted indeed to
see a friendly Commonwealth country, in the person of its
Permanent Representative, as this month’s President of the
Security Council.
87. May I also take this first opportunity we have had this
month to thank the representative of Libya for the skill
with which he conducted the affairs of the Council last
month.
88. We have adopted this resolution and we have had the
benefit too of the wisdom and the experience of Ambassador Baroody. I listened, as I always do, with interest and
attention to the representative of Saudi Arabia, particularly
to his reminiscences of the drug trade in London in 1938.
While perhaps the immediate relevance of some parts of his
speech may not have been apparent right away, I must say
that, at the end of his half hour, the appositeness and
indeed the precision of his points were happily established.
The Council may indeed find it comforting to have heard
from him how alert Scotland Yard was in 1938 to any
apparent interest in the arms trade by persons not
authorized to engage in such dealings. I wish to assurehim
and the Security Council that the United Kingdom authorities remain as vigilant in this regard today as they were
then.
89. My delegation l&as made clear its position on the
application of an arms embargo against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It did so when we voted in
favour of the draft resolution which became resolution
418 (1977) /2046th meeting]. The embargo which we
voted for on that occasion is mandatory and it seems hardly
necessary, therefore, to add that we are of course fully
observing it. As I explained at the time, the United
Kingdom Government had in any case been applying a
voluntary embargo for some years.
90. It follows from our support for resolution 418 (1977)
that we are entirely content to have voted for the draft
resolution that was before us today. We accept that there is
merit in having a Committee to monitor the application of
the embargo. Such a Committee of course has a precedent
in the shape of the Committee set up under resolution
253 (1968). My delegation believes that the expertise
acquired by that Committee and the procedures it has
evolved will indeed provide the most useful precedent for
the new body which we have voted for today.
91. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation from
French): I should like first of all, Mr. President, to extend
our warmest congratulations to you on your accession to
your high office. I should like also to express our thanks to
you for the dedication and great distinction with which you
have assumed your responsibilities since the beginning of
this month. France takes particular pleasure in seeing the
presidency for December in the hands of Mauritius, with
which my coun.try has long maintained relations of friendship based on history and culture.

1
I

92, I should like also to congratulate our outgoing
President, Ambassador Kikhia, for the skill and talent with
which he conducted the proceedings of the Council in
November, He may rest assured of our gratitude.

93. I come now to the item on the Council’s agenda.
94. The Security Council has met at the request of the
African Group to consider, in conformity with rule 28 of
the provisional rules of procedure, the establishment of a
Committee to monitor the implementation of resolution
418 (1977). My country, which joined all the other
members of the Council in voting for the adoption of that
resolution on 4 November, had no difficulty at all in
associating itself with a further unanimous decision on the
proposal that was before us. In my statement in November
[2046th meeting], I had made it clear that my country
would take all the measures necessary to ensure the
implementation of that resolution. In response to the letter
of the Secretary-General dated 10 November, I confirmed
on 30 November [S/12464] that the French Government
intended to apply without restrictions the decision of
4 November instituting an embargo on the provision of
arms to South Africa. I also stated that, consequently, any
delivery of military matt+iel to that country had been
prohibited as of the vote on resolution 418 (1977).
95. We all wish this resolution to be implemented. We also
believe that, in the same concern for effectiveness which led
to the unanimous adoption of resolution 418 (1977), the
future Committee should act in such a way that its
recommendations will have the authority naturally attaching to recommendations adopted unanimously. In this
regard, the Organization is not without experience. The
rules that have already been tried and tested in the
Committee on Sanctions against Southern Rhodesia will be
a guarantee of the successof our new undertaking.
96. The decision we have just taken reflects once again the
determination. of the world community to see an early end
to the intolerable situation prevailing in South Africa, on
which we have had an opportunity to state our position at
length at earlier meetings of the Council. It must be our
hope that this determination will be understbod.
97. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
France for the kind words he addressed to me and for his
reference to the good relations existing between France and
Mauritius.
98. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation jkm R-en&):
Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure for me to welcome
you as President of the Security Council for the last month
of this year and to congratulate you most warmly on this
occasion. Your vast experience and the qualities so generally recognized at the United Nations will be valuable in the
discharge of your duties. The delegation of Romania is
most happy to co-operate closely with you, and we express
our complete confidence that you will successfully discharge your important mission.
99. I wish also to pay a well-deserved tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Mansur Kikhia of the Libyan
Arab Eamahiriya, for the excellent manner in which he
guided our work during the month of November. 1 wish to
say that it was a pleasure to work with him and that I value
his open and friendly spirit.
100. Because of the efforts made by all the members in
the last few days and because of their spirit of co-operation,

the Council has just unanimously adopted a new resolution
which fittingly
strengthens and completes resolution
418 (19X’) adopted a month ago. We hope that the
decision taken today will really.make the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa more effective. Accordingly,
the Romanian delegation expresses its conviction that all
States will co-operate fully with the newly established
Committee in its work of promoting the effective implementation of resolution 418 (1977), and supply it with all
the information it may request pursuant to the present
resolution.

necessary follow-up of resolut jo
418a matter
C1977).witfis*t
It is not
en&$ for the Council to decide n on
ot
the Same time taking stepsto ensure strict cornpliancc witI,
it’s decision by Member States. Otherwise the rcMIIutrtnts
of the Council will become mea
ninglcss and not have tb:
desired impact.
108. The setting up of the COG
will thcreh~re
help
to underline the determination of mittee
the Council
to take such
measures as may be consrdered approprhtc to ensure tlac
successand effectivenessof the a-s embargc against South
Aftca. We eamestlY hope that the deliberations of t)2$
pwcted Omm-dttee~4 be marked by the same spirit of
harmony and co-operationthat has been &OW~ during de
consideration of this issueby the Council.

101. As my delegation stated on 4 November last, resolution 418 (1977) is “the expression of the will of the
Member States not to ease the political pressure on the
racist regime of Pretoria until that regime abandons its
policies of apartheid and aggression” (2046th meeting,
para 35/, We consider that the resolution deciding to
establish a Committee represents a new and serious warning
to the racist regime of South Africa designed to compel it
to renounce its racist inhuman policy of apmheid.

109. On this occasion, my delegation would like tr,
commend the spirit of compromise
and accomnr~~rtir,r~
shown by the representatives of Benin, the I,rbyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius in drafting the text cjf th
resolution, as well as t0 express our appreciation ftir the
positive and constructive role played by all the nt
members of the Council.

102. It is the statutory duty of our Organization to give all
possible support to the legitimate aspirations to freedom
and independence of the populations of southern Africa,
victims of apartheid and racial discrimination.

110. Finally, Pakistan feels that the adeption uf two
successiveresolutions by consensus is highly significant rruI
should not go unnoticed. It has helped to demonstrate the
immense potential of the Council
to take and iln~l~rn~n~
important decisions by consensus, provided all mem
share unity of purpose and adopt a flexible attitude. In cur
view, a resolution adopted by consensus is in the ultimate
analysis the best guarantee of its endorsement and
cation by the entire international
community and
the United Nations a functioning reality.

103. Recent events in southern Africa and the aggressive
actions of the Pretoria Government against the majority of
the population of South Africa and against neighbouring
States are proof that new measures are needed to render
Council decisions more effective. In our opinion, the
establishment of a Council Committee with the responsibilities set forth in the resolution just adopted constitutes
an important political act. We are convinced that its
activities will be in keeping with the mission entrusted to it
and that, with the assistanceof Member States, it will make
an important contribution to the strengthening of the
embargo against South Africa.

111. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
{Union cf Soviet Soci
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. P~s~~nt,
fnst of ail I should like to congratulate you, the repro
tative of a friendly country, on your accession tr,
responsible post of President of the Security Council
this month. We have no doubt that under your l~a~er~~~~~
the Council will be enabled to move forward in rcsclvin
number of important international
problems. It should
said that we have already accumulated considerable expenence of constructive co-operation with the dele~at~~~ of
Mauritius in va&m United Nations bodies and we bc
that this useful co-operation will continue to dcvcl~p.

104. Mrs. HYDER (Pakistan): Mr.President, allow me
first to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. My delegation is confident that, under your able
guidance, the Council will be able to discharge its functions
with speed and efficiency.
105. I should also like to take this opportunity to
compliment your predecessor, the representatrve of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, for the statesmanlike manner in
which he conducted the proceedings of the Council last
month. His successful handling of our deliberations in large
measure contributed to the adoption of resolution
418 (1977) by consensuslast month.

112. Nor do we wish to fail to mention the di~l~lll~~~~~
skill and tact with which the work of the (‘ouncil wjp%
guided last month by your
distinguished pr~de~~,$~~r~
Ambassador Uhia, the representative of the Ijbyan Arab
Jamahiriya, a country that is friendly to US. It is not@worthy that it wasprecisely under his presidency that the
Council took the decision that is regarded wrtb full
justification by’ the international
opinion as an lul~9r~~~~
stepforward in the struggle for the definitive eIinurratr~~r1
r:jf
colo~alism ad apartheid i.n the southern Irart k+f the
African continent. We are extremely grstdd to ARdM%
sador Kikhia for his substantial contribution tit tlrc wb’rkit
the Council in that direction.

106. The Security Council has just adopted the resolution
sponsored by the three African members of the Council
which seeks to set up a Committee to monitor the
implementation
of the mandatory arms embargo imposed
by resolution 418 (1977) and to study ways and means by
which it could be made more effective.

Union Ofl the q~~st~~~~pf
measures against the racrs2

113. The position of the Soviet

107. Pakistan has wholeheartedly supported the resolution
because we feel that the setting up of the Committee is a

adopting further effective
9

regimes that have taken root in southern Africa has been set
forth repeatedly. As was emphasized by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko, in his
statement on 28 November this year on the occasion of the
visit to Moscow of the Commissioner for External Affairs
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Mr. Joseph Garba, it is
still far from possible to strike the struggle for the
elimination of the vestiges of colonialism and racism off the
list of priority tasks confronting States. Unfortunately,
there are still regions where colonialism and racism continue to hold sway. One might mention by way of example
Rhodesia, Namibia and the Republic of South Africa. The
position of principle of the Soviet Union on this question,
as Mr. Gromyka stressed, is we11known. We favour the
earliest elimination of the vestiges of colonialism and of
racist rkgimes on the African continent, and the immediate
and effective transfer of power to the lawful representatives
of the majority of their indigenous populations in Zimbabwe and Namibia.
114. It was on this basis that the Soviet Union acted in
supporting resolution 418.(1977) concerning a mandatory
embargo on arms shipments to the racist regime at Pretoria.
We noted then /2046tlt meeting/ that, with the adoption
of that resolution, the Council was in essencetaking the
first definite step forward in the question of the application
to South Africa of mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter.

Committee will become a genuinely effective means for the
implementation of this resolution and an additional instrument in the struggle for the attainment of those goals that
the Council set itself when it took the decision. Care must,
of course, be taken that this important organ Of the Council
has at its disposal all appropriate means for carrying out the
functions entrusted to it. We assume that, within the
framework of the Secretariat, due measures will be taken to
ensure the effectiveness of the work of the Committee.
119. In setting forth our position in regard to the
mandatory embargo on arms shipments to the racist
Pretoria regime, my delegation emphasized that the Soviet
Union regarded this decision as the basis for the Council’s
adoption of further effective measures in the struggle
against racism and apartheid in southern Africa and as a
point of departure for the application against the Pretoria
rbgirne of effective economic and other mandatory sanctions. In our opinion, the development of events in South
Africa and the increasing viciousness of’ the repressive
policies of the racist regime once again demonstrate the
urgency not only of strict compliance with the resolution
on an embargo on arms shipments but also of the extension
of sanctions against Pretoria to other areas and the cutting
off of any kind of co-operation with the racist regime in the
field of nuclear technology as well as in economic, financial
and all other spheres.
120. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative
of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for the kind words he
addressed to me and I assure him that the Constructive
co-operation of Mauritius with the delegation of the Soviet
Union will always continue.

115. In its reply to the questionnaire of the SecretaryGeneral, the Permanent Mission of the USSR declared
(S/12457/ that the Soviet Union would strictIy comply
with all the provisions of that resolution. The Soviet Union
maintains no relations with South Africa, does not supply it
with arms or military equipment and maintains no economic ties of any kind with the Pretoria r&me.

121. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish]: Mr. President, I should like to place on record the
great pleasure of my delegation at seeing an African
statesman of your eminent status presiding over the work
of the Council this month, We wish you every success and
assure you of our warmest co-operation.

116. It is a positive point that @her Member States also
attach extreme importance to resolution 418 (1977). This
is testified to by the replies that are coming in to the
Secretary-General’s questionnaire, replies containing undertakings to observe strictly all provisions of that resolution.

122. My delegation also wishes to pay a special tribute to
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Ambassador Mansur Kikhia, on the manner in which he presided
over the work of the Council during the month of
November. Ambassador Kikhia demonstrated tremendous
skill as a statesman and as a conciliator and, as has already
been stated here in the debate, that contributed greatly to
the unanimous adoption of resolution 418 (1977) and,
indirectly, to that of the present resolution, which his
country submitted jointly with Mauritius and Benin. We
hope that Mr. Kikhia’s wisdom as a conciliator can be used
not O&J in southern Africa but also in other parts of Africa
and thus help to resolve other crises.

117. But we also realize that it is essential to institute a
truly effective monitoring of the performance of the
obligations undertaken by States in this regard. The
proposal of the African States for the establishment of
appropriate international machinery that will bear responsibility for supervising the implementation of the Security
Council resolution instituting a mandatory embargo on
arms shipments to South Africa is therefore fully justified.
The idea of setting up such machinery had been put
forward earlier by African countries. Thus, in the Lagos
Declaration for Action against Apartheid it was indicated
that the Lagos Conference recommends “the setting up of a
watchdog committee to follow up the observance of the
arms embargo”.3 Today, thanks to the efforts of the
African countries, this idea is being translated into practice.

123. I should like to refer now to resolution 421 (1977),
which has ,just been adopted unanimously by the Council
and for which Panama voted. That resolution is a response
to a request made by Ambassador Oyono, Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Calneroon and
Chairman of the African Group, in a letter dated
5 December /S/12470/ in which he requested the establishment of a body to supervise the implementation
of
resolution 418 (1977) concerning the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa.

118. The delegation of the Soviet Union has supported the
draft resolution on the subject submitted for the Council’s
consideration by the delegations of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius. We hope that the new Council
3 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XIV.2, sect. X,
para. 25.
10

----

124. The contribution made by the delegations of Benin,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius in submitting
the draft resolution has been most valuable, and my
delegation would like to make a few brief comments on the
scope of the resolution since, by the time it is implemented,
Panama will no longer be a member of the Council,

130. Furthermore, it is very important that the Corn.
mittee should be provided with adequate facilities by the
Secretariat, of the same kind as the facilities provided for
the Security Council. Two of the sponsors of the draft
resolution which has just been adopted, Benin and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, together with my own delegation,
had some experience, during the work of the Mission sent
to Cotonou pursuant to a Council resolution, of the
importance of those services, particularly the one mentioned in rule 49, which states that

125. My delegation considers that it is important to note
that the Security
Council has already established an
analogous Committee made up of all the members of the
Council. It is logical, therefore, that the work of the
Committee which we have just established should be
governed by the same rules of the provisional rules of
procedure.

“the verbatim record of each meeting of the Security
Council shall be made available to the representatives of
the Security Council and to the representatives of any
other States which have participated in the meeting not
later than 10 a.m. of the first working day following the
meeting”.

126. One of the tasks of the Committee is to examine the
report on the progress of the implementation of resolution
418 (1977) which will be submitted by the Secretary
General. Basically, that resolution relates to a universal
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, so that the
functions of the Committee will be of the greatest
importance. Furthermore the Committee will have to study
WAS and means by which the mandatory arms embargo
could be made more effective against South Africa, to make
recommendations in this connexion to the Council and to
seek from all States further information regarding the
action taken by them.

131. When collecting evidence, it is extremely important
to be able to count on this service, and therefore my
delegation is particularly pleased that the resolution, in
paragraph 3, requests
“the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance
to the Committee and to make the necessary arrangements in the Secretariat for that purpose, including the
provision of appropriate staff for the servicing of the
Committee”.

127. In this connexion, I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to some provisions of its provisional rules of
procedure which should be applied to the Committee. Rule
48 provides that, ‘Ymless it decides otherwise, the Security
Council shall meet in public”, Accordingly, the meetings of
the Committee must be held in public, in accordance with
established practice.

This is an appropriate provision, that will make it possible
to make available to the Committee all the facilities needed
for it to perform its task, The Secretary-General thus has a
clear perception of these duties and we are pleased that the
matter is left to him, We are confident that he will be given
the means to provide the necessary staff.
132. Because of the late hour, I do not wish to tax your
patience, but I wish to express my gratitude to Ambassador
Boya of Benin for the efforts he made prior to the adoption
of this resolution so as to be able, through negotiations
with the members of the Council, to provide USwith a text
which we could adopt unanimously.

128. Furthermore, it is of the utmost importance that the
Committee-which
is to be entrusted with making recommendations and studying means to make the embargo more
effective-should
be able to submit to the Council the facts
it needs in order to adopt such measures. In my opinion,
rule 39 places an instrument in the hands of the Committee
for this purpose, for it says that the Council may
“invite members of the Secretariat or other persons,
whom it considers competent for the purpose, to Supply
it with information
or to give other assistance in
examining matters within its competence”.

133. I believe that the events which have occurred
recently in South Africa fully warrant the severity of the
action which the Council has taken, not only by deciding
on a universal arms embargo, but also establishing a
Committee which will be an active, dynamic, demanding
body.

129. Therefore, if there should be any violation of the
amls embargo, or if a situation were to arise which would in
any way affect the implementation of the embargo,
naturally any State Member of the United Nations-and
even a State which is not a Member, because this is covered
in the resolution-could
present relevant evidence to the
Committee. In such case, the Committee must be able to
accept that information and request assistance in the
consideration of the matters before it from qualified
persons, experts and eminent personalities, and even take
legal note of the statements of such persons, which would
eventually constitute a cumulative body of evidence for
consideration by the Council when the Committee presents
its recommendations.

134. The representative of China, aside from any ideological considerations, gave a list of the injurious actions
committed by the Vorster regime against the international
community, which 1 think we would all agree with. We
cannot fail to mention the infamous death of Steve Bike,
the leader of the Black Consciousness Movement, a death
that really stirs the conscience of mankind. What was done
to Steve Biko is perhaps unprecedented in any martyrdom
in any religion, He suffered an intense and prolonged
agony, travehg 750 miles-l,200 kilometres-naked in a
primitive open vehicle, he bore inconceivable insults and
injuries to his human dignity. I repeat, probably no apostle,
no martyr, no supreme being of any religion of mankind
suffered the way he did. This was an infamous act, the
11

work of hyenas, not human beings. It gives us an indication
of what the Security Police in South Africa must be like.
135. Any member of the Council who has had any
political experience knows that among security policewhether in the north, the south, the east or the west-may
be found, and often are found, mercenaries, men without
conscience, cruel and inhuman monsters who lack any
respect for human dignity. This may be regarded as a mere
accident in any civilization. But when, after Mr. Kentridge,
the distinguished lawyer for the Biko family, a man
deserving of recognition, has exhaustively detailed that
whole series of insults to black consciousness and to the
consciousness of our so-called Western Christian civilization, which incidentally does not exist in South Africa,
we see a magistrate like Marthinus J. Prins, the Chief
Magistrate of Pretoria, absolving the Security Police of
responsibility for that atrocious crime, then we have a clear

idea of the standard df justice and the kind of values thal
obtain in that country. In absolving the Security Police oj
Port Elizabeth, in revealing by an act of monstrous injustice
how detestable is the Pretoria rdgime, that magistrate in
effect passed a sentence of condemnation against that
opprobrious rdgime. That is why the decision taken today is
of great importance for mankind. We cannot overlook it,
since it is in effect a tribute to the physical and moral
courage of Steve Biko whose image will be our ideal for
generations to come.
136. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Panama for his impassioned speech, for the kind words
addressed to me and for his constant co-operation, which I
have always valued.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite I Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: IJnited
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librniries
d+ositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-voua
eupr&s de votre libraire
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIES
et lcs agenccs
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&An en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidorae
en todae partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijaee
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lltho

in Unltsd

Nations,

New

York

Price:

SUS,

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-November

1978-2,200
