S/PV.8234

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8234th meeting

Monday, 16 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Cardona Moscoso
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Bah Kuhnke
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Preventing sexual violence in conflict through empowerment, gender equality
and access to justice
Report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2018/250)
Letter dated 2 April 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/311)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10885 (E)
*1810885*

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Preventing sexual violence in conflict through
empowerment, gender equality and access
to justice
Report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250)
Letter dated 2 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/311)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Germany, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mexico,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
Senior Researcher of Kaladan Press.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Gerton
van den Akker, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security of the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
2/80

16/04/2018

accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/250, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.
I also wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2018/311, which contains the
text of a letter dated 2 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome Her Excellency Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin
by commanding Peru and His Excellency Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for convening this important
open debate on sexual violence and conflict. I also
very warmly welcome Ms. Razia Sultana here today
to amplify the voices of the Rohingya community and
to offer an account to the plight of women and girls
systematically targeted due to their religion or ethnicity.
This year in Myanmar, and in many other conflict
situations, the widespread threat and use the sexual
violence is once again being used as a tactic to advance
military, economic and ideological objectives. Once
again it has been a driver of massive forced displacement.
Let me be clear: both genders endure the horrific
brutality of sexual violence in conflict. Sexual violence
is also a very common method of torture of detainees,
and in many conflicts most detainees are men and boys.
But overall women and girls are disproportionately
affected. Gender-based discrimination is the invisible
driver of most crimes of sexual violence. The lower
one’s status in terms of wealth, health and education,
the greater her vulnerability and exposure to harm.
Last year, I travelled with Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten to Nigeria
and to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
both nations, the consequences of sexual violence are
profound and enduring for survivors, their families and
their communities. Survivors are forced to live with the
untreated physical and psychological trauma, the social
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

stigma and unwanted pregnancies. The children born of
rape are often ostracized and relegated to the margins
of society. That serves yet again to highlight the fact
that, in the end, sexual violence has consequences
for all affected women, girls, men and boys. It is a
deliberate tactic to humiliate and disempower and
undermine social cohesion. Our responsibility must
be to bring justice, recognition and reparations to
the survivors of those horrendous crimes — not only
justice in the courtroom but also social justice and
economic empowerment.
We should recognize and support the resilience
of the many survivors who are working as agents of
change. If we are to prevent these crimes being repeated,
we must ensure accountability and deterrence. In that
context, I welcome the continued engagement by those
parties listed by the Secretary-General in his reports
on conflict-related sexual violence. For example, the
signing of a unilateral communiqué by a coalition of
armed groups in Mali in July 2017 and the development
of a joint communiqué implementation plan by the Iraq
Government last month are both very encouraging.
Let me also highlight the increased vigilance being
shown by peacekeepers in protecting women, girls,
men and boys from sexual violence as part of their
protection-of-civilians mandate. Last month in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo, a
female engagement team of 16 soldiers from the United
Kingdom, South Africa and Nepal supported a civilian
mission to one of the country’s most remote areas in
response to reports of abductions and sexual violence
inflicted on hundreds of civilians. This shows the
value of alert networks and the importance of women
in peacekeeping to better address conflict-related
sexual violence.
Women’s protection advisers deployed to United
Nations peace operations also have a leading role
to play in supporting Government counterparts in
implementing their commitments. Those commitments
include engaging all parties to the conflict to prevent
sexual violence and ensuring that survivors and civil
society organizations can voice their concerns about
security, protection and limitations in service provision
and that they can help shape inclusive new policies
and laws.
Resolution 2106 (2013) calls on all actors — the
Security Council, parties to armed conflict, Member
States and United Nations entities — to do much more

S/PV. 8234

to combat impunity for those crimes. Let us intensify
our efforts to end the horrific litany of sexual violence
in conflict so that our women, girls, men and boys have
no less burden to bear as they work to rebuild their
shattered lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I am delighted to join the Council
today for the first open debate on sexual violence in
conflict during my tenure as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Allow me to start by expressing my appreciation to Peru
for presiding over this meeting and for its leadership on
the women and peace and security agenda.
The focus of this debate, on preventing sexual
violence in conflict through empowerment, gender
equality and access to justice, could not be more timely
or more in line with my own vision for advancing this
mandate. When I took up office last June, I outlined
a three-pillar priority agenda, namely, converting
cultures of impunity into cultures of deterrence through
consistent and effective prosecution; addressing
structural, gender-based inequality as the root cause
and invisible driver of sexual violence in times of
war and peace; and fostering national ownership
and leadership for a sustainable, survivor-centered
response that empowers civil society and local women’s
rights defenders.
Another important first is the participation in
today’s debate of Ms. Razia Sultana, on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
Ms. Sultana is the first Rohingya woman, born in
northern Rakhine state, Myanmar, to brief the Council
on the plight of her people. Her presence here is a
historic opportunity to give a face and a voice to a
community that has been denied a nationality, denied
an identity, and even denied a name. Her perspective
will be particularly valuable on the eve of the Council’s
first visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh. Indeed, voices
from directly affected communities provide the ground
truths that must guide our action, and I trust that her
message will be heard and heeded.
The annual open debate on sexual violence in
conflict provides a critical opportunity for taking
stock of how we are progressing, or regressing, in this
agenda. The data and trend analysis presented in the

18-108853/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250)
serves not only to measure progress but also to inspire
and accelerate it. It was exactly one decade ago, in
2008, that the Council adopted the ground-breaking
resolution 1820 (2008), which elevated the issue of
conflict- related sexual violence onto its agenda as a
threat to security and an impediment to peace. It urged
us to debunk the myths that fuel sexual violence, and
indeed the notion of rape as an inevitable by-product of
war or mere collateral damage can never again serve as
an alibi for inaction.
Since then, the issue has been systematically
included in the mandates of peacekeeping missions,
reflected in the designation criteria of sanctions regimes,
addressed in ceasefire agreements and excluded from
amnesty provisions. Women’s protection advisers have
been deployed to field missions to generate actionable
information and pursue a protection dialogue with
parties to conflict. Today, we are supporting thousands
of survivors we were not reaching a decade ago.
Resolution 1820 (2008) demanded nothing less than
the immediate and complete cessation by all parties
to armed conflict of all acts of sexual violence against
civilians. In that respect, while significant normative
and operational progress has been achieved, it is clear
that words on paper are not yet matched by facts on
the ground. We have not yet moved from resolutions to
lasting solutions.
I believe that we are at an inflection point in this
agenda and must urgently consolidate progress by
ensuring accountability or risk a reversal resulting in
wartime rape being once again normalized due to the
frequency and impunity with which it is committed.
The past decade of enhanced political momentum
to combat sexual violence has coincided with a
confluence of global crises, including mass migration
and displacement, rising violent extremism and
terrorism, the resurgence and spread of conflict, and
the proliferation of arms.
These factors have created the conditions for
renewed patterns of violations. Indeed, the report before
us shows that in 2017 sexual violence continued to be
employed as a tactic of war, a tactic of terrorism and a
tool of political repression. Across a range of settings,
it was used by parties to conflict to attack and alter
the ethnic or religious identity of persecuted groups and
to change the very demographics of disputed regions.
The threat of sexual violence continued to serve as a
driver of forced displacement, and has inhibited the
4/80

16/04/2018

return of uprooted communities to their areas of origin,
especially in the absence of accountability for past
crimes. In this way, conflict-related sexual violence has
led to the dispossession of land, resources and identity.
The trafficking of women and girls for the purpose
of sexual exploitation continued to be an integral part of
the political economy of war and terrorism, generating
revenue for combatants and armed groups. Women and
girls have also been gifted to combatants as part of a
perverse system of rewarding and socializing recruits.
A rising trend noted in the report is the recourse to
negative and harmful coping mechanisms in response
to the risk of rape in environments of instability and
indigence. Early marriage has spiked in contexts
where families have no other means of providing for or
safeguarding their daughters. This has resulted in more
repression, in the name of protection. Indeed, sexual
violence both arises from and reinforces unequal
gender relations, impeding the realization of women’s
rights and freedoms.
In several contexts, victims have been forced
to marry their rapist in the name of restoring social
harmony and family honour. Survivors have endured
multiple, intersecting stigmas in the wake of sexual
violence, including the stigma of association with
an armed or terrorist group and of bearing children
conceived through rape by the enemy. Often, these
women and children are viewed as affiliates rather than
as victims of violent extremist groups, and vilified as
threats to the communities they seek to rejoin. The
divisive force of stigma prevents family reconciliation,
in some cases leading to renewed displacement, with
survivors fleeing to escape reprisals by their own
relatives or communities. Stigma can have lethal
repercussions, including honour killings, suicide,
untreated diseases — such as HIV and traumatic
fistula — unsafe abortion, maternal mortality, extreme
poverty and high-risk survival behaviour. Stigma and
victim-blame give the weapon of rape its uniquely
destructive power, including the power to shred the
social fabric and turn victims into outcasts. It is also
the reason that sexual violence remains one of the least
reported of all crimes.
The plight of children conceived as a result
of wartime rape demands urgent attention. These
children may be left stateless, in a legal limbo, and
susceptible to recruitment, radicalization, trafficking
and exploitation, with wider implications for peace
and security. Colombia is the only country in which
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

children conceived through rape are legally recognized
as victims, al though the fear of stigma has prevented
many from coming forward to seek redress.
Male survivors of sexual violence have had their
social status, identity and sexual orientation called
into question. In some countries, that can even result
in their arrest. Despite some landmark cases, such as
the International Criminal Court ruling in the trial of
Bosco Ntaganda in 2017, mass rape continues to be met
with mass impunity. That means that the vicious cycle
of violence, impunity and revenge continues unabated
in many nations torn apart by war. For instance, it is
a travesty and an outrage that not a single member of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or Boko
Haram has yet been convicted for sexual violence as an
international crime.
Although the report before us paints a bleak, at
times harrowing, picture of brutality, it is also important
to highlight the progress achieved at the country level.
For instance, the Forces armées nationales de Côte
d’Ivoire were delisted last year, following the adoption
of concrete action plans and concerted efforts to
prevent and punish sexual violence. No new cases or
allegations concerning members of the Ivorian armed
and security forces were recorded in 2017, which shows
what is possible when political will and risk-mitigation
measures are in place.
Several other States continue to implement joint
communiqués and action plans to curb conflict-related
sexual violence, such as the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Iraq,
Somalia and South Sudan. I look forward to other
parties that appear in the list, such as the Myanmar
armed forces and the Sudanese armed forces, adopting
similar communiqués or frameworks of cooperation
with my Office. Another instructive example is that of
Colombia, which elevated gender justice to the heart of
its peace process, resulting in thousands of survivors
receiving reparations for sexual violence.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a former
parliamentarian in Kavumu, South Kivu province, was
convicted in 2017 for the rapes of 39 young children
committed by his militia, as a crime against humanity.
That trial brought an end to the serial rapes in Kavumu,
and helped to disband a militia that was threatening
local security. In addition, hundreds of prosecutions
have been undertaken by the Congolese authorities,
with support from the United Nations Organization

S/PV. 8234

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is part of my
Office. A number of significant law reform initiatives
also took place in 2017 to delink rape from adultery and
morality crimes, as seen in Afghanistan, Somalia and
the Sudan.
The history of wartime rape has been a history
of denial. On my visits to countries of concern, I still
encounter attempts to deny or downplay this issue. Yet
such an approach serves no one — not the Government,
not the credibility and efficacy of national institutions
and not the people trying to come to terms with the
past and build a better future. No problem can be solved
through silence. We will never be able to prevent what
we are unable, or unwilling, to understand.
At this critical juncture, we cannot lose focus. We
must keep the searchlight of international scrutiny on
this historically hidden crime. When I think of what is
at stake, I think of the thousands of women and children
who remain in the captivity of groups like ISIL and
Boko Haram. I think of the women released — pregnant
or with children — from the grip of a terrorist group,
who are forced to choose between their babies and their
communities of origin that refuse to accept them. I
think of the faces of the survivors I have met in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Darfur,
Nigeria and Guinea and in the teeming camps in
Bangladesh. I think of the Bosnian man who reduced
the room to tears by describing his struggle for identity
and belonging, having been born of wartime rape and
orphaned by prejudice and stigma. If the Security
Council resolutions on sexual violence tell us one thing
it is that wartime rape is preventable, not inevitable.
Addressing it is our collective responsibility. The
survivors are watching and waiting. We cannot afford
to fail them. Looking forward, I would like to propose
three recommendations.
First, I call on the international community to
give serious consideration to the establishment of
a reparations fund for survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence, to help them rebuild their lives and
livelihoods. Reparative justice is what survivors want
most, yet receive least.
Secondly, we need a more operational response to
stigma alleviation, because stigma kills. Socioeconomic
reintegration support for sexual violence survivors and
their children must infuse peacebuilding, reconstruction

18-108855/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

and reconciliation efforts. In cases where survivors face
ongoing risks, I encourage States to adopt special quota
projects to help relocate women and children to third
countries, following the precedent set by Germany to
protect members of the Iraqi Yazidi community. Similar
consideration should be given to the most vulnerable
Rohingya women and children.
Thirdly, we need to marshal sustained political
resolve and resources equal to the scale of the challenge.
The gender-based violence response in humanitarian
settings remains chronically underfunded. Time and
time again, we see how a lack of resources translates
into a lack of protection. The report before us should
serve as an alarm and a wake-up call to the onset of any
donor fatigue.
Despite all the challenges, what gives me hope
is the way that women — from Liberia, Colombia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and elsewhere — have used their experience
as survivors of sexual violence to mobilize political
movements for peace. They have become galvanized
and organized in response to that threat, and have
begun to channel that impetus into political aspirations
to ensure that the dark chapters of their nation’s history
never repeat. We must support these efforts to enhance
women’s participation and influence because, after all,
empowerment is protection.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Patten for her very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sultana.
Ms. Sultana: I am a Rohingya lawyer, researcher
and educator who specializes in the trauma, mass rape
and trafficking of Rohingya girls and women. I have
been working directly with Rohingya women and
girls in the refugee camps in Bangladesh since 2014.
As a senior researcher, I have worked with Kalandan
Press on a few reports. I am a coordinator of the Free
Rohingya Coalition, Director of the women’s section
of the Arakan Rohingya National Organization and the
founder of Rohingya Women Welfare. Today I speak
on behalf of my people, who have been driven from our
motherland. Where I come from, women and girls have
been gang-raped, tortured and killed by the Myanmar
army for no reason other than for being Rohingya. I
also speak today on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security.
6/80

16/04/2018

Since August last year, more than 670,000 Rohingya
have fled Myanmar. That is the fastest refugee
movement since the Rwanda genocide. I am extremely
grateful to Bangladesh for opening its borders.
However, the international community, particularly
the Security Council, has failed us. The most recent
crisis could have been prevented if the warning signs
since 2012 had not been ignored. Since that time,
State security forces have committed human rights
abuses against the Rohingya. Officials then placed
severe restrictions on our freedom of movement, which
limited access to a livelihood, health care, food and
education. Discrimination against the Rohingya people
dates to as far back as 1982, when we were stripped of
our citizenship rights. Many of Myanmar’s other ethnic
minorities — including the Karen, Kachin, Chin,
Hmong and Shan peoples — have also faced decades
of entrenched discrimination, rape and other human
rights violations owing to the military operating with
impunity. Other ethnic women’s groups in Myanmar
have documented such patterns for decades. In 2002,
the Shan groups released a report that described the
same patterns of gang-rape, killing and mutilation. In
2014, the Women’s League of Burma released a report
that documented the rape of more than 100 ethnic
women by the Myanmar army. That demonstrated how,
even after the elections in 2010, the Myanmar army was
still raping ethnic women with impunity. The same is
happening now, only on a much larger scale.
My own research and interviews provide evidence
that Government troops raped many more than 300
women and girls in 17 villages in Rakhine state. With
more than 350 villages attacked and burned since
August 2017, that number is probably only a fraction
of the actual total number of women raped. Girls as
young as six years of age were gang-raped. Women and
girls were caught and gang-raped in their homes as they
ran away or tried to cross the border into Bangladesh.
Some were horribly mutilated and burned alive. The
sexual violence involved hundreds of soldiers and
occurred across a large part of Rakhine state. Such
scale and breadth provide strong evidence that rape was
systematically planned and used as a weapon against
my people. The pattern of mutilation of women’s private
parts after rape suggests a specific directive to instil
terror among the Rohingya people, as well as to destroy
their very means of reproduction. With hundreds of
thousands of troops deployed across Myanmar, it has
horrifying implications for the safety of women and
girls across the country.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

There are similar situations around the world,
such as in Syria and Yemen. More than 3 million
women and girls are at risk of sexual and genderbased violence in Yemen. In Syria, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic found that sexual violence carried out
by Government forces and militias formed part of the
widespread and systematic attacks directed against the
civilian population.
Rohingyas continue to flee today, and humanitarian
organizations estimate that 60 per cent of the displaced
Rohingya currently in Cox’s Bazar, in Bangladesh, are
women and girls. Had Bangladesh closed its borders, the
situation would have been considerably worse. However,
the international community and humanitarian agencies
need to urgently scale up the health and protection
services to support the Rohingya refugees. That must
include unhindered access to life-saving health care
services, mental and psychosocial care and improved
conditions of sanitation, water and hygiene. Despite
the acute need, post-rape care, including access to safe
abortions and emergency contraception, is critically
low in the camps. Women and girls with disabilities
and the elderly face greater risks and needs, which are
not being addressed. There must be a faster registration
process for non-governmental organizations specialized
in humanitarian sexual reproductive health care and in
women’s empowerment and protection programming.
My greatest concern is the increased incidents of
young women being trafficked, some of whom are as
young as 12 years old. Young women and girls either are
kidnapped or are promised jobs or marriage offers and
then disappear. Many see no future and are desperate
to escape to a better life. They are easily trapped by
false promises and then never seen again. There have
also been cases of young teenage boys being abducted.
I am working on an awareness campaign for parents
and community leaders to provide their girls with a
protected environment.
Young Rohingya women have a vital role to
play in such awareness-raising and in coordinating
humanitarian assistance in the camps. They should be
encouraged to volunteer, as they will be trusted by their
community to relay vital information and, at the same
time, they will learn important leadership skills. Many
young Rohingya women in the refugee camps want
to help their people and to be actively involved in the
future of their community. They need to be supported
and provided with the necessary training to do so. It is

S/PV. 8234

time to empower our Rohingya women and girls with
vision, respect and support in whatever way we can.
Later this month, the Security Council will visit
the refugee camps in Cox’s Bazar and continue on to
Myanmar. During that visit, its members must meet
women and girl survivors. I can facilitate safe meetings.
They must work with the Bangladesh authorities to stop
the trafficking, pressure the Myanmar Government and
senior officials to cooperate with the United Nations
independent international fact-finding mission on
Myanmar and insist on unrestricted humanitarian
access across Rakhine state.
The rule of law must drive the response to the
Rohingya crisis. International pressure is urgently
needed to end impunity in Myanmar and to support
political and legal reform that ends the oppression of
all ethnic peoples in Myanmar. Any return of refugees
to Myanmar must be in accordance with international
standards and must be safe, dignified and voluntary.
As the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
recommended, and many members of the Council
agreed, the Government of Myanmar must address
the central questions of Rohingya citizenship, rights,
freedom of movement and equality before the law. My
people must be guaranteed their safety upon return
to Myanmar. My people are not asking for citizenship;
we want our right to citizenship back. My people must
be guaranteed their safety upon return to Myanmar.
My people must be guaranteed their safety upon return
to Burma.
The Myanmar military is listed for the first time
in this year’s report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250). In the
light of that and the ongoing impunity of the army, the
Security Council must refer the situation in Myanmar
to the International Criminal Court without delay, for
its horrific crimes against Rohingya as well as for
violations against other ethnic groups in the country,
including in the Shan, Karin, Kachin and other states. It
is hypocritical to condemn the human rights violations
and express horror at the new violence, while then
also selling arms to Myanmar and seeking explorative
licenses to mine its natural resources. Member States
committed to conflict prevention and sustaining peace
cannot turn a blind eye to State-sanctioned persecution
of an ethnic minority, discrimination or other human
rights violations, including sexual violence for trade.
That applies to Myanmar and all crises elsewhere.

18-108857/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

My statement today is not only for Rohingya
women but for my other ethnic sisters who are also
facing atrocities. Women community leaders from
different ethnicities across Myanmar are working
together to build inter-ethnic peace and community
relations. We believe in a peaceful and united Myanmar
for all ethnicities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Sultana for her informative briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Bah Kuhnke (Sweden): I align myself with the
statements to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union, the Nordic countries and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.
Let me begin by thanking the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila
Patten, for their thoughtful interventions this morning
and for their leadership and concrete efforts to combat
conflict-related sexual violence. I want to extend a
particular word of welcome and thanks to Ms. Razia
Sultana, whose testimony underlines the critical
importance of using all the tools available to the
Security Council to prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence.
In my position as the Swedish Minister for
Culture and Democracy — with responsibilities such
as national human rights, civil society and the fight
against discrimination and racism — I have met women
and girls, men and boys who are seeking asylum in
Sweden, and I have listened to their testimonies. I
have heard stories about children in conflict areas,
taken from their families, abducted, forced into sexual
slavery. Those are horrible atrocities. But it does not
stop there. During their journey to Europe, they were
once again abused and harassed, including in refugee
camps. My role as Minister is to listen, to understand
and — most important — to act. Those testimonies,
like Ms. Sultana’s, cannot only be something we here
are horrified by; the stories must become the starting
point for action.
Regrettably, violence, oppression and systematic
subordination still mark the daily lives of countless
women and girls. Conflict-related sexual violence
brutalizes and traumatizes the victims and seeks to
undermine and shatter communities and societies.
8/80

16/04/2018

Its impact cannot be overestimated. Addressing this
scourge is a central part of the Security Council’s work.
Alarmingly, conflict-related sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism has reached new levels. That is
a core security challenge. At the heart of this issue is
the fundamental principle of women’s full enjoyment
of human rights, especially sexual and reproductive
health and rights. The link between accountability and
prevention is clear. Ensuring accountability and putting
an end to impunity for violations and abuses against
international law must be a priority for all of us, both
inside and outside the Council.
When Sweden joined the Security Council, we
set out two overarching priorities: conflict prevention
and women and peace and security. Therefore, we
thank Peru for organizing this open debate, and
welcome the focus of today’s discussion. Since 2014,
Sweden has pursued a feminist foreign policy based
on four R’s — rights, representation, resources and
reality check. That means that throughout our foreign
policy — including peace, security, trade, humanitarian
and development efforts — we are applying a systematic
gender perspective. Without inclusion and respect for
all, sustainable peace can never be achieved. We know
that gender equality makes societies more peaceful.
The ongoing Stockholm Forum on Gender Equality
will cover many of these critical issues and seek
common solutions.
The Council needs to address the gender dynamics
of the root causes of conflict. We must consider
structural gender inequality as a critical element of the
instability that hinders efforts to maintain or restore
international peace and security. To achieve that, we
need gendered conflict analysis, while building on
gender-disaggregated data and solid gender expertise.
We also need to build alliances with brave civil
society actors, who play an essential role in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence and promoting gender
equality. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Council consider the early
warning signs of sexual violence in its monitoring of
conflict situations.
Last year, the Security Council added the first-ever
separate designation criteria on conflict-related sexual
violence in the sanctions regime for the Central African
Republic. However, having the criteria is not enough;
sanctions committees also need gender expertise. This
year, when the Council renewed the sanctions regime
for the Central African Republic, it added language to
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

respond to this need. Let us work together to include
similar criteria in all relevant sanctions regimes.
Panels of experts must also be mandated to report
to the sanctions committees on conflict-related sexual
violence. In cases where there are still no separate
designation criteria, we encourage the panels to report
under international humanitarian law and/or human
rights criteria. To further inform country-specific
considerations, we encourage Council members and the
broader membership to make full use of the documents
and the meetings of the Security Council Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security.
The importance of women in peacekeeping no
longer needs to be justified. The evidence speaks
for itself. With more female peacekeepers and police
officers, we can achieve more and reach the whole
population in a conflict area. Sweden is actively
addressing factors that hinder the deployment of women
peacekeepers, police and corrections officers. The
women and peace and security agenda is an integral
part of predeployment training for all Swedish troops,
and all deployed contingents have specially trained
gender advisers. There are many good examples to be
shared in that regard.
We welcome the enhanced focus on access to
justice and its links to prevention, which contributes
to ending impunity and to ensuring victims’ trust in
accountable and effective criminal-justice institutions.
As the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2018/250 highlights, the effects of sexual
violence — including trauma, stigma, poverty and poor
health — can echo across generations. In response, we
need to ensure socioeconomic-reintegration support to
restore community cohesion. Survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence also must have access to the full
range of livelihood, legal, psychosocial and medical
services, including sexual- and reproductive-health
services that are not subject to donor restrictions.
The focus of today’s open debate shows that it is
a broad agenda with many interconnected goals and
that no single actor can achieve them alone. That makes
alliances — among States, regional and international
organizations, civil society, women’s organizations,
inter alia — so important. We, the Security Council,
need to show leadership — not just with regard to
today’s topic, but across all aspects of our work.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Special

S/PV. 8234

Representative Patten and Ms. Sultana for their briefings
today. The report of the Secretary-General on the rising
levels of conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250)
is chilling. We welcome the discussion today and hope
that it serves as an impetus for the Security Council to
take concrete steps to both ensure justice for survivors
and help prevent these crimes from occurring. I thank
the President for convening today’s meeting.
We should all be appalled at the level of sexual
violence taking place in conflicts around the world.
In war zone after war zone, horrific violence against
women is not an unfortunate by-product of conflict but
a weapon of conflict. As the Secretary-General’s report
details, and as Ms. Sultana describes in horrible detail,
in Burma, as we speak, the military is using sexual
violence as a tool for ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya
and for terrorizing other ethnic communities across the
country with impunity. And what does that mean? It
means using mass rape, sexual exploitation and sexual
slavery of women and girls — girls as young as 12 or
13 — to drive groups of people out of their homes. It
means using the terror, stigma and shame of rape to
drive families from their country, often from the
only place they have ever known. As the mother of a
precious nine-year-old girl, I find the horror of these
crimes unfathomable.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sexual
violence is a common tactic used by armed groups to
punish and humiliate people allied with their enemies.
Women and girls are the battlefield on which conflict is
waged. A staggering 27 per cent of Congolese women
have experienced sexual violence in their lifetime.
And let us all understand why women have been
targeted in so many conflicts. It is because violence
against women is violence against families, and violence
against families is violence against whole communities.
Survivors are stigmatized and isolated, families and
communities are ripped apart, and entire generations
are left less able to find peace and to reconcile with
their communities. Sexual violence is the poisoned root
of societies that are suffering endless conflict, poverty
and dislocation.
It is for this reason that we welcome today’s debate.
When we recognize the role of sexual violence in
conflict, we recognize the link between human rights
and conflict. The United States has long urged the
Security Council to address human rights as an issue of
peace and security. Debates like the one we are having

18-108859/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

today do that in a powerful and undeniable way. This
linkage should be apparent to anyone who has spent any
time in conflict zones or the refugee camps that house
the survivors. The sexual violence those survivors
experienced is not random; it is calculated and designed
to inflict punishment and fear on a community.
Tragically, we could go on all day about the
different aspects of this problem around the world,
but we are here to discuss solutions. The Council has
sanctions tools at its disposal to punish these heinous
actors around the world, but unfortunately they are
terribly underutilized. For example, last year former
Special Representative Bangura proposed names to the
Council of perpetrators who should be held accountable
for their crimes, but nothing has been done.
It is now time for the Council to use these tools
to hold perpetrators accountable for their actions. It is
now time to end impunity for these criminals and show
survivors and the rest of the world that the international
community will respond. It is now time that Member
States actively develop sanctions designations for
perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict. We can also
designate criminals operating in conflict zones where
we already have United Nations sanctions regimes in
place. Taking those steps will not only end impunity for
sexual violence and conflict; it will also help to deter
future abuses.
The United Nations also has a role to play in
countering violence against women in the field through
our peacekeeping missions. Women talk to each other,
and, more importantly, they understand each other.
We should capitalize on this fundamental truth and do
a better job of recruiting and including more women
in peacekeeping. Unfortunately, only 4 per cent of
uniformed peacekeepers are women. That number is
even smaller in the most dangerous missions, where
women are suffering the most. Deploying more women
peacekeepers will provide valuable insights that male
peacekeepers often cannot obtain.
However, it is not just about numbers. It is also
about the roles that women peacekeepers take on.
Women peacekeepers should be encouraged and
empowered to engage with local communities and
bring value to the work of their missions. Additionally,
research shows that female participation improves
dispute resolution. Women need to be at the table during
peace negotiations. The United Nations should strive to
10/80

16/04/2018

include female representation in negotiating bodies and
mediating teams.
Finally, the United Nations should ensure that
all peacekeeping training centres around the world
include training to involve women in prevention and
peacebuilding efforts. Without understanding the
concerns of half of the population, conflict can never
be resolved. Sexual violence primarily affects women,
but at its heart it is an issue of human dignity. And it
is an issue of how violations of human dignity — the
denial of human dignity — have an impact on peace
and security. As such, it is a vital issue of concern for
the Security Council. I thank the President once again
for arranging today’s debate.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing today’s open debate on the
women and peace and security agenda relating to the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. We
express our appreciation for the Secretary-General’s
annual report on this topic (S/2018/250). I would also
like to thank the briefers for their respective remarks.
Conflict-related sexual violence has indeed
become rampant in various conflicts and postconflict situations. We note that the Secretary-General’s
report contains useful recommendations that could
form an important basis for addressing this serious
challenge. The recommendations will have particular
significance in the consideration of specific conflict or
post-conflict situations, and the Council could explore
ways and means of ensuring their implementation.
The Council should encourage or pressure,
as appropriate, all parties to an armed conflict to
fully comply with international humanitarian law,
particularly in relation to the protection of civilians.
The implementation by Member States of relevant
regional and international legal instruments for the
prevention, punishment and eradication of all forms of
violence against women would also contribute to the
national, regional and international response to victims
of sexual violence.
We note that progress has been registered,
including through the alignment of national legislation
to international standards and implementation of joint
communiqués and actions plans in several Member
States, as indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. This notwithstanding, sexual violence
continues to be used by belligerent parties in conflict
and post-conflict situations in different parts of the
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

world. In particular, extremist and terrorist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram and Al-Shabaab, are using it as a tactic of war to
terrorize civilian populations and achieve their strategic
objectives. The stigmatization faced by victims of
sexual violence and the challenges in their reintegration
process, as well as the impunity that the perpetrators of
this heinous crime enjoy, are indeed deeply troubling.
Therefore, there is need to redouble our efforts in
preventing conflict-related sexual violence, providing
the necessary support to victims and fighting impunity.
In this regard, the three-pillar priorities identified by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
could serve as the basis. In addition, the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council
contained in his latest report, particularly in relation to
engagement with relevant parties to an armed conflict,
exploring the use of periodic visits to address the issue,
as well as the possibility of accelerated deployment of
protection advisers, could form part of a comprehensive
framework for preventing and addressing conflictrelated sexual violence.
The Council should also continue to attach the
utmost importance to preventing and addressing the
root causes of conflict. Furthermore, measures aimed
at reducing the vulnerabilities of civilians, including
by enhancing the capacity of peacekeeping missions,
as well as the Council’s using all the available tools at
its disposal, will be critical. In this regard, the Council
could explore the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to include sexual violence as part of the
designation criteria on a case-by-case basis, particularly
in the context of the use of mass rape and other forms of
sexual violence by extremist and terrorist groups.
In post-conflict situations, the Council could
further strengthen its peacebuilding efforts aimed
at rebuilding national capacity and institutions,
particularly the capacity of security and judiciary
services to prevent and punish conflict-related sexual
violence and addressing its root causes. That will enable
the Council to fight impunity and bring perpetrators to
justice, as well as to ensure the non-occurrence of such
grave crimes.
We have noted from the report of the SecretaryGeneral that some of the information concerns
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence that
are linked, or alleged to be linked, to Governmentaffiliated forces. In our view, such information should

S/PV. 8234

be communicated to the relevant authorities in a timely
manner with a view to investigating and verifying its
objectivity, accuracy and reliability. That, we believe,
would contribute to fighting impunity and providing
the necessary assistance to victims of conflict-related
sexual violence and their families.
Finally, I would like to conclude my remarks by
reaffirming the commitment of Ethiopia to working
with all the relevant actors, including the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
preventing conflict-related sexual violence and fighting
impunity in this regard.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I want
to start by thanking Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their very insightful speeches,
as well as Ms. Razia Sultana for her powerful speech,
which should challenge us to reflect on this topic.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our full support to the Special Representative and her
team of experts on the rule of law and sexual violence
in conflict to implement this agenda, which is a priority
for France.
At the outset, France aligns itself with the statements
to be made by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
I will start by making several observations on
issues which are alarming before proposing an overall
response and several concrete ways to strengthen our
collective action against these hateful acts.
First, despite the Council’s efforts, we remain
confronted with an intolerable situation. We are
horrified by the number of cases of sexual violence
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250), which still includes 51 listed parties, and
by the sometimes systematic use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war, a method of torture and a tool of
terror. In the 19 situations examined in the report,
sexual violence is also synonymous with restrictions on
freedom of movement. That is the case, for example, in
Syria, where sexual assaults are committed at crossing
points and where sexual violence in besieged areas is
described as systematic. The communities targeted are
also forced to move, thereby finding themselves in new
situations of vulnerability. At times, progress achieved

18-1088511/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

has been swept away, as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where an increase in violence has also led to
an increase in verified cases.
We condemn all those cases of violence with the
greatest firmness. International justice must be able
to convict the guilty. In that regard, we can highlight
some progress, for example, the conviction last August
of Colonel Becker for war crimes, including rape,
committed in 2015 by his soldiers in Musenyi, South
Kivu. We also note the end of equating rape with
adultery in Afghanistan, the Sudan and Somalia.
However, a great deal of progress is still needed.
For example, it is incomprehensible that no individual
associated with Da’esh or Boko Haram has been
convicted, even though we know those terrorist
groups have used sexual violence as a tactic of war on
a large scale. Furthermore, local and national justice
mechanisms, such as in Somalia or South Sudan,
sometimes subject victims to a double punishment by
forcing them to marry their aggressors.
The statement by Ms. Razia Sultana, as well as
the findings from the Special Representative’s visit,
refer to the systematic use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war in Burma to terrorize the Rohingya and
make them flee. The Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly have already condemned that sexual
violence, and the Security Council must ensure that
justice is served against the guilty parties and that
adequate assistance is provided to the victims. We must
also be extremely vigilant with regard to the situation
in Kachin and Shan states.
The intolerable often takes root in intolerance.
Sexual violence is very often exacerbated or even
incited by discrimination, including that linked
to gender, inequality between women and men,
prejudice and stereotypes. Even after their liberation,
victims are often pursued by those prejudices and
face stigmatization.
Sexual violence must therefore be fought throughout
the process, from prevention to rehabilitation and
reintegration. Victim support programmes, such as
those established in Colombia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Kosovo, are essential. Social, legal and medical
services, including psychological and social support,
as well as dialogue within communities, are crucial.
That response must be quick, as demonstrated by the
situation in the Central African Republic, where men
and boys are also victims.
12/80

16/04/2018

This struggle must also be part of a comprehensive
response to all the challenges that societies pose to
the rights of women. It is all the more effective when
women’s participation in decision-making is assured
and when real attention is paid to their economic and
social emancipation. Sexual violence jeopardizes
women’s economic and social process, and many are
forced to relinquish their right to land ownership,
for example. Such violence is also used as a threat to
prevent them from participating in politics. France will
therefore continue to call for a comprehensive response
through the effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, as it did during the
debate on 27 October 2017 (see S/PV.8079), under its
presidency of the Security Council. It is not enough to
be outraged; we must act.
Today’s excellent concept note (S/2018/311, annex)
has inspired us to reflect on prevention. Effectively
combating impunity is the best method of prevention.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the
perpetrators of sexual violence are tried by competent
national courts and, failing that, by international
criminal courts, including the International Criminal
Court. When judicial proceedings are impossible in
the short term, we must ensure that mechanisms are in
place to document crimes and enable proceedings at a
later stage. The Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Independent and
Impartial Mechanism can play that indespensable role.
In addition, providing support to national authorities
must go hand in hand with protecting civil society actors
who work each day to combat sexual violence and assist
victims, and who are themselves often threatened.
The Council can now make its response more
specific and effective. First, it can include sexual
violence as a designation criterion, directly or indirectly,
in all sanctions regimes. It must have genuine recourse
to that tool. I propose that we work together to ensure
that it is employed.
Next, we must ensure that peacekeeping operations
have the necessary capacity to implement their
mandates. Protecting women is not optional; it is an
absolute necessity that must be firmly anchored at the
centre of operations. In that regard, the posts of gender
advisers and women’s protection advisers are crucial
and must be preserved.
Lastly, the Council must be able to address the issue
of sexual violence in conflict more regularly — for
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

example, by issuing press statements when instances
of sexual violence are confirmed in theatres of
conflict. Several United Nations initiatives should
be commended and supported, such as UN-Women
and Justice Rapid Response, which comprise a pool
of experts to provide support to inquiry mechanisms.
On a broader scale, we commend the zero-tolerance
policy of the Secretary-General with regard to sexual
exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment. The
United Nations must set an example, and the “UN Too”
movement, which mirrors the Me Too movement, opens
the door for concrete responses.
As for France, to mention a few examples, we have
established a whistle-blowing unit and training courses
on various types of sexual violence for soldiers ahead of
their deployment, as well as for magistrates. Last year,
the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs financed
civil society projects to combat violence against women
in Yemen and Nigeria, following similar initiatives in
the Central African Republic, Cameroon and Lebanon.
It is now funding the establishment of a holistic
treatment centre for victims of sexual violence in the
Central African Republic.
The international community, in particular the
Council, must redouble its efforts in response to
such odious and vile acts. This is one of France’s top
priorities, including within the context of its feminist
diplomacy. My country will continue to demonstrate
the utmost respect for that call. As President Emmanuel
Macron recalled, that requirement is the essence of
our dignity. More than ever, France is committed and
determined to act.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you very much, Sir, for
convening today’s debate on this important topic.
I thank the Secretary-General for his useful report
(S/2018/250), as well as Ms. Amina Mohammed,
Ms. Pramila Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana for their
valuable briefings.
Our discussion today focuses on preventing
sexual violence in conflict by empowering women
and ensuring gender equality and access to justice. In
that regard, I would like to mention three main issues:
first, the links among sexual violence, conflict, violent
extremism and terrorism; secondly, addressing the root
causes of sexual violence in conflict; and, thirdly, the
importance of ensuring justice for survivors of sexual
violence during conflicts.

S/PV. 8234

First, with regard to the links between sexual
violence, conflict, violent extremism and terrorism,
this year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1820 (2008), which acknowledges that
conflict-related sexual violence is a threat to international
peace and security and requires an international
response. It also acknowledges that sexual violence is
being used as a war tactic. The report of the SecretaryGeneral confirms that once again by documenting the
continuation of the targeting of victims on the basis of
their ethnic, religious or political affiliation with the
aim to forcibly displacing them, which is tantamount to
ethnic cleansing. The report also mentions instances of
such acts being perpetrated in Congo and the Central
African Republic, and elsewhere against the Rohingya.
Based on resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2253
(2015), and taking into the account the Council’s
acknowledgement that sexual violence in conflict
is a war tactic and a tool used by some terrorist and
extremist groups, such violence also constitutes an
element of the political economy of terrorism that
is used in recruitment and financing. The Security
Council should hold accountable all perpetrators of
such crimes and end their impunity. It should also
further include in the mandates of peacekeeping and
political missions tasks related to the empowerment of
women in conflict and on holding the perpetrators of
crimes of sexual violence accountable following the
end of conflict, including referring such crimes, which
amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity, to
appropriate tribunals.
Secondly, with regard to the root causes of sexual
violence in conflict, last year we all witnessed a
retreat by extremist and violent terrorist armed groups,
which led to new challenges in the areas that had been
liberated from terrorism, including the need to hold
to account those responsible for sexual violence and
to reintegrate survivors. Sexual violence is still used
as a means to force people to leave their land and to
sexually exploit women and girls. It is perpetrated even
by those responsible for refugee camps and by refugee
smugglers. In such circumstances, the impunity
enjoyed by perpetrators prevents displaced persons
and refugees from returning to their homes and places
of origin in safety and dignity. It also exacerbates and
prolongs crises. We agree with the Secretary-General
that the best way to prevent sexual violence is to protect
basic freedoms and human rights, support economic
empowerment and fair political participation, build

18-1088513/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

national capacity and provide assistance to the survivors
of sexual violence, in particular women and girls who
are marginalized or economically disadvantaged.
At the regional level, the State of Kuwait hosted
the International Conference for Reconstruction of
Iraq, where it announced its contribution of $1 billion
in the form of loans and investments. We did so because
we believe that the areas liberated from the terrorist
Da’esh organization must be rehabilitated and provided
support for comprehensive development in order to
achieve sustainable development for women and girls,
as well as national reconciliation and social justice.
Thirdly, with regard to sexual violence in conflict,
the State of Kuwait attaches particular importance to
addressing the consequences of sexual violence on
survivors by providing them access to justice. We now
have in place a robust normative framework that enables
States to address sexual violence in conflict, beginning
with resolution 1820 (2008), as well as other related
resolutions, such as resolution 1988 (2011), which
established the position of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and led to improved coordination
among relevant entities, as well as resolution 1960
(2010), which established a mechanism to monitor and
report on sexual violence in conflict.
We support the close cooperation between Member
States and United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence, aimed at compensating survivors, providing
access to justice, respecing their culture and affording
them the psychological, physical and social assistance
they need. The root causes of sexual violence in conflict
are numerous, as are its forms and victims. Ensuring
justice is a multidimensional issue that requires a
multidimensional response to address the short- and
long-term psychological, physical, economic and
social consequences of sexual violence. We stress the
importance of treating survivors and their children as
victims first, as opposed to viewing them as being loyal
to armed or terrorist groups. The national capacities of
the Member States in dealing with such crimes must
be reinforced.
In conclusion, while we speak of the importance
of ensuring justice for the survivors of sexual violence,
we would be remiss if we did not commend the steps
taken by the Secretary-General in the implementation
of the zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation
and abuse. We take note of the special measures taken
with regard to protection from sexual exploitation and
14/80

16/04/2018

abuse mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report.
The United Nations commitment to those measures
will enhance its credibility and promote wide-ranging
efforts to eliminate sexual violence.
Ms. Cardona Moscoso (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Conflict-related sexual
violence involves a series of crimes against humanity
that have devastating and irreversible consequences
for its victims. The Security Council must address the
issue on a more regular basis, which is why we thank
the presidency of Peru for its initiative in convening
this open debate. We would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
leadership in making this issue more visible. Moreover,
we thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Razia Sultana for their briefings.
Bolivia believes that conflict-related sexual
violence is one of the most heinous acts against
humanity because its emotional and physical
consequences continue to affect its survivors long after
the conflicts end. The international community must
band together to tackle this problem and coordinate its
efforts to implement measures at the national, regional
and international levels.
Over the past 18 years, the Security Council has
been developing a series of resolutions that attempt to
provide a comprehensive response to sexual violence
in conflict, which indubitably poses a serious threat
to international security and a real impediment to the
achievement of peace in countries that are victims
of armed confrontation. Despite those resolutions,
however, sexual violence in conflict continues to be a
cruel reality in the daily lives of millions of people.
It is imperative that the Security Council be resolute
in the implementation of its resolutions on combating
sexual violence in conflict by promoting accountability
and implementing the zero-tolerance policy. We
believe that the Secretary-General’s suggestions in his
recent report (S/2018/250) are correct, especially with
regard to including sexual violence in the designation
criteria for sanctions and in ensuring that the sanctions
committees can access information from an expert on
gender and conflict-related sexual violence.
Although sexual violence in conflict knows no
gender, it mostly affects women and girls, who are
subjected to rape, sexual slavery, prostitution, forced
marriage and sterilization, trafficking in persons and
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

other forms of violence with terrible consequences
for the physical and psychological well-being of the
victims. Very often, instead of receiving protection and
assistance, they are marginalized and rejected in their
own communities.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism is most
alarming. In that regard, the international community
must work together to support national initiatives
geared towards the social reintegration of survivors and
their children so that they can fully enjoy their rights.
Likewise, the increasing risk of sexual violence
in refugee camps and during displacement is another
challenge with which the international community must
grapple. Insecurity during displacement, lack of access
to basic services for refugees and the prolongation of
conflicts that impede a safe return are all difficult
conditions that millions of people now experience. An
example is the situation on the border between Myanmar
and Bangladesh. We highlight Bangladesh’s goodwill
in providing refuge to the Rohingya people, and we
encourage Myanmar to continue working with the
United Nations to ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable return of the displaced persons.
We believe that women’s empowerment as a
preventive measure, access to justice and accountability
are fundamental elements in the fight against sexual
violence. However, it is clear that, in order to promote
such measures, we must first address the root causes
of conflict, reduce structural inequalities, combat
extreme poverty and eradicate the discrimination that
patriarchal systems have left entrenched in society and
that prevent women from enjoying unhindered personal
development and access to justice.

S/PV. 8234

conditions of abuse and discrimination in which women,
minorities and rural populations live. Afghanistan has
provided a good example of legal and constitutional
transformation for women in its work to implement
its national action plan for Afghan women, which has
proved to be an encouraging development, despite the
fact that major challenges remain.
Similarly, close cooperation with regional
organizations is also of the utmost importance. Last
year, the Deputy Secretary-General visited Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
very significant for the joint work of the United Nations
and the African Union. That type of approach is very
important for the implementation of the gender, peace
and security programme on the African continent,
as well as for the strengthening of other existing
mechanisms. We also highlight the establishment of
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, which was set up
through a peace agreement led by the African Union,
with technical support from the United Nations. Despite
the time it is taking to implement, it is a collaborative
initiative that we should continue to encourage. That
said, we believe that we have good tools for continuing
our struggle against sexual violence. Many challenges
lie ahead, and we must therefore strengthen the
commitment of the Security Council and the United
Nations system in general.

Prevention is a very important tool that the
Secretary-General has been promoting over the past
year. Increasing the cooperation between the United
Nations and civil society is essential for prevention,
in order to access more specific information that
will enable us to carry out more reliable analyses of
the situation.

Mr. Radomski (Poland): We commend Peru for
convening today’s important debate. Poland aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
observer of the European Union. I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for
her remarks. I also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her comprehensive briefing.
We greatly appreciate her tireless and dedicated work.
We are honoured by the presence of Ms. Razia Sultana
among us today, and we deeply appreciated her moving
and inspirational testimony on behalf of the Rohingya
women and girls who have suffered from sexual
violence. As a voice representing civil society, hers is
important for all of us to hear.

It is key to promote the participation of women
in peace, security and development processes, and
to include in the agreements specific content on the
inclusion of women, the fight against sexual violence
and the elimination of impunity. The political
empowerment of women should be promoted by
States through concrete measures that transform the

We are outraged by the persistent and widespread
incidence of sexual violence in armed conflict. As many
speakers have noted, sexual violence is increasingly
used as a tactic of warfare and constitutes a flagrant and
unacceptable violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. We are all aware that the
already staggering number of reported cases of sexual

18-1088515/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

violence in conflict represents a mere fraction of
the true number. One of the greatest challenges that
the victims of these crimes are facing is the lack of
accountability for their perpetrators. The recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250) highlights the
various challenges that we face in addressing conflictrelated sexual violence. I would like to emphasize three
areas that merit our particular attention today.
First, we welcome the focus of this year’s report
on economic empowerment as a tool for eliminating
conflict-related sexual violence. Poverty and social
exclusion are risk factors associated with genderbased violence. The economic empowerment of women
means ensuring proper funding for programmes that
address the economic and social needs of survivors,
as well as implementing initiatives aimed at changing
the conditions that enable violence to occur in the first
place. We also believe that there is a need for a broader
discussion in the Security Council of the importance
of women’s economic empowerment in post-conflict
settings in more general terms. Peacebuilding
and recovery funding still largely ignore women’s
economic role.
Let me now turn to the second question of the
stigmatization of victims of sexual violence. Beyond
the immediate cruelty of sexual violence and its
consequences, victims are still all too often stigmatized
and rejected by their families and communities. In their
desire to avoid stigma and discrimination, the majority
of victims do not report rape or other forms of sexual
violence. That not only contributes to a culture of
impunity, it also prevents survivors of sexual violence
from accessing medical care and legal assistance. We
support the Secretary-General’s call to traditional,
religious and community leaders to address harmful
social norms and help to redirect the stigma of rape from
the victims to the perpetrators. In particular, we want
to draw attention to the social stigma experienced by
children conceived through rape. Women with children
born of sexual violence are the most marginalized
of all. Children born of rape are often ostracized by
their families and communities. Children living on
the margins of societies are not only deprived of basic
human rights, but are at a higher risk of being recruited
by armed and organized-crime groups, thereby posing
a direct threat to peace and security.
My third point relates to sexual violence directed
against men and boys in armed conflicts. We welcome
the attention that the Secretary-General’s report gives to
16/80

16/04/2018

this issue. The devastating effects of sexual violence on
male survivors and their families should be discussed
openly in this forum. The great reluctance of many men
and boys to report sexual violence makes it very difficult
to accurately assess its scope. Almost certainly, the
limited statistics that exist vastly understate the number
of male victims. For male survivors, sexual violence
remains hidden owing to cultural taboos. The hesitancy
of male survivors to speak about sexual violence makes
impunity for such crimes even more likely. We urge
States to remove all structural and legal obstacles that
prevent the investigation and prosecution of rape and
other forms of sexual violence committed against men
and boys.
The latest Secretary-General’s report makes it clear
that we should spare no effort in combating sexual
violence. Only by shedding light on the issue can we
lift the long shadow of sexual violence in conflict
from all its survivors and prevent it from happening in
the future.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s meeting, and to express our
gratitude to the briefers for their interesting and
useful information. I would particularly like to thank
Ms. Razia Sultana for her interesting briefing, and I
hope that during Council members’ upcoming visit to
Myanmar, in which we will be participating, we will
learn more about the issue.
Since the Security Council began to deal with the
problem of sexual violence in conflict, almost 10 years
ago, much has been achieved. First, it is now generally
understood that sexual violence is a serious challenge
rather than a collateral or secondary manifestation of
individuals’ baser instincts, exacerbated by situations
involving armed conflict. There can also be no doubt
that sexual violence is a consequence of conflict,
including as a result of impunity for those who commit
such crimes. In our view, therefore, eliminating sexual
violence, as well as other forms of violence directed
at civilians, can be achieved only by resolving armed
conflicts by peaceful means and eradicating their
root causes.
We have traditionally supported the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In particular, we greatly
appreciate her work on strengthening national capacitybuilding and developing dialogue with religious and
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

other traditional leaders in addressing problems related
to the stigmatization of victims of sexual violence and
their rehabilitation. So far, unfortunately, we have
failed to defeat the evil of violence. The statistics
relating to the increase in sex crimes by members of
terrorist groups is particularly disturbing. We urge
States to cooperate more actively in dismantling the
so-called shadow economy of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, which profits from trafficking
in persons and sexual slavery, for instance. We hope
that such crimes will be effectively documented and
investigated, for which primary responsibility lies with
the relevant authorities of the States on whose territory
they are committed.
We would also like to take a separate look at
a number of positions presented in today’s report
(S/2018/250). Although we share most of its conclusions
and recommendations, I feel it is important to draw
attention to a number of worrying aspects. First, as a
general observation, if Special Representative Patten
is to effectively carry out the tasks she has been set,
she should make sure that she continues to stick strictly
to her mandate. She should not divert her efforts and
resources to the issues of gender equality overall,
migration or violence against women generally. That
does not mean that those problems are not important.
They are, but they are not part of her mandate. Her
focus should be on situations of armed conflict, and
particularly those where sexual violence is occurring
on a large scale.
For several years now, we have been seriously
concerned about attempts to broaden the interpretation
of the scope of the Security Council’s mandate on
combating sexual violence in conflict by using a
different term — “conflict-related sexual violence”. As
we see it, what may at first seem to be mere technical
differences actually run the risk of going beyond
the Security Council’s remit and infringing on the
mandates of other United Nations bodies. It is essential
for these purposes to differentiate between acts of
sexual violence as war crimes or similar criminal acts.
Another trend we would also like to comment on
is the growing emphasis in the report on human rights
issues. We recall that sexual violence in conflict is first
and foremost a violation of international humanitarian
law. That is why both Government entities and
non-Government participants in an armed conflict
are obliged to ensure compliance with norms aimed at

S/PV. 8234

combating sexual violence, and this is something that
should be monitored systematically.
Lastly and most importantly, this year we have seen
ill-advised attempts to use the issue of sexual violence
in conflict to resolve narrow political issues, something
that is reflected in the country section of the report.
In the section on Syria, in particular, the problem
of atrocities against women and girls perpetrated
by fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other terrorist organizations committing
outrageous acts in Syria is very much glossed over. The
evaluations and figures are presented in such a way that
one must extrapolate to get the full picture. How should
we interpret that? How will the militias and terrorists
react to that timidity? Probably with the thought that
their crimes are escaping the international community’s
attention and that they can continue them.
At the same time, there is not a word about the
substantive change in the security situation in Syria,
of the fact that a greater part of its territory has been
cleansed of terrorists, or that thanks to difficult,
painstaking efforts, large numbers of civilians, a
significant percentage of whom are women and children,
some of them victims of sexual violence and abuse,
have been liberated from the militias. For example,
during a period of active fighting, some 165,000 people
were evacuated from eastern Ghouta alone. We believe
that a one-sided approach, a lack of full disclosure or a
failure to mention objective realities can only harm the
Special Representative’s mandate and the effectiveness
of her efforts to combat sexual violence in conflict.
We would also like to emphasize separately that the
zero-tolerance policy that the report welcomes should not
operate on the principle of us versus them. Any efforts
to exempt national peacekeeping contingents acting
under Security Council mandates, or representatives of
non-governmental organizations working in countries,
from responsibility for committing such acts are
unacceptable. In that regard, we want to point out that
Paris has tried to sweep under the rug the examination
of cases of sexual violence, including against children,
by French soldiers during Operation Sangaris in the
Central African Republic. Despite the fact that the
investigation was supposedly carried out, no one was
punished, as far as one can tell. That is outrageous.
There are also other cases where a double standard
is clearly applied. For example, in considering the draft
of resolution 2410 (2018) on extending the mandate of

18-1088517/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

16/04/2018

the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
the United States delegation refused to establish the
importance of ensuring that all accusations of sexual
violence by representatives of non-governmental
organizations accredited with the United Nations
are reported.

and terrorism. Unfortunately, rape, which is often
collective, sexual slavery, forced prostitution and many
other forms of sexual violence are tactics to force people
or entire communities to flee their place of residence,
leaving behind them their property to the benefit of
their aggressors.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we have not
lost the hope that measures taken in the United Nations,
including through today’s discussions, will contribute
to the goal of eliminating sexual and all other forms
of violence against civilians in armed conflict and
ultimately to resolving those conflicts to the benefit of
international peace and security.

That worrisome situation, which seriously
undermines human rights and international humanitarian
law, has justified the international community and
the Security Council taking robust measures to deal
with that challenge. In that regard, it is important to
underscore the relevant provisions of resolution 1820
(2008), which recognizes that sexual violence is a tactic
of war that demands an appropriate security response.
It is also worth recalling the provisions of resolution
2331 (2016), which links human trafficking, sexual
violence and terrorism and, at the same time, calls for
psychological, medical and legal measures, inter alia,
as part of the reparations to which victims are entitled.

Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I would like to commend your country, Peru,
Mr. President, for including this important issue of
sexual violence in conflicts around the world on our
agenda during its presidency.
The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250). We also
thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Under-Secretary-General
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
Senior Researcher of Kaladan Press, for their briefings.
We thank Ms. Sultana for the important information
she provided on the situation of women in Myanmar.
The issue before us this morning offers the Security
Council the opportunity to debate, once again, the issue
of the important role of women in the peace and security
agenda around the world. My country shares the view
of experts that the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war represents a serious attack on the physical and
moral integrity of its victims and is serious breach of
society’s moral values. Women and girls living in areas
of instability are affected in an alarming way by sexual
and gender-based violence. Such violence, which is
usually perpetrated with the clear aim of impacting
the identity and dignity of its victims, has disastrous
consequences for them physically, psychologically and
economically, as well as repercussions for peace and
social cohesion.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250),
sexual violence is used by the warring parties as a
strategy of war and terrorism against communities. It
is increasingly a lucrative activity, fueling conflicts
18/80

Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that an appropriate
response to the problem of conflict-related sexual
violence includes the increased participation of women
in collective research and peacebuilding efforts,
since, as resolution 1325 (2000) underscores, women
significantly contribute to peacekeeping in their
community and nation. In that connection, it remains
essential to increase our efforts for the inclusion,
leadership and protection of women with a view to
ensuring social cohesion and lasting peace.
Following the post-election crisis in 2010 and 2011,
in March 2012 Côte d’Ivoire was listed in the annex
to the report of Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2012/33). It was delisted on 15 April
2017 in the light of the positive developments in the
country with regard to stability and peacebuilding.
That outcome is the result of the significant efforts of
the Ivorian Government, which, since the end of the
crisis, has made the fight against sexual violence a
priority by implementing a national strategy to combat
gender-based violence, in addition to the existing
legal mechanisms.
In order to fight against this scourge, a national
committee to combat conflict-related sexual violence
was set up by decree. The committee seeks to strengthen
the legislative framework by establishing a specific
provision for the repression of rape. In the same way,
the ownership of such efforts by the Government at
the highest level of the ranks of the Forces armées
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

de Côte d’Ivoire clearly demonstrated its relevance
in fighting against the scourge. Such ownership has
led, among other things, to the higher ranks making
specific commitments to train their staff on the issue of
sexual violence.
Issues of sexual violence, both in times of peace
and of conflict, have now become an integral part of
the training modules of training centres and military
academies in Côte d’Ivoire. The revised code of
conduct of the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire also
places a particular emphasis on crimes related to
sexual violence. In addition, the recruitment of women
to positions of responsibility in areas previously
reserved for men, in particular the defence sector, has
contributed to the effectiveness of the steps taken by the
Government with regard to the scourge. Thus, following
the implementation of the Government’s strategy and
other initiatives, such as the many awareness-raising
and training sessions, the number of documented cases
of sexual violence decreased from 478 in 2012 to 30 in
2014, 3 in 2015 and none in 2017.
My country welcomes the synergy of action
between the Ivoirian Government and the United
Nations system, brought about by the establishment
in 2015 of the joint mechanism of the Forces armées
de Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire to follow up on human rights violations.
In addition, that comprehensive cooperation has also
resulted in technical assistance being provided by the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict as part of the action
plan of the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire, whose
implementation led to, inter alia, the establishment of
specialized police units. Thanks to all those efforts,
today the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire are the first
and only entity to be have been delisted from the annex
to the report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence.
Moreover, our national social cohesion programme,
which was implemented in 2012 and includes a gender
dimension, resulted in the establishment of six posts
between 2015 and 2017 dedicated to the role of women
in peacebuilding in the western and central western
regions of the country, which were affected very
harshly by conflict in the past. That approach has had a
major impact in terms of the provision of psychosocial
support for victims of sexual violence and conflict.

S/PV. 8234

Notwithstanding the important progress achieved,
my country remains aware of the remaining challenges
with respect to the sensitive issue of reparations for
sexual violence committed during the post-electoral
crisis. Côte d’Ivoire would like to reaffirm its
determination to conclude investigations into cases
already identified and to support the victims, especially
through actions undertaken and led by the Ministry for
Women, Child Protection and Solidarity. Furthermore,
in the context of preventing and deterring the new forms
that sexual violence might take in times of peace, the
Ivorian Government intends to continue those efforts
and to make them a priority. That includes retaining the
zero-tolerance policy currently in place in the Ivorian
security and defence forces.
I cannot conclude my remarks without reiterating
the gratitude of my country to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and her team for their excellent work and efforts to
support the Ivorian Government in its fight against this
phenomenon. Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms not only its full
readiness and willingness to share its experience but
also to take up lessons learned from successes achieved
elsewhere, with a view to strengthening the resilience
of its people as well as existing legal and institutional
frameworks, including better addressing issues related
to gender-based sexual violence. In that regard, my
country welcomes next June’s experience-sharing and
lessons-learned mission to Colombia, supported by the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, with a view to taking inspiration from the
successful experiences of that country with regard to
victim compensation and reparations for victims of
sexual violence in conflict.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan thanks
the Peruvian presidency for highlighting the need to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence by ensuring
empowerment, gender equality and access to justice.
We commend Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, for so succinctly presenting the key
aspects of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/250),
as well as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila
Patten, on the important work of her Office. We
also thank Ms. Razia Sultana for her passionate and
informative, although horrifying, analysis of the
situation concerning sexual violence against Rohingya
women and women of other ethnic groups in Myanmar.

18-1088519/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

Kazakhstan
supports
the
findings
and
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s annual
report. Despite the robust normative framework and
the progress achieved, conflict-related sexual violence
remains at an alarmingly high level. More troubling
yet, sexual violence is aggravated by human trafficking
and is used as a tactic of war and source of income by
armed groups, terrorist organizations and transnational
organized crime networks. This scourge therefore
requires concerted and well-coordinated cross-national
interventions with a One United Nations approach.
All efforts by United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict require
improved coordination with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, and regional and
subregional organizations and initiatives, such as the
African Women Leaders Network, in the areas of
prevention, information-sharing and documentation,
assistance to victims, training of security forces, legal
assistance and exchange of good practices in combating
sexual violence. It is also crucial to bring women to the
negotiating table at the highest levels and to emphasize
the responsibility of host Governments and regional
organizations to provide momentum.
The State has the primary responsibility for
enacting legislation to respond to sexual violence and for
strengthening the law enforcement and criminal justice
system, in addition to increasing the representation of
women in the military and police services. National
legislative responses around the world should be
harmonized and made compatible with United Nations
standards. We commend the Team of Experts for its
continuing technical assistance to Member States and
call on the international community to ensure the
needed funding for the Team.
High-level field visits by the Security Council and
the United Nations, such as the African Union-United
Nations joint mission to African countries led by the
Deputy Secretary-General in July 2017, are important
to create awareness around the women and peace and
security agenda, and should become a regular practice.
Sexual violence affects every aspect of a survivor’s
life. The Secretary-General’s report underscores
the fact that conflict-related sexual violence leads to
the stigmatization of victims and the devastation of
physical and economic security, especially of displaced,
minority and rural women. Therefore, as Ms. Sultana
so eloquently argued, victims should receive full,
20/80

16/04/2018

competent and speedy attention, with increased access
to health care, psychosocial support, legal assistance
and socioeconomic reintegration, along with improved
camp management. We must support the safe, voluntary
and sustainable return of displaced populations and
refugees. Cooperation with religious leaders, civil
society and local communities is most important in
order to change extremist narratives, shift the stigma
of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators,
promote education and create awareness around the
empowerment of women. The entire community often
needs healing, and therefore this must be given full
attention in the context of truth and reconciliation
commissions and transitional justice.
We absolutely agree with all the briefers today
and with the report of the Secretary-General that the
international community should ensure accountability
for all cases of sexual violence in conflict and bring
about a resolute end to impunity. State and non-State
parties to a conflict must be pressured to comply with
international law. States need to work with Security
Council sanctions committees, which must include,
where appropriate, sexual violence as designated
criteria for sanctions against individuals and
organized networks.
We strongly believe that preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse by the peacekeepers should be an
absolute priority, with zero tolerance for such offences.
Peacekeeping missions must include protecting
civilians, especially women and girls, as a fundamental
element in their mandates, including greater
recruitment of women military and police officers.
Besides that, all troops and police contingents should
have full training prior to and during deployment. We
support the deployment of women’s protection advisers
to peacekeeping missions, with ensured long-term and
sustainable funding for their work.
Kazakhstan integrates the women and peace and
security agenda in its national legislation, including
formulating new strong pro-women policies that will
guarantee women’s engagement in decision-making
at all levels in the political and economic life of
the country. Training on gender equality for the armed
and security forces and deploying women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations are also priorities.
At the regional level, we are focusing on Afghanistan,
with a multidimensional approach to conflict
prevention and resolution, recovery and reintegration,
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

accompanied by humanitarian and development
assistance that is carried out by strengthening the
security-development nexus. In cooperation with Japan
and the United Nations Development Programme,
Kazakhstan has launched a project for gender equality
in Afghanistan, which also focuses on providing policy
support and capacity development.
At the international level, we are contributing to
the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against
Women, which funds projects in post-conflict settings.
In conclusion, we are ready to work with the
international community as part of every multilateral
effort that promotes the central elements of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the new
agenda for peace related to gender empowerment.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As a number of
speakers have noted today, the Charter of the United
Nations makes clear that the United Nations was
established to protect the dignity and worth of the
human person. We therefore join our other colleagues
in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s debate.
I emphatically appeal to all speakers not to
politicize this issue — one of the worst afflictions we
face in modern times. I think it behooves all of us to
treat the issue as a common problem that we are all
committed to mitigating and eventually eradicating.
For the avoidance of doubt, let me say incredibly
clearly that the United Kingdom salutes the courage of
Ms. Sultana in her fantastic work — I am very glad
that we had the chance to hear about it before the
Security Council undertakes a mission to Bangladesh
and Myanmar — and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her efforts and the very
comprehensive briefing that she gave us today.
I think it is really positive that so many Members
of the United Nations want to speak in today’s debate.
With that in mind, I will be brief. Like others, we
are committed to preventing, but also responding to,
sexual violence in conflict. We launched the Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative some years ago,
which shows how central tackling sexual violence is to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Five years on
from the global summit that launched that campaign,
the United Kingdom plans to hold an international
meeting in 2019 to maintain a global focus. We look
forward to working very closely with everybody in the
Chamber to achieve our common goals.

S/PV. 8234

I agree with our Russian colleague that sexual
violence is one of the violations of international
humanitarian law that also applies to non-State actors,
which I think is incredibly important. We adopted the
General Assembly Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Group of Eight
Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict
in 2013. I hope that, as work progresses in this area,
we might be able to build on those two important
documents. If I may, I would like today to focus on
three specific issues.
The first issue is the importance of education,
in particular for girls. Women and girls are
disproportionately affected by sexual violence in
conflict, as we have heard from many speakers,
including the Ambassadors of Kazakhstan and of
Côte d’Ivoire. That is not to detract from the point
that men and boys can also be victims, but it is women
and girls who suffer most. Therefore, by extension,
creating a global environment where gender equality
and women’s rights exist and discriminatory attitudes,
behaviours and practices do not will obviously help to
achieve that goal. The British Foreign Secretary has set
a personal target for British diplomacy of helping other
countries achieve 12 years of quality education for all
girls. We are investing our development assistance in
girls’ education, as we know that it contributes to a
safer and more prosperous world, reduces conflict and
increases stability.
My second point regards survivor stigma, which
the Polish representative very eloquently set out. I will
therefore not repeat what has already been said, but
just say that we completely agree with the focus that he
attributed to this area. The United Kingdom’s Principles
for Global Action: Preventing and Addressing Stigma
Associated with Conflict-related Sexual Violence in
Conflict is a practical guide that we have drawn up to
raise awareness among policymakers of the challenges
concerning this issue. We truly hope that the principles
can be applied in all contexts where sexual violence
has occurred.
Finally, I will broach justice and accountability,
which other speakers have also touched upon. The
survivors of sexual violence and children born as
a result of rape must receive justice for what has
happened to them. That is a critical element of our
prevention efforts. There has been some important
progress — for example, at the Kavumu trial in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo late last year,

18-1088521/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

when 11 Congolese militia members were convicted of
crimes against humanity for murder and rape against
37 young children. But there is much more to be done.
Although Kosovo and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant are not mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/250), there continues to be a gap in
justice and accountability for sexual violence cases
from those conflicts.
In conclusion, we join others in urging all Member
States to implement the international protocol on the
documentation and investigation of sexual violence
in conflict. That provides guidance on achieving
accountability for this truly abhorrent crime, which we
must all pledge to tackle.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Peruvian presidency for its initiative to
convene today’s open debate. I would like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their briefings. China also listened attentively to the
statement made by the civil society representative.
The current international security situation remains
complex and challenging, marked by frequent armed
conflicts and rampant terrorism. In some countries
and territories, people still live in the shadow of war
and conflict. Vulnerable groups, such as women and
girls, bear the brunt of such instability and fall victim
to sexual violence in armed conflicts. China strongly
condemns and firmly opposes the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war and any act of sexual violence against
women and girls. The international community is dutybound to take comprehensive measures and effectively
strengthen its cooperation to address this issue.
First, it is necessary to promote the peaceful
resolution of armed conflicts and eliminate the
breeding grounds for sexual violence in conflict. The
international community should continue to exercise
diplomacy to achieve a political settlement of critical
issues and use negotiation, good offices and mediation
to achieve a peaceful settlement of disputes. The
Security Council resolutions concerning women and
peace and security should be implemented earnestly. At
each stage of the peace process, the unique perspective
of women should be leveraged and their safety and
security concerns addressed, in order to guarantee
women the right to full participation in, and clout
during, decision-making.
22/80

16/04/2018

Secondly, vigorous support for the countries
concerned is required to help them strengthen capacitybuilding, shore up protection through stabilization
and promote equality through development, thereby
effectively safeguarding the rights of women. The
countries involved shoulder the primary responsibility
for preventing and combating sexual violence in
conflict and for protecting women and children. The
international community should respect the sovereignty
and will of those countries and the measures taken
by their Governments in national contexts and
actively provide them with constructive assistance to
enhance their capacity-building in the areas of, inter
alia, security, the economy and governance, so as
to help bolster the status of women and fully realize
their empowerment.
Thirdly, we must resolutely crack down on
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
international community should act firmly to put an
end to the horrific acts of terrorist and extremist forces
that harm women and children, closely integrate the
elimination of sexual violence in conflict with the fight
against terrorism, uphold uniform standards of counterterrorism and strengthen international coordination.
The countries concerned should scale up cooperation
in border control and law enforcement to provide a
safe environment and a dignified social climate for
terrorized victims of sexual violence.
Fourthly, it is necessary to ensure that all the
relevant United Nations bodies work in synergy. The
Security Council should fulfil its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security and
improve its coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and UN-Women, so that those bodies
can work together to address issues in areas such as
women and peace and security, within the purview of
their respective mandates and expertise. In addition,
cooperation with relevant regional and subregional
organizations should also be strengthened so that they
can leverage their expertise and unique perspectives to
create a favourable environment in which women and
girls can live and thrive.
China stands ready to continue working with the
international community to create a peaceful, safe and
stable international environment and make greater
contributions to the early elimination of sexual violence
in conflict and to the continued development of the
global women’s cause.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like to start by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, and Ms. Razia Sultana for their
pertinent briefings. I also wish to express our sincere
gratitude to Peru for organizing this important debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union, as well as that to be delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/250)
and today’s testimonies from the briefers describe
in no uncertain terms the gruesome and widespread
prevalence of sexual violence in both conflict-affected
and post-conflict settings. The mere fact that the report
covers one tenth of the United Nations membership
is disturbing in itself. Allow me to focus on three
important aspects: first, the plight of the Rohingya
in Myanmar; secondly, the fight against sexual
exploitation and abuse; and, thirdly, the course of action
to stop impunity.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands adds its voice
to that of today’s civil society briefer, Ms. Sultana,
in condemning in the strongest terms the cruelty that
Rohingya women and girls have faced both before and
after fleeing their homes in Rakhine state. We cannot
remain silent about the injustice done, and the trauma
inflicted on, those women and girls and their wider
communities. It is upsetting that now, after Syria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a State actor
has once again been listed as being credibly suspected
or responsible for sexual violence in a situation of
armed conflict. That demands a concerted response
from the international community to bring justice and
rehabilitation to the victims of that violence.
There is a mosaic on the third floor of this building
that reads “Do unto others as you would have them do
unto you”, which brings me to my second point. While
the report primarily looks at sexual violence inflicted by
armed groups and State actors, we cannot ignore cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse or sexual harassment
committed by those working for, or associated, with
the United Nations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
reaffirms its total commitment to the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse

S/PV. 8234

and on sexual harassment — a matter that is rightfully
gaining the attention and visibility it deserves.
Masculine-dominated cultures often create
obstacles to upholding zero-tolerance policies. However,
like the Secretary-General, we are determined to
remove those obstacles and work towards true gender
equality. Moreover, by including women and the gender
perspective in prevention, peacekeeping and conflict
resolution, we can diminish sexual violence in conflict,
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse.
My third point is on the course of action to stop
impunity. I would like to echo the words of Special
Representative Patten: sexual violence is avoidable.
The very first recommendation that the SecretaryGeneral makes to the Security Council in his report is
to include sexual violence as a part of the designation
criteria for sanctions. Sanctions are a tool that could be
more effectively used to deter sexual violence and to
curb and constrain the individuals involved. They have
the potential to protect the safety and lives of millions
of women and girls, as well as boys and men, living in
conflict areas. The recent inclusion of that criterion in
the sanctions regime for the Central African Republic is
a welcome development that needs to be taken up more
consistently. We call on the Council to systematically
and explicitly incorporate and apply sexual violence as a
designation criterion in sanctions regimes, particularly
in those regimes targeting the actors listed in the
report. For those conflict-affected countries for which
no specific United Nations sanctions regime exists, we
urge the Council to consider the adoption of targeted
sanctions regimes that would allow for the inclusions
of a specific designation criterion on sexual violence.
Ultimately, sanctions cannot be an alternative
to prosecution for crimes that are punishable under
international law. It is first and foremost up to Member
States to ensure the prosecution of perpetrators and to
facilitate reparations under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, it is up to Member States to guarantee
survivor’s access to all legal, psychosocial and
medical services, including safe abortion, emergency
contraception and HIV treatment.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions
is critical to ensuring accountability for past crimes
and prevention and deterrence for the future. In that
context, we recognize the work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in
building national capacities to enhance accountability

18-1088523/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

16/04/2018

for conflict-related sexual violence. However, if
national governments prove to be unable or unwilling,
the Council should revert to other means and channels,
such as the International Criminal Court, to make sure
that both State and non-State parties comply with their
obligations under international law.

We wish to highlight the outstanding work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the appointment of a victims’
rights advocate and a zero-tolerance commitment to
this type of abuse.

Let me end by reiterating our strong support for the
work of Special Representative Patten and the vision
she has articulated since assuming office last year.

Nevertheless, the report also reminds us that
such incidents are not random or isolated, but rather
are an integral part of the operations, ideology and
economic strategy of the parties — State and non-State
groups — to many conflicts, and that such occurrences
have been compounded as a result of sexual violence
becoming a tactic of war and a source of income for
parties involved in conflict, be they groups of violent
extremists, terrorists or organized crime in those
territories or neighbouring countries. The movements
of people fleeing from conflict within and among
countries further complicate the situation.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): On behalf of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, I would like to begin my statement by aligning
myself with the statement to be made by Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
I thank the Peruvian presidency and Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for convening this much-needed
debate during a year that commemorates the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
through which sexual violence in armed conflict was
included on the Security Council agenda. I would
also like to acknowledge the work, deep commitment
and informative and alarming briefings of Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. They have contextualized sexual
violence in armed conflicts and are making an effective
and urgent appeal for the need for sustainable peace,
security and development.
As this is the first statement of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on this important issue, I wish
to begin by saying that my country unequivocally
condemns sexual violence in both armed conflicts and
times of peace, as well as the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. We believe this to be one of the
worst attacks on human dignity, and we share the
deep concern of everybody in the Chamber about the
growing trend of such unacceptable acts in the world.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2018/250), which covers the period from January to
December 2017, notes progress on some efforts focused
on preventing and responding to sexual violence in
armed conflict in the context of post-conflict situations
and areas of particular concern, especially through
investments in human resources and information,
action policies and the architecture of the Organization.
24/80

Victims of sexual violence are often the most
vulnerable individuals: women, children and men of
all ages, sometimes refugees or migrants, who, due
to conflict, are caught in the crossfire and fall victim
to violence, sexual slavery, forced prostitution and
sterilization, human trafficking and other forms of
sexual abuse. Equatorial Guinea wishes to call on all
parties involved in conflict to commit to ensuring the
protection of civilians, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, bearing in mind the primary
responsibility of national Governments in that regard,
respecting the sovereignty of countries and supporting
their efforts in implementing the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
We cannot separate violence, including sexual
violence, from the root causes of conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved without investing in the sustainable
development of countries and gender equality. That
is the most effective conflict prevention strategy. In
that regard, we wish to recognize the ambitions of
the Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its clear focus
on people-driven sustainable development, anchored
in gender equality, the empowerment of women and
equitable economic growth among and within countries.
We also recognize the framework of collaboration
and commitment of the African Union and the United
Nations in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda and in the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflicts, the impunity of the perpetrators
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8234

of those atrocities and ensuring accountability for
those crimes.

Security Council, based on the resolutions adopted in
that regard.

Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the pivotal role of
implementing resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 2331
(2016) and other relevant resolutions to guarantee the
participation and empowerment of women in conflicts
and to promote and take the necessary action to avoid
attacks of sexual violence in those environments.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

As our country is free from conflict, at the national
level we are focusing on the promotion of women,
gender equality and the fight against sexual violence,
within the framework of our sustainable development
strategy, Horizon 2020. Our country’s willingness to
monitor, follow up on and propose actions, policies and
strategies aimed at promoting women, which is reflected
in the composition of our Security Council team, is
part of the action plan of our national education-forall programme, the national multisectoral action plan
on women and gender equality, and the work of the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Gender Equality, which,
among other activities, is responsible for national
campaigns to combat violence against women and girls.
It is also worth mentioning the Equatorial Guinea Child
Support Centre, an institution led by the nation’s First
Lady, Mrs. Constancia Mangue Nsue de Obiang.
In conflict situations and their international
responses, Equatorial Guinea would like to recommend
that organizations in charge of coordinating
peacebuilding missions coordinate the application of
best practices by training all recruited contingents
during predeployment preparation, through integrating
the gender perspective and providing solid training on
sexual exploitation and abuse. Likewise, we advocate
continued support for the various components of
the United Nations architecture to combat sexual
violence in armed conflicts and for collaboration
among them and United Nations agencies for counterterrorism, organized crime, humanitarian response
and sustainable development, in order to safeguard
the recovery and reintegration of victims, especially
children born of sexual violence and women who have
survived such assault.
I conclude by saying that Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its strong condemnation of all those acts and
our support for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse. We again express
our willingness to cooperate in this area as part of the

I welcome the important briefings of the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
Ms. Pramila Patten, as well as the valuable testimony of
Ms. Razia Sultana. We also welcome the participation
of a significant number of countries that have requested
to take part in this open debate.
My delegation is especially grateful for the support
and contribution of women’s organizations in preparing
for this annual debate and for the Informal Expert group
on Women and Peace and Security, which Peru has the
honour to chair alongside Sweden.
We wish to express Peru’s commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, which is a
crucial component of the fight against sexual violence
in conflicts. We are convinced that the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, has a fundamental
role to play in preventing this atrocious crime.
We note with deep concern the magnitude of
the problem and the changing patterns of sexual
violence noted in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2018/250). Its widespread and systematic use as a
military tactic and attack against collective identities
must be acknowledged and confronted as a threat to
peace and international security. Consequently, we
must condemn in the strongest terms all forms of sexual
violence in armed conflicts, which overwhelmingly
affects women, girls and boys. We must protect the
victims and ensure that those responsible are held
accountable. But that is not enough. A comprehensive
strategy against this scourge requires addressing its
root causes. To that end, the empowerment of women,
gender equality and access to justice are key.
Evidence illustrates that greater participation by
women in decision-making processes results in a lower
likelihood of conflict, and that defending and promoting
their rights reduces their vulnerability. Equality and
empowerment have a direct impact on the maintenance
of peace and security. The same applies to access to
justice. We reaffirm the critical need to ensure that
those responsible for such acts of violence are held
accountable before the justice system and to eliminate
all structural obstacles that hamper investigation and

18-1088525/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

prosecution of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Moreover, due attention to and the rehabilitation of the
victims are critical to any process of building sustainable
peace. It is necessary to understand that their traumas
are also psychological in nature and carry the potential
to destroy the social fabric of a community.
We cannot ignore the stigma and fear of the victims,
or their intimidation by their attackers. The majority of
cases of sexual violence are not reported. This reflects
the low level of confidence in and credibility of national
institutions, which is exacerbated when the aggressors
are members of the security forces. It is necessary
to create a closer relationship between the State and
its institutions and the victims. In this regard, Peru
has a national plan on violence against women and a
comprehensive reparations programme for the victims
of violence in Peru between 1980 and 2000.
The Peruvian commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda is also manifested in the
progressive increase in Peruvian women’s participation
as Blue Helmets, pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).
In this regard, we wish to highlight the importance of
incorporating the gender perspective into the mandates
of peacekeeping operations deployed by the Council.
There is also the need to adequately train Blue Helmets
to protect women and children’s human rights. The
Security Council must also continue to encourage,
support and monitor specific commitments and plans to
prevent sexual violence in the conflicts on its agenda.
We consider it important to recall, in line with resolution
1820 (2008), that sexual crimes should not be subject to
amnesty in the context of conflict resolution processes.
We wish to conclude by expressing our appreciation
of and support for the work of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and her team, and to
highlight the high priority given to this issue by the
Secretary-General, in keeping with the need to build
sustainable peace. In the words of the SecretaryGeneral, the time has come “to give that agenda the
investment and action it deserves, so as to replace
horror with hope” (S/2018/250, para. 22).
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
26/80

16/04/2018

I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Alghabra (Canada): It is my distinct pleasure
to participate in this open debate on sexual violence
in conflict. Let me begin by expressing my gratitude
to Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their briefings, and to our Peruvian counterparts for the
work they have put into the organization of this year’s
debate. I also want to sincerely thank Ms. Sultana for her
courageous work and her powerful testimony. Canada
is supportive of her activism and stands with her.
Today I am pleased to speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an informal
network of 54 interested Member States chaired by
Canada and representing all five regional groups of
the United Nations. We are outraged by the persistent
and widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict by State and non-State actors. Sexual violence
is being used as a tactic of warfare and a tactic of
terrorism and is a flagrant and unacceptable violation
of international humanitarian law and of international
human rights law.
Among the many concerning country situations
documented in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/250), the sexual violence inflicted
against the Rohingya is especially appalling. It
demands a swift and concerted response from the
international community, including in meeting the
needs of the survivors of such violations and bringing
those responsible to justice. Above all, we must do more
to prevent sexual violence in conflict from occurring
in the first place. We encourage the Security Council
to give due consideration to the early warning signs of
sexual violence in its monitoring of conflict situations.
Indeed, preventing sexual violence is part of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. We must
ensure that related expertise, including gender advisers
and women protection advisers, are provided with the
access and resources needed to fulfil their critical
tasks in peacekeeping operations. Cooperation with
local civil society organizations can also help identify
precursors, risks and prevention and protection
strategies for sexual violence in conflict. Furthermore,
the implementation of joint communiqués, action plans
and national policies to curb conflict-related sexual
violence play an essential role and we are encouraged
by the progress of a number of States in this regard.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Justice and accountability are means of prevention.
Indeed, a climate of impunity discourages reporting,
undermines assistance and abets further violations. We
therefore call for accountability for crimes of sexual
violence in armed conflict. This in turn requires effective
investigation and documentation, legal assistance for
the victims of sexual violence, and adequate legal and
evidentiary frameworks to prosecute such crimes.
Moreover, accountability for and the prevention of
sexual violence should be included in peace agreements,
including, where appropriate, in transitional justice
mechanisms promoting justice, truth, reparations and
measures to prevent their recurrence. Amnesties should
not be granted to perpetrators of sexual violence, and
sexual violence should be explicitly prohibited by the
terms of ceasefires and peace agreements. We recognize
the invaluable contribution of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to
building national capacities to enhance accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence. We welcome the
landmark ruling of the International Criminal Court
in the case of Prosecutor v. Bosco Ntaganda, and note
the recent surrendering of Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz
Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud, wanted for crimes against
humanity and war crimes in Mali, including rape and
sexual slavery.
In contrast, it is disconcerting that not a single
member of Da’esh or Boko Haram has been prosecuted
for sexual violence crimes to date. We emphatically
call on the Security Council to explicitly include sexual
violence as a designation criterion within United Nations
sanctions regimes where such crimes are persistently
perpetrated. Relevant sanctions committees should also
be supported by dedicated gender and sexual violence
expertise and draw on information from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
In all our efforts to ensure accountability, we must
not lose sight of the needs and rights of survivors of
sexual violence in conflict. Greater efforts are needed
at all levels to ensure that survivors have access to the
full range of livelihood, social, legal, psychosocial and
non-discriminatory medical services to promote their
rehabilitation and reintegration into their communities.
Fundamentally, we are of the view that systemic
gender-based discrimination, such as the exclusion of
women from political life, economic marginalization
and discriminatory systems of both formal and informal

S/PV. 8234

law, is conducive to sexual violence in conflict. Any
serious effort to address sexual violence in conflict
must confront this fact.
Lastly, we condemn in the strongest terms cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations and in international assistance, as well
as sexual harassment within the United Nations.
We encourage the Secretary-General to ensure that
common standards are developed and implemented
across all United Nations entities to better prevent and
respond to all cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Please allow me to make some additional points as
Canada’s representative.
We meet at a time of great uncertainty in the
world, where an astounding proportion of the global
population is living with conflict every day. These
people are not living at the outer edges of conflict,
but are fully immersed in the ugliness of war. The
year 2017 was an alarming reminder of how the rise
in conflict and violent extremism continues to trigger
patterns of sexual violence. The disproportionate effect
of violent extremism on women and girls is evident in
many conflicts. It was especially brought to the fore
of Canadians’ minds when we heard of the terrible
atrocities carried out by Da’esh, including against
Yazidis, who suffered a particularly high level of
violence. As a result, Canada made a commitment last
year to providing assistance to over 1,200 vulnerable
Yazidi women and children and other survivors of
Da’esh by resettling them in Canada. This was an
important decision that we can be proud of.
But sexual violence in conflict continues around
the world. As the Secretary-General highlights in his
report, “[w]ars are still being fought on and over the
bodies of women” (S/2018/250, para. 9). Women in
conflict stand as courageous survivors of violence,
not victims. We must harness their resilience, their
determination and their innovative solutions to find
ways to end conflict. We commend the courageous
women who lead us out of conflict, but we must resolve
collectively to ensure that these crimes stop.
Canada is particularly alarmed by the plight of
Rohingya women and girls in Myanmar and Bangladesh.
For the first time this year, the Secretary-General’s
report specifically names the Myanmar Armed Forces
for engaging in patterns of sexual violence in conflict.
Women there have talked about suffering sexual
trauma at the hands of both the Myanmar military and

18-1088527/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

those who support it. Canada has already sanctioned
Major General Maung Maung Soe under the Justice for
Victims of Corrupt Foreign Officials Act for his role
in the oppression, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity committed against the Rohingya minority
in Myanmar.
Even after fleeing Myanmar, many women and
girls continue to face gender-based violence. Their
movements within refugee camps are often restricted
for fear of being abducted for trafficking or forced
marriage, harassment and sexual violence. As
Ms. Patten reported to the Council in December 2017,
every woman or girl she spoke with during her visit to
the camps and settlements in Bangladesh
“reported having either endured or witnessed
sexual violence... rape, gang-rape by multiple
soldiers, forced public nudity and humiliation,
and sexual slavery in military captivity... There
are indications that this pattern of widespread and
systematic sexual violence has been used as a tool
of dehumanization and collective punishment”
(S/PV.8133, p. 4).
I thank Ms. Patten and the rest of today’s briefers
for being a voice for survivors and for their courage
and leadership. I cannot emphasize enough that these
horrific actions must be addressed directly by the
international community, for there can be no impunity
for those who inflict such callous and indiscriminate
violence against a civilian population.
Rape has been used as a weapon of war against the
Rohingya. Our briefers have spoken of this heinous
violence and Canada’s Special Envoy, Mr. Bob Rae, also
spoke of this tragic reality in the report he published
earlier this month. All United Nations and international
institutions must be mobilized to bring the perpetrators
to justice. Today’s debate is of critical importance. We
are hopeful that together we can find a way to ease the
suffering of all those affected by this crisis.
Through its feminist international assistance policy,
Canada is supporting UN-Women to rapidly deploy
experts to ensure that international organizations and
transitional justice processes are able to investigate and
prosecute incidents of sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict-affected States. This includes deploying
a sexual and gender-based violence investigator to
the Independent International Fact-finding Mission
on Myanmar.
28/80

16/04/2018

Accountability for crimes of this nature must be our
priority. That is why we urge the Security Council to
systematically incorporate sexual violence as a specific
designation criterion in United Nations sanctions
regimes where such crimes are persistently perpetrated.
It is why we call on the Council to ensure that the issues
of women’s rights and sexual violence are consistently
and adequately addressed when establishing and
renewing the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions.
Among its five objectives, Canada’s national
action plan on women and peace and security focuses
on preventing, responding to and ending impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation and abuse. It seeks to meet the specific
needs of women and girls in humanitarian settings,
including the upholding of their sexual rights and access
to sexual and reproductive health services. Through
our action plan, we want to empower women and girls
economically, socially and politically so that their voice
can be amplified. We know they are powerful agents of
change. Our duty is to remove the barriers of oppression
and discrimination. Societies in which women and girls
have an equal voice and equal rights benefit from equal
opportunities and live in equal safety and security are
far more likely to reject sexual violence.
Canada is grateful to Special Representative Patten
for her efforts to raise alarm about sexual violence
trends globally. We appreciate the work done by the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also thank civil
society organizations — many of which are represented
here today — for the ongoing good work they are doing
to stop sexual violence and hold its perpetrators to
account. Civil society and the women’s movement are
the backbone of our societies.
Canada calls for justice for the survivors of such
horrific crimes. Our response ought to be holistic and
centred on the survivors. We must support communities
in Myanmar and in Bangladesh, but most importantly
we must ensure that reproductive health, psychosocial
and legal services are available to these communities, as
well as the sensitive and coordinated documentation of
cases. We must act together within the United Nations
and other institutions to defend the rights of all people
to live free of sexual violence and abuse.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We align ourselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
Eight resolutions adopted by the Council reflect
the significant progress we have made in the area of
women, peace and security. In resolution 1820 (2008),
the Council recognized for the first time that sexual
violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against
humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide.
A decade later, patterns of sexual violence remain a
sad reality in many conflict situations, and effective
responses have been rare.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) documents sexual violence including
rape, sexual slavery or forced prostitution, pregnancy,
abortion, sterilization and marriage in 19 conflict
situations, committed by 47 parties. Patterns of sexual
violence are often embedded in and compounded by
underlying structural conditions such as inequality,
gender-based discrimination and the violation of
minority rights. The empowerment of women is
therefore a key ingredient of an effective response.
This requires the increased representation of women in
mechanisms to address conflicts and the incorporation
of a gender perspective in conflict resolution and
peace processes.
The situation of the Rohingya community is of
high relevance to our discussion and we welcome
the presence of an advocate for the Rohingya today.
Many of the 700,000 civilians fleeing Rakhine state to
Bangladesh have endured physical and psychological
sexual assault. Rape, sexual slavery and other forms
of grave sexual violence have mostly been committed
against Rohingya women and girls. Those who have
fled are vulnerable to further violations, including
trafficking for the purpose of forced marriage or
sexual exploitation. We commend the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for exploring the
option of investigating the deportation of the Rohingya
community as a crime against humanity. This is
precisely the type of situation for which the ICC was
created, and the Council should refer it to the Court.
In Syria, sexual violence has been used as tactic
of war and as part of an attack against the civilian
population, committed by various parties to the conflict
with rampant impunity. It is shocking in particular that
not a single member of the Islamic State in Iraq and the

S/PV. 8234

Levant has been prosecuted for sexual violence offenses
as of yet. The International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, created by the
General Assembly in light of paralysis in the Security
Council, has made sexual and gender-based violence a
priority of its work. We call on all States to cooperate
with the Mechanism by sharing relevant information
and through financial support.
Accountability is an essential part of the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence. International
criminal justice mechanisms have done groundbreaking
work. The finding in the Akayesu case before the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda that sexual
violence can amount to genocide was a landmark
decision. Of comparable relevance was the verdict
of the ICC in finding Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo
criminally responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity for sexual violence on the basis of
command responsibility. The Prosecutor of the ICC
has made sexual and gender-based violence crimes
one of her strategic priorities as a reflection of the
very progressive stance of the Rome Statute, adopted
20 years ago, on sexual and gender-based violence.
Justice Rapid Response has also done invaluable work
to investigate sexual and gender-based violence.
Women and girls are disproportionately affected
by sexual violence, but we must not ignore the fact
that many men and boys become victims as well.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250)
documents incidents in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan, Sri Lanka and Syria.
The rape and sexual torture of men and boys are all
too commonly practiced in detention settings, often
aimed at extracting confessions during interrogation.
Such patterns continue to be underreported, owing to
cultural taboos and fear of being stigmatized. Sexual
violence against men and boys in situations of armed
conflict warrants our increased attention in order to
inform our response to gender-based sexual violence
overall, with accountability and necessary services to
victims as key components.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil) (spoke
in Spanish): I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohamed and the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,

18-1088529/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

Ms. Pramila Patten, for their briefings, and Ms. Razia
Sultana for her statement.
We note with concern that, despite the efforts
of the United Nations, serious incidents of sexual
violence continue to occur on massive scales in armed
conflicts. Addressing this problem is rendered all the
more difficult as victims of violence are often unable
to find ways to report such abuse, given the absence of
protection mechanisms and the fear of stigmatization or
even punishment for speaking up. We underscore that
the most effective way to combat the crime of sexual
violence is the prevention of conflict itself. In this
regard, we support the preventive approach advocated
by the Secretary-General in his report on the issue
(S/2018/250).
The increase in the number of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and in peacebuilding
initiatives is a central element in advancing the
prevention of and response to sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, including in cases
of sexual abuse and exploitation. It also represents
the positive contributions to various aspects of
conducting multidimensional operations, in particular
by improving interaction with women in local societies
and contributing to the effectiveness of monitoring and
investigating reports of abuse.
Brazil therefore welcomes the measures recently
announced by the Office of Military Affairs with a view
to reaching the target of women constituting 15 per cent
of those deployed in peacekeeping operations. In this
regard, Brazil has redoubled its efforts to increase the
number of female candidates for civilian and military
posts in peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. In July, Brazil will host a United Nations
course for developing leadership capacity among
female police officers aimed at Latin American and
Caribbean nations.
We recall that the issue of access to justice for all
victims and the punishment of perpetrators are of central
importance in confronting the threat of sexual violence
in conflict and upholding respect for international
humanitarian law. Conflict resolution processes must
take into account the legal, medical and psychosocial
needs of victims of sexual violence. The complementary
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court can play
a decisive role in that regard. The Security Council must
also contribute to such efforts by conferring mandates
and adequate means of protection for women and
30/80

16/04/2018

advocating for the punishment of such crimes. Brazil
has been supporting cooperation projects to addressed
gender-based violence at the bilateral and triangular
levels in countries such as Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We express our appreciation for and gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his new strategic approach
to taking action against sexual exploitation and
abuse committed by personnel of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and special political missions.
Brazil signed the voluntary compact on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse and strongly
supports all efforts for its full implementation. Brazil
has also been part of the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network since its creation. A year ago,
we launched our first national action plan on women,
peace and security.
We will achieve inclusive and lasting peace only
when women, who form half of the world’s population,
can participate fully in all efforts to that end. With
regard to the prevention of sexual violence in conflict,
the perspective of women is all the more essential in the
general framework of the peace continuum proposed by
the Secretary-General. As the representative of Brazil
to the United Nations Conference on International
Organization in San Francisco in 1945, Bertha Lutz,
said: “There will never be unbreakable peace in the
world until women help to forge it”.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I am
speaking on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, and Ms. Razia Sultana, who spoke on
behalf of civil society and in particular the Rohingya, for
their briefings. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for her leadership and dedication.
The European Union (EU) has been and will remain a
staunch supporter of her important mandate.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Conflict-related sexual violence, as well as all
forms of violence and discrimination against women,
girls, men and boys, are crimes and violations of human
rights. The European Union welcomes the report
submitted by the Secretary-General (S/2018/250). It
provides harrowing evidence of the occurrence of
sexual violence in conflict in numerous places around
the world.
While there is improved awareness of the prevalence
and hideousness of sexual violence in conflict and
normative progress has been achieved, including in
the Council through dedicated resolutions, countless
women, men, girls and boys still live under the constant
threat of sexual violence. Those living in areas plagued
by conflict and violent extremism have the most
to fear. Behind every statistic in the report — and
unfortunately, we know that underreporting continues
to be a challenge — we find a life and a person. Two
simple questions are posed: What are we, as the
international community, doing to put an end to that,
and what is needed that we are not yet doing?
The European Union has taken concrete action to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
Our engagement to achieve gender equality, security,
sustaining peace and sustainable development is at the
core of our daily work. The European Union emphasizes
the continued importance of a holistic approach that
addresses conflict-related sexual violence as part of
the broader women and peace and security agenda,
recognizing that sexual and gender-based violence are
also the results of gender inequalities and women’s and
girls’ subordinated positions and patriarchal contexts.
While sexual and gender-based violence predominantly
target women and girls, men and boys are also among
the primary and secondary victims of those crimes.
The issue of stigma placed on the victim rather than
on the perpetrator, where it would rightfully belong,
must be analysed and addressed within the broader
context of sexual and gender-based violence. It is well
known that stigma in the wake of sexual violence can
have lasting and even lethal repercussions. Every person
who has suffered from sexual violence must have the
right and access to comprehensive health-care services,
justice and reparations, and not be revictimized,
rejected, ostracized or worse.
The European Union wants to see practical
steps towards effective prevention and protection
from conflict-related sexual violence. It remains

S/PV. 8234

unacceptable that most incidents of conflict-related
sexual violence, including rape, continue to be met with
impunity. It is nothing but a failure that, for instance,
not a single member of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant or Boko Haram has yet been prosecuted for
sexual offences. Accountability and access to justice are
a must. Victims and witnesses of sexual violence have
to be ensured access to impartial and safe tribunals and
reparations, including as a form of transitional gender
justice, and their safety must be sufficiently addressed
during and after those legal processes.
The European Union has implemented a global
project to support gender-sensitive transitional justice.
The project has been realized in Kenya, Kosovo,
Colombia and the Philippines, and also supported the
development of global norms and standards. Another
EU action implemented in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo strengthened the capacities of the military
justice system to prosecute war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the Kasai and the east
of the country. The project supported military courts,
which then tried and convicted 11 militiamen and a
provincial member of Parliament for crimes against
humanity, rape and murder committed between 2013
and 2016.
The EU is determined to remain a global leader
in ending sexual and gender-based violence, including
in conflict-related situations. One example of that
is the joint EU-United Nations Spotlight Initiative to
eliminate violence against women and girls. Launched
in September 2017 with an initial investment of
€500 million by the EU, the Spotlight Initiative
recognizes that women and girls are disproportionately
subjected to violence, including femicide, sexual
violence, intimate partner violence, trafficking
and harmful practices. It is one of the largest-scale
demonstrations of the political will of the European
Union and the United Nations to say “enough is
enough”. We must act now to address gender-based
violence in all its forms.
We continue to support United Nations action
against conflict-related sexual violence. We recognize
that the United Nations peacekeeping operations play a
vital role in the protection of women, girls, men and boys
as part of their mandated task of protecting civilians.
We also stress the importance of training peacekeeping
personnel in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.

18-1088531/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

In addition, we stress the importance of actions
designed and implemented in partnership with civil
society, ensuring that they are able to influence the
analysis, design and planning of activities related to
the prevention and protection against conflict-related
sexual violence. We are troubled about the continuously
shrinking space for civil society in many parts of the
world, including attempts to silence women’s voices by
threatening them with rape.
In 2017, the EU allocated almost €22 million in
humanitarian aid to the prevention of and response to
sexual and gender-based violence worldwide. In June
2017, the EU took over the leadership of the Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies — a global initiative of more than 76
stakeholders to make sure that all humanitarian actors
work together to prevent and mitigate gender-based
violence, from the earliest onset of a crisis.
Also in June 2017, the EU signed the Council
of Europe Istanbul Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and domestic
violence. With that signature, we committed to
further strengthening the existing legal framework on
preventing and combating violence against women.
The EU is also continuously working to improve its
procedures and practices in its civilian missions and
military operations. Last year, we took stock of our
programmes and projects that address conflict-related
sexual violence. We have identified 43 multi-year
projects, with an overall value of €43 million, and two
multi-country programmes, with an overall value of
€8.5 million.
The EU will continue to accelerate the
implementation of our commitments to eliminating
sexual and gender-based violence, both within and
outside our borders and in times of peace, crisis and
conflict. We will continue to provide specific support
to victims of violence, including in the most remote
and fragile areas. The EU is also strengthening
efforts to ensure that women, girls, men and boys
who arrive in the European Union fleeing conflict,
instability, persecution, discrimination or violence,
including sexual violence, have access to medical care,
legal support, appropriate trauma counselling and
psychosocial care.
The EU would like to see us all collectively
continue to build on and strengthen what is already
in place. Furthermore, we must all acknowledge and
32/80

16/04/2018

address the necessity of partnerships and clear roles
and responsibilities, as well as the close alignment
of programmes. We must also ask ourselves the
uncomfortable question of whose security and safety
are being addressed and resourced, and whether there
are things we are not yet doing, but need to be done.
We heed the call of the Secretary-General to reinforce
our efforts, with urgency, to prevent and protect more
women, girls, men and boys from falling victim to
those heinous crimes and we hope that others will join
us in that fight.
A full version of this statement will be posted online.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Given that this is my first statement with Peru as
President, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and
to thank you for convening this open debate. I also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence and Conflict and, of course, Ms. Razia Sultana
and her organization for their briefings today.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/250) before
the Council highlights Colombia’s efforts to make
gender justice a central issue throughout its peace
process and in its efforts to tackle cases of sexual
violence in conflict. Colombia recognizes that the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace does not
actually constitute peace in itself, but it is a necessary
step towards the changes that we need to bring about the
peaceful and reconciled society that we in our region
and the international community have so longed for.
Colombia has been adapting its constitutional
framework to respond to the challenges that we face
after more than 50 years of armed conflict, and the role
of women will unquestionably be key to implementing
it. In recognition of that, within our new institutions we
have established a specialized gender unit, made up of
women leaders, that will help us achieve the changes
that the Peace Agreement identifies as needed in order
to offer women — especially the rural women who
were most affected by the decades of conflict on their
land — better living conditions that can help to empower
them and bring them the economic independence that
can break the eternal cycle of violence that tramples on
their rights.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8234

The Peace Agreement establishes the creation of
a comprehensive system of transitional justice that
includes various legal and non-legal mechanisms.
The members of those institutions were elected in
September. For the first time in our country, 28 of
the 51 judges in the Special Jurisdiction for Peace are
women, and a woman now presides over the court. The
missing persons search unit is led by a female director.
Women compose 54 per cent of the comprehensive
system, which reflects their interest and their right
in applying the provisions of the Agreement related
to gender. Colombia recognizes the need to ensure
accountability for sexual violence crimes committed
in the context of the conflict. That is why last month,
the new director of the office for investigations and
prosecutions indicated that the composition of that
particular group is being worked on, with the aim of
investigating all cases of sexual violence that occurred
in the context of the armed conflict.

violence in conflict. The Council has developed a vast
regulatory corpus in the area, and this may be one
of the topics of our open debates that Member States
agree on most readily. So what is still preventing the
effective implementation of resolutions, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law?
From time to time it is suggested that the women and
peace and security agenda and the issue of sexual
violence in conflict do not belong at the centre of the
Council’s activity. The prevalence and consequences
of such issues are underestimated. Nevertheless,
the fact that we are witnessing worrying patterns
of sexual violence in a recent and rapidly unfolding
humanitarian crisis such as that affecting Myanmar’s
Rohingya population confirms once again that this
agenda represents a central challenge to international
peace and security. This paradigm shift in the classic
concept of security should therefore have immediate
practical consequences.

At this stage, we need to pay special attention to
access to justice and reparations for victims of the
armed conflict, because we cannot forget that 51 per
cent of the officially registered victims of the armed
conflict are women. That is why we have established a
gender perspective as part of our targeted approach. We
are applying the strategy of individual reparations for
female victims of sexual violence, not just in the Special
Jurisdiction but also with regard to ordinary cases, and
we are making enormous efforts to emphasize that and
to resolve every case.

Spain is grateful to the Peruvian presidency for
organizing this open debate in connection with the
prevention efforts on the United Nations agenda. We
appreciate the commitment of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and of Special Representative Pramila Patten
and the contribution and courage of Ms. Razia Sultana in
particular. Testimonies like hers are vital to preventing
the normalization of sexual violence as an inevitable
consequence of war.

Colombia is firmly committed and feels a
tremendous responsibility to the international
community and our own communities. As the Special
Representative said this morning, the story of sexual
violence and war has been a story of denial. Nothing
can be resolved through silence. That is why we
persevere in our efforts — so that services, justice and
reparations can reach the survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
As we do every year, we are meeting once again to
address a problem as old, and yet as current, as sexual

Much has been said in this debate on the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict. I would like
to add some thoughts and proposals. With regard to
root causes, who are the primary victims of sexual
violence in conflict situations? In a majority of cases
they are women and girls who are economically and
politically marginalized. That is true whether we are
speaking of the women and girls of the Central African
Republic, those in Kivu, the Kasais or Tanganyika in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Yazidis
in Iraq or the Rohingya in Myanmar, where there has
even been talk of ethnic cleansing. We must address the
root causes — inequality and the absence of women’s
empowerment and participation — and we must respond
to early warnings. The Council has the necessary tools
if it chooses to use them — the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, peace operations’
mandates, the work of women protection counsellors,
and sanctions, to name a few. I therefore urge Council
members to address the issue of sexual violence in the
context of their next visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh.

18-1088533/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

Spain believes that we must make the fight against
sexual violence in conflict a priority in every context.
We observe how sexual violence is sometimes a factor in
forced displacements in places such as Colombia, Iraq
and Syria. The risk does not disappear in refugee camps,
and fear of sexual assault prevents many displaced
people from returning to their communities. The case
of the Rohingya is particularly worrisome. We believe
that the negotiations on the global compact on refugees
would provide a good opportunity for addressing sexual
violence in those contexts. Let us take advantage of that
opportunity and those negotiations.
Resolution 2331 (2016) recognizes the nexus
between sexual violence and human trafficking during
conflicts. It also explores the use of sexual violence
as a terrorism tactic employed by certain groups and
includes it among their possible sources of financing.
We find it surprising, as many representatives have
pointed out today, that to date no member of Da’esh
or Boko Haram has been prosecuted for sexual assault.
Nor have we made progress in acknowledging the
victims of sexual violence as victims of terrorism or
conflict in such contexts.
We must fight stigmatization. The fear of ostracism
is even greater when the victim is a man or a boy, and is
exacerbated by the fact that many countries do not see
men as possible victims of sexual violence. We therefore
suggest that this perspective be taken into account in
cooperation projects and humanitarian assistance. That
was one of the topics addressed at the recent meeting
in Berlin of the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network, which my country established
in 2016 and which is chaired by Germany this year.
The meeting also included a specific session on
accountability for crimes of sexual violence as a central
element in preventing conflicts.

16/04/2018

We also provide such training to other countries, such
as Palestine and Colombia, and contribute to the United
Nations initiative against sexual violence in conflict
among the other projects outlined in our second national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which includes specific measures to combat
sexual violence, including in the humanitarian field.
Finally, impunity today breeds impunity tomorrow.
It must be addressed through mechanisms for improving
the preservation of evidence, which require specialized
knowledge. The prosecution of two landmark cases in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the judgment
of the International Criminal Court in the case of Bosco
Ntaganda, not only strengthens the victims’ trust in
justice but also deters possible perpetrators.
The United Nations must lead by example. I propose
that we all work to better implement the zero-tolerance
policy of the United Nations on sexual exploitation and
abuse and that we prevent and fight sexual violence, the
most silent crime in armed conflicts. We owe that to the
thousands of victims who have suffered and continue to
live with the consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/250) and the Deputy Secretary-General
for her presentation this morning. We would also like
to express our appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten and Ms. Sultana for
their briefings.

In order to achieve implementation of the resolutions
on sexual violence in conflict, the specialized
knowledge of the expert panels of the Sanctions
Committees, mediators and negotiators of any peace
process, the military, the United Nations Police and the
humanitarian actors is essential. The Security Council
can and must do much more in that area, for example
by including specific listing criteria on sexual violence
in all sanctions regimes and ensuring subsequent
follow-up.

Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s annual
report describes continuing concerns, as well as a
number of new and emerging ones, with regard to the
use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, terrorism,
torture and repression, and as a means of persecution.
Sexual violence significantly aggravates the severe
effects of conflicts. Moreover, the nexus between
conflict-related sexual violence and terrorism, human
trafficking and organized crime further worsens its
impact. Such trends and emerging concerns require
a robust international response. We reiterate that the
prevention of sexual violence should constitute an
integral part of wider efforts to prevent conflict.

In the area of training, Spain has worked to
strengthen guidance for its security-sector personnel,

Sexual and gender-based violence has been a
devastating feature of the conflict in Syria since it began.

34/80

18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Unfortunately, millions of Syrians, particularly women
and girls, continue to live under the threat of sexual
violence from various parties on the ground. The report
of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic published last month,
entitled “‘I lost my dignity’: Sexual and gender-based
violence in the Syrian Arab Republic” (A/HRC/37/72/
CRP.3), is a frank illustration of the horrific acts of
sexual violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime and
associated militias, as well as terrorist organizations,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), the Democratic Union
Party (PYD) and the Kurdish People’s Protection
Units (YPG). We believe that when depicting the
disturbing nature of sexual violence inflicted in Syria,
it is essential to refrain from adopting a selective and
limited approach to sampling the perpetrators. That is
particularly important to avoid creating the impression
that the international community might overlook
particular acts of sexual violence committed there. In
that understanding, I would like to read an excerpt from
paragraph 90 of the report, in connection with acts of
sexual violence committed by the PKK/PYD/YPG
terrorist organization in Syria, which is collectively
identified as “Syrian Democratic Forces” (SDF).
“Torture of male detainees, however, including
the burning of and threats to burn genitals, was
documented in 2017. In one such incident in June
2017, in an SDF detention facility in Al-Tabga
(ar-Raqqa), males were reportedly subjected to
burning of their genitals with cigarette lighters
during interrogation.”
That paragraph, along with two others in the report,
speaks clearly to the mindset and tactics used by the
PKK/PYD/YPG terrorist organization, which resorts to
torture and sexual violence in detention centres in areas
under its control, as has been confirmed by independent
organizations and United Nations investigative bodies.
As a neighbouring country that has maintained an
open-door policy for Syrians fleeing war and violence
in their own country, Turkey now hosts more than
3.5 million Syrians, 1.6 million of whom are women.
Empowering and ensuring self-reliance for Syrian
women and young people in particular, with no tolerance
of sexual and gender-based violence, is crucially
important to us. That is why we make every effort to
provide security and safety for them, including through
partnership with the United Nations Population Fund.

S/PV. 8234

The findings of the Secretary-General’s report
on the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar are
also disturbing, and there are other credible reports
that concur with them. First of all, the international
community expects the Government of Myanmar to
create the conditions necessary for peaceful coexistence
in Rakhine state and for the safe return of refugees.
That means ending every kind of violence, including
sexual violence, giving humanitarian agencies
immediate and unhindered access to the populations in
need and implementing international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in Rakhine state.
Bringing the alleged perpetrators of sexual and other
violence to justice will also be critically important to
ending any repetitions of that vicious cycle.
The increasing numbers of protracted conflicts,
forced displacements and humanitarian emergencies
create an environment that is conducive to the trafficking
of women and girls. Trafficking often involves sexual
violence and exploitation. Turkey attaches the utmost
importance to the fight against human trafficking,
which constitutes a violation of human rights and an
offence to the dignity and integrity of human beings. In
that regard, we recall the importance of resolution 2331
(2016), of which Turkey was a sponsor. Among other
things, an effective and resolute response to conflictrelated sexual violence requires empowering women
and girls, promoting gender equality and ensuring
access to justice and accountability for such crimes. It
also needs the political will and concerted action of the
international community as a whole.
Allow me to conclude by underscoring that Turkey
remains determined to continue to contribute to
international efforts aimed at addressing this challenge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation commends
your effort, Mr. President, in organizing this open
debate on an issue of critical importance. We thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their informative briefings this morning.
For far too long, sexual violence has remained a
grim and inevitable reality of armed conflicts, which
has often been employed systematically and with
impunity, to coerce, punish, humiliate and instil
fear among the targeted civilian population. Even

18-1088535/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

as the international community has come together to
collectively condemn such acts of unimaginable horror,
sexual abuse of women and girls continues to be used
as a tactic of war in conflicts around the world. While
sexual violence remains a designated war crime and a
crime against humanity, for survivors its impact goes
well beyond the ordeal of the harrowing experience
itself. Stigma and marginalization often outlast the
conflict, and the trauma haunts survivors for the rest of
their lives. The recent report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250) rightly
emphasizes how the effects of such violence can echo
across generations.
The Security Council has been proactively taking
up this issue under its women and peace and security
agenda. The legal framework and institutional focus
are in place, but complicated geopolitics around
various conflicts and divisions within the Chamber
have allowed perpetrators to continue to carry out these
heinous atrocities with impunity. From Myanmar to my
own country’s neighbourhood, the world continues to
watch in horror as several State and non-State actors
employ rape and sexual abuse as a deliberate policy
to subdue and oppress entire populations. A lack of
verifiable and independent reporting from many of
these hotspots is letting those who commit and condone
these acts go scot-free.
In order to combat impunity for these crimes and
protect women and girls from systematic abuse, the
international community needs to recalibrate and
revisit its response. Let me make four specific points
in that regard.
First, the Security Council, as the primary body
tasked with the maintenance of international peace
and security, should focus on addressing the root
causes of conflict to remove the breeding grounds for
such crimes.
Secondly, mechanisms to independently investigate
and verify reports emerging from conflict situations
where sexual violence is taking place are critical to
dealing with the challenge.

16/04/2018

Victim protection and rehabilitation should remain a
top priority. The stigma attached to victimhood must be
redirected towards the perpetrators. They are the ones
who should be made an example of, not just as a matter
of retribution but also as a preventive measure.
My country has always advocated the integration of
the gender perspective into the peacebuilding paradigm
to promote the cause of sustaining peace. As one of the
world’s leading troop-contributing countries, Pakistan
has set the highest standards in fulfilling peacekeeping
mandates, including protecting vulnerable segments of
the population, especially women and children, from
violence. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
Pakistan was among the first countries to sign the
Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on the subject.
We have also contributed to the Trust Fund in Support
of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
To share our experience and promote best practices
in peacekeeping, we have established a United Nations
peacekeeping training institute in Pakistan, which
offers specially designed modules to help peacekeepers
respond effectively and protect innocent civilians
from sexual violence. We also believe that increasing
participation by female peacekeepers and encouraging
more women to take up mediation roles will help in
the stabilization and reconstruction phase of postconflict rehabilitation.
For my country, protecting the vulnerable,
including women and children, is not only a global
peace and security imperative. More important, this
is an obligation of humanity. We remain resolute and
steadfast in our commitment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Sætre (Norway): I make this statement on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

Thirdly, we must also take concrete steps to
enhance the capacity of national institutions and
improve criminal justice systems in countries facing
armed conflict.

At the outset, I would like to thank Peru for
organizing this important debate. Sexual violence
is increasingly being used as a weapon or a tactic of
war. We know that domestic violence also increases
as tensions in society grow. The chaos of conflict
often prepares the ground for further unreported and
unprosecuted abuse.

Fourthly, justice does not only mean punishment for
the perpetrators. It also means redress for the survivors.

Women are always vulnerable in conflict. Violent
extremists often target women specifically and

36/80

18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8234

strategically, undermining women’s rights and security.
Sexual violence makes up a significant part of extremist
violence. Sexual violence is often seen as inevitable in
conflict. We do not agree. That attitude encourages
impunity and silences survivors.

UN-Women’s training of experts, as well as the Gender
Standby Capacity. Our civil society partners provide
psychosocial and legal support and engage in livelihood
programmes. Moreover, our academic partners provide
knowledge that informs our policy decisions.

The challenges are immense and include
insufficient protection mechanisms, inadequate rule of
law, weak judicial systems, poor services for survivors,
stigmatization of victims and witnesses, structural
discrimination and economic and social inequalities.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a violation of both
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. It can be a war crime, a crime against
humanity or an act of genocide. The International
Criminal Court plays a vital role in the fight against
impunity, but States have the primary duty to prevent
and investigate cases and to prosecute the perpetrators.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions, both
during peacetime and in conflict, is therefore critical.

The Nordic countries underscore the pivotal
importance of gender equality and women’s
empowerment, as highlighted in the concept note
(S/2018/311, annex).

Sexual violence is eroding the societies we are
striving to stabilize and rebuild. It is destroying the
future as well as the present for many more than the
women and girls, men and boys directly affected.
Preventing and responding to sexual- and genderbased violence is a priority for the Nordic countries.
In our mediation work, we strive to ensure that
victims are heard and that amnesty for sexual crimes
is not accepted. We are working hard to increase the
number of women deployed to international operations,
because we believe that diverse teams deliver better.
We train all our personnel to ensure that those who are
entrusted with people’s lives can in fact be trusted. We
contribute specialized police teams to United Nations
peace operations.
Together with the United Nations, we are developing
a whole-of-mission handbook for United Nations
operations on how to prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence. We cooperate with the African
Union and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, supporting the life-saving
services provided by the United Nations Population
Fund to survivors, and the efforts of UN-Women
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to ensure a gendered humanitarian response.
We work with Ms. Patten, the Group of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and we support Justice Rapid Response and

Without the full and effective participation of
women at all levels, we will not be able to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence or respond effectively.
We need a broad, coordinated response. The Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence in
Emergencies, the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network and the emerging alliance of
networks of women mediators are all important steps
in the right direction. Today’s discussion is not about
victims but survivors, who are entitled to protection
and justice. They must be enabled to participate
in rebuilding their societies. Only then will peace
be sustainable.
A longer version of this statement will be
available online.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Hoshino (Japan): I would like to begin
by joining others in thanking the briefers for their
important insights. I will abridge my remarks today in
the light of the time constraints, and would therefore
like to ask participants to refer to the website to see
Japan’s full statement.
Japan is seriously concerned about the fact that
sexual violence continues to be used as a tactic of
war, and we condemn such acts in the strongest terms.
We must put an end to sexual violence. In preventing
and deterring sexual violence, we should reflect on
its root causes, such as discrimination against women
and gender inequality. It is crucial that we support the
efforts of the United Nations and its States Members
to obtain political commitments from the parties to
conflicts to addressing these causes, and to ensure
that those commitments are implemented. In that
regard, Japan commends the important collaboration
both on joint communiqués and national action plans
between the Office of the Special Representative of the

18-1088537/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

16/04/2018

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
relevant countries.

for sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Economic and political empowerment is one
surefire way to prevent and deter sexual violence.
Women cannot be seen merely as victims of conflict;
they are active peacebuilders and safeguards against
violent extremism. Empowering women enhances the
resilience of families, communities, regions and beyond.
Japan believes that the most effective contribution that
donors can make is to women’s empowerment. With
that in mind, through UN-Women, we recently decided
to provide additional financial assistance of around
$18 million for women’s empowerment and leadership
programmes where they are needed most.

In conclusion, we need concrete interventions
with concrete results, based on the concept of
human security. It is never too late for justice and
accountability. However, the sooner they come, the
sooner the healing can start and the sooner a sense of
dignity can be restored to survivors. Japan calls on the
international community to unite and take concrete
actions as steadily and as quickly as possible. Japan
will always be a part of that effort.

Last year we witnessed various instances of the
liberation of territories from armed groups, and the
release or escape of women and girls who had been held
by such groups, which shed light on the cruel realities
that affect women and girls in conflicts and the growing
and urgent need to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of such acts and justice for their survivors.
Putting an end to a conflict does not necessarily mean
putting an end of sexual violence. If the perpetrators are
free or remain in power, the stigma will never end, and
that can lead to distrust of Government. Where there is
impunity, people may seek their own retribution, which
in turn can easily result in relapses into conflict.

Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico affirms that sexual violence
in conflict, whether it is a tactic of war, an act of
terrorism or criminal violence, is an abhorrent act and
a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

In order to address the complex issues related
to accountability, we must work to ensure the
establishment of a rule of law and justice system that
is responsive to gender in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Since 2014, Japan has been financially
supporting the work of the Team of Experts in the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is
being effectively deployed in some of the world’s most
challenging contexts and is delivering practical results.
For example, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
a priority country for Japan and the Team of Experts.
As the country’s current situation is a difficult one, we
have set up seven specialized units on sexual violence.
They provide training, mentoring, infrastructure and
technical support for judicial investigations and mobile
courts and have brought qualitative and quantitative
improvements in the judicial response to sexual
violence. Between 1 January and 31 October 2017, these
units registered 1,726 cases of sexual and gender-based
violence that have so far resulted in 643 judgments and
represent the first-ever concrete data on accountability

Sexual violence in conflict does not occur
spontaneously, and can therefore be prevented if
States make full use of all the tools at their disposal
to empower women and girls and strengthen their
protection and access to justice. In investing in women
as essential promoters of peace and security, we must
bear in mind that from a prevention perspective, every
national and international effort to address sexual
violence in conflict should be made in recognition
of the virtuous circle that exists between sustainable
peace, development, the rule of law and human rights.

38/80

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.

We appreciate Peru’s convening of today’s open
debate, given how urgent it is that we analyse the
most effective and sustainable ways to prevent and
address sexual violence in conflict, such as through
the empowerment of women, the promotion of gender
equality and efforts to ensure access to justice and
accountability for the commission of such crimes.

Sustainable peace is not possible without the
comprehensive participation and consideration of
the needs and perspectives of women and girls.
The systematic exclusion of girls from schooling
leads to discrimination and is at the root of women’s
marginalization in political, economic and social
life. Such marginalization is one of the most obvious
structural causes of conflict and creates fertile ground
for sexual violence. Girls must be empowered in the
family and in school in relation to boys; women must
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

be empowered with equality in relation to men and to
society in general. Empowered women, respected in
their society, are crucial to building a healthy, equitable
and inclusive social fabric in which the same human
rights for all are promoted and respected. Communities
based on gender equity will always be more resilient
in the face of every kind of conflict or expression
of violence.
Mexico has integrated a gender perspective
into its national development plans as one of its
main directions for action, enabling the necessary
resources to be allocated to it in the national budget.
Our long-term national initiatives include a national
programme for equality and non-discrimination
aimed at mainstreaming a gender perspective into all
Government programmes, actions and policies with a
view to guaranteeing women’s rights. At the federal
level, our Government is coordinating efforts with local
authorities, the private sector, civil society and academia
aimed at advancing the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in a comprehensive and
timely manner, including all the targets of Sustainable
Development Goal 5.
Crises do not discriminate with regard to gender,
and armed conflict has a particular impact on women
and girls. Mexico recognizes the importance of including
them in mediation processes and process for building,
strengthening and sustaining peace, and believes that
it is vital to ensure they participate in prevention,
reconstruction and national reconciliation efforts. Their
access to justice is crucial, and establishing protection
mechanisms for women and girls should therefore be a
norm in every legal system.
The resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on women and peace and security have helped to
strengthen the normative architecture of that agenda.
The challenge now lies in achieving its effective,
consistent and cross-cutting implementation across the
entire United Nations system and by Member States in
order to eliminate the marginalization of women that
still exists when it comes to making decisions on peace
and security.
Mexico has joined the Secretary-General’s
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual abuse committed by United Nations staff on
the ground. In that regard, we should point out that the
privileges and immunities of the Organization cannot
and must not be seen as a factor in impunity. That is

S/PV. 8234

why we call on the Council to implement a stronger
and more effective mechanism for monitoring national
proceedings related to sexual violence committed by
staff deployed under the United Nations flag, as well
as other officials and experts on mission, in order to
combat impunity.
As an international community, we must
acknowledge that sanctions are one of the most
effective ways of punishing perpetrators of sexual
violence and ensuring that they never commit such
acts again. However, sanctions imposed by the Council
will continue to have a limited impact when it comes
to combating sexual violence in conflict if they are
not strengthened through cooperation, both within and
outside the United Nations system, on investigating and
documenting these types of war crimes in an impartial
and effective manner.
Prevention, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out on several occasions, involves the empowerment of
women and girls in society. A society cannot be healthy
when the needs of half of its members are ignored.
There can be no sustainable peace without women’s full
participation in our societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting on this vital topic. We
were impressed by the comprehensive statements by
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Special
Representative Pramila Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
reiterates its commitment to fighting gender-based
violence, including sexual violence.
Sexual violence is among the gravest violations
of human rights. Its impact ranges from immediate to
multiple long-term physical and mental consequences
for women and girls, men and boys. It also has very
negative consequences for their families, communities,
societies and countries as a whole. But it is not inevitable.
There are ways to prevent it. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation in his latest report
(S/2018/250) to give due consideration to early-warning
signs of sexual violence when monitoring conflict
situations. If we fail to act early, the human, political
and economic costs can be devastating, as we know all
too well. That calls for a more alert, coordinated and

18-1088539/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

comprehensive approach by States Members and the
United Nations system.
It is crucial to support survivors of sexual violence
with adequate services so that they can rebuild their
lives. Survivors should also always be given the option
of documenting their cases for future accountability
processes. In that regard, the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in ensuring the effective
investigation and prosecution of sexual and genderbased crimes cannot be emphasized enough. The work
of UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response is also
important, since its joint expert roster has been an
effective tool for deploying experts to investigate and
document sexual violence in conflict-driven zones.
Estonia is fully committed to tackling genderbased violence and has put in place a comprehensive
development strategy for the period from 2015 to 2020
for reducing violence domestically. It lays out concrete
activities for reducing and preventing violence in its
various forms, including sexual violence. Globally,
Estonia has been a strong supporter of Special
Representative Pramila Patten and her mandate. We
are also proud to be a consistent contributor to the ICC
Trust Fund for Victims, which alleviates suffering for
survivors of violence.
I would also like to emphasize the important role
of civil society. While intergovernmental cooperation
is extremely significant, we need to ensure that
everyone is heard. Civil-society and non-governmental
organizations, and women’s organizations in particular,
can provide new insight and data that could otherwise
be missed. It is therefore very important to ensure that
non-governmental organizations have larger platforms
and more access to United Nations meetings and
forums. That would unquestionably help us to ensure
that every detail is accounted for in achieving our goals
related to ending conflict-related sexual violence.
Our experience has shown that national action plans
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, are essential in raising awareness
of the need for the inclusion of women in conflict
prevention and sustainable peacebuilding. Estonia is
currently implementing its second national action plan,
which was created and is being implemented jointly
with non-governmental organizations.
A fundamental lesson that we have learned from
experience and from the Secretary-General’s reports
is the sheer level of detail that we have to deal with
40/80

16/04/2018

in addressing sexual violence in conflict-driven zones.
Let us work together, domestically and globally, to put
an end to sexual violence forever.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): My delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank you and your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s important debate
on women and peace and security, with a special focus
on preventing sexual violence in conflict through
empowerment, gender equality and access to justice. It
is crucial that the Security Council continue to address
various aspects of conflicts within the framework of
thematic debates. Today’s debate also contributes
significantly to the systematic advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda in the work and
decision-making of the Security Council.
Slovakia considers prevention to be the cornerstone
of United Nations efforts aimed at peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The women and peace and security
agenda, together with the goals of inclusivity and gender
equality, definitely fits into the Secretary-General’s
broader prevention agenda. The women and peace and
security agenda will also be instrumental in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially
SDG 5 and SDG 16, which recognize gender equality,
as well as peace, justice and strong institutions, as a
global development priority.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse (A/72/751), and commend
his commitment and leadership, not only where the
women and peace and security agenda is concerned
but also as shown by his efforts to implement a zerotolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation and
abuse. Having the right information is often the first
step towards achieving our goals. For that reason,
we welcomed the launch of a dedicated website, in
August 2017, and the system-wide response to sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as the development of
a repository of national laws on sexual exploitation
and abuse by the Special Coordinator on Improving
the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

The high-level meeting convened last September
provided important momentum, with the establishment
of the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations operations. The President of Slovakia, His
Excellency Mr. Andrej Kiska, is a proud member of
the Circle.
Slovakia has also signed the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse and made a financial contribution to the United
Nations Trust Fund for victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse last year. We encourage all Member States
to show their solidarity with victims and commit to
eradicating the scourge by signing the compact and
providing financial support as needed and where
possible. We are of the view that a meeting proposed
by the Secretary-General to be convened on the
sidelines of the general debate during the next session
of the General Assembly will contribute to building
momentum and raising the visibility of issues relating
to the empowerment of women and the fight against
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Slovakia fully supports the approach of the
Secretary-General, reiterated in his most recent
report (S/2018/250), which is based on prioritizing
the rights and dignity of victims. Member States, in
particular troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) must continue
to work closely with the United Nations in order to
combat impunity and hold perpetrators accountable.
Slovakia is a TCC and PCC that fully cooperates with
the Secretary-General.
The Security Council should look more closely
at the possibility of referring cases deemed to be
particularly important to the International Criminal
Court, for example those involving gender-based
crimes. The solid case law of international criminal
tribunals relating to sexual violence can and should
also be used in national proceedings against alleged
perpetrators. It is equally important to address the root
causes of the scourge. The Secretary-General has quite
rightly stated in his report that weak State institutions,
in particular justice systems, exacerbate those factors
and can contribute to a climate of impunity. In a broad
sense, justice systems, including investigative bodies,
must adopt non-discriminatory and gender-sensitive
approaches. We must not forget the importance of
providing easily accessible legal aid to victims. In that
regard, civil society plays a crucial role.

S/PV. 8234

As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, Slovakia wishes to recall resolution
2151 (2014) on the issue of security sector reform, which
underscores the importance of women’s equal and
effective participation and full involvement in all stages
of security sector reform processes. A gender-sensitive
security sector is key to developing security sector
institutions that are non-discriminatory, representative
of the population and capable of effectively responding
to the specific security needs of diverse groups,
thereby playing a crucial role in prevention. Reforming
the security sector must also include the reform of
recruitment processes and an improvement in the
delivery of security services to address and prevent
sexual and gender-based violence.
In conclusion, the international community is
facing unprecedented challenges to global peace and
security. Civilians, including women and girls who
are often the most vulnerable, pay the highest price as
they face systematic violence and oppression. There
is no doubt that we must redouble our efforts to effect
changes on the ground, in particular in favour of women
and girls and societies in regions and countries affected
by conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset I would like
to commend the Peruvian presidency for convening
today’s debate, in particular for the angle it has
chosen. I also thank the briefers for their insightful and
informative contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and with that by
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Our concerns about the use of sexual and genderbased violence have deepened for two reasons: first, the
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence by
terrorists and violent extremist groups and, secondly,
the increased vulnerability of migrants, in particular
women and girls, to trafficking for the purposes of
sexual and other forms of exploitation. Women and
girls fleeing conflict must be afforded safe passage and
protection, including from sexual and gender-based
violence, while in transit and at their final destinations.
It is for those reasons that last year Italy promoted
the adoption by the Council of resolution 2388 (2017),

18-1088541/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

which further explored the nexus between trafficking
in persons and conflict-related sexual violence, as
outlined in resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2331 (2016),
with a special focus on the trafficking of children in
conflict situations. We encourage the Security Council
to continue to monitor those issues and ensure followup to those resolutions.
Conflict-related sexual violence can be prevented and
more effectively addressed through the empowerment
of women, gender equality and accountability for the
crimes perpetrated. First, empowering women is key
to any strategy that aims to help women take control of
their lives and prevent them from falling prey to sexual
violence in conflict. In keeping with the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to women’s leadership and
gender equality, as a vital element of its prevention
agenda Italy launched the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network. As we all know, the Mediterranean
region, key to international peace and security, is
currently facing several threats, including violent
extremism and transnational organized crime, human
trafficking and humanitarian emergencies.
In that environment, women can help countries
prevent conflicts and strengthen national reconciliation
processes by ensuring a gender and inclusive perspective
on issues, such as security, justice and governance,
which are often the root causes of violent conflicts. The
goal of the Network is to increase the number of women
involved in peacemaking efforts and facilitate the
appointment of women mediators and special envoys
at the local and international level, in particular in the
Mediterranean region.
With regard to accountability, prevention fails
if there are no consequences for sexual and genderbased violence. At the national level we must assist
Governments in strengthening accountability for
such crimes. That is the approach we are taking, for
example, with the Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units in Vicenza, which provides high quality
training and specialized courses for peacekeepers on
the prevention and investigation of sexual and genderbased violence. At the global level, the Statute of the
International Criminal Court expressly lists various
forms of sexual and gender-based crimes as underlying
acts of both crimes against humanity and war crimes.
In that regard, we welcome the recent surrender of Al
Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud,
wanted for crimes against humanity and war crimes
in Mali, including rape, forced marriage and sexual
42/80

16/04/2018

slavery. If properly supported, including by the
Council, justice can become a relevant deterrent for
human rights violations.
The Council can also do so by imposing targeted
sanctions against individuals who have committed
sexual violence. For example, in January 2017 sexual
and gender-based violence was included as a standalone
designation criterion in the renewal of sanctions in
the Central African Republic. The Security Council
could certainly deter such crimes by imposing targeted
sanctions. However, it is necessary to ensure that
sanctions are effectively implemented in order to
increase the cost of allowing or using sexual violence
in conflict. Only when the cost of the weapon of
sexual violence becomes visibly more expensive to its
perpetrators will there be a significant step towards the
eradication and prevention of the scourge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Ms. Baumann (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s debate, which
allows us to reflect on the best strategies to prevent
sexual violence in conflict. Switzerland has always
advocated a preventive approach with regard to conflict
and violence. By preventing sexual violence, we not
only protect individuals from one of the most brutal
forms of violence; we also protect entire societies.
The good news is that the tools needed to implement a
preventive approach, such as access to justice, gender
equality and empowerment are all well-known and at
our disposal.
First, allow me to address access to justice, which
remains a major challenge for all survivors of sexual
violence, especially in places affected by conflict,
where judicial systems are weak or non-existent. The
widespread fear of reprisals and stigma discourages
victims from coming forward. Law enforcement
agencies are therefore important partners in the fight
against violence. That is why Switzerland supports
police and armed forces by training them in compliance
with legislation and taking victim-centred approaches
in the handling cases of sexual violence.
The first step is often to increase public trust in the
police. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have been lending our support to the police in holding
open-door days for the local people. In Tajikistan,
Afghanistan and Nepal, Switzerland has worked with
local police forces to set up special police units to deal
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

with cases of family sexual and gender-based violence.
Switzerland has also prioritized efforts to support the
review of national laws, promote legal aid and provide
survivors with psychosocial counselling throughout
the judicial process. We also encourage and support
efforts to improve the documentation of rape and
other forms of sexual violence against men and boys
in situations of armed conflict to more effectively deal
with such crimes.
Secondly, I would like to turn to gender equality
as the principle means of prevention. There is a strong
empirical connection between the lack of gender
equality in a society and the readiness to take up arms.
A thorough analysis of the dynamics of gender equality
can therefore help to design tailor-made programmes
to prevent conflicts from breaking out. For that reason,
Switzerland’s fourth national action plan on women,
peace and security will also focus on promoting genderresponsive security sector reform and the deployment of
mixed teams in military and police units. The national
action plan further recognizes the need for women’s
economic empowerment as a precondition for equal
participation in peacebuilding. However, it is not enough
to simply focus on empowering women; initiatives need
to gain the support of all family members to advocate
women’s financial independence.
Thirdly, I would now like to speak on empowerment.
We are not talking only about women’s empowerment.
Men also need empowerment and education in order to
transform traditional gender-relations and put an end
to harmful behavioural patterns. It is crucial to include
men and boys, whether as allies, potential victims,
perpetrators and champions for gender-equality, in any
conflict and violence prevention strategy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for sustaining this
important dialogue on women and peace and security.
Indonesia greatly appreciates all the briefers for
their remarks.
One of the persistent challenges that today’s
debate is reminding us of is sexual violence in
conflict. Indonesia is deeply concerned about the use
of sexual violence as a war tactic. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/250) emphasizes, anyone
becomes susceptible to sexual violence during conflict,
regardless of their sex. Women and girls in particular

S/PV. 8234

have been exploited by the warring parties, yet women
have articulated their desire to move past victimization
and take the lead to improve their own situation and
in the broader scope, despite being victims of horrible
acts, having faced injustice or marginalized because
of gender.
Indonesia welcomes the response of Member States,
the United Nations and civil society. The international
community’s efforts have raised women’s profiles as
assets to peace. Since the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has built a robust framework in which women can
exercise their role in peace and security. It is worth
noting that the same resolution clearly mentions that
effective steps to prevent and respond to all forms
of sexual violence can significantly contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Along
with constructive measures to increase women’s roles
in peace, the international community can still do much
more. It must continue to condemn sexual violence in
conflict, which requires greater efforts not only to put
an end to it, but also to consider means to prevent such
atrocities from taking place in the first place.
I would like to take this opportunity to share
Indonesia’s views regarding the prevention of sexual
violence before, during and after conflict. First, there
is no price that can be placed on human life. The
human toll of conflict is devastating. For that reason,
civil order must be preserved if conflict is imminent.
Peaceful solutions must be actively pursued. More
resources should be poured into prevention in order to
rebalance the approach to peace and security, which has
focused more on response actions.
Secondly, the value of the women and peace and
security agenda in preventive measures will emerge
through the empowerment of women to assume the
confidence and capacity to access the policy-making
process, which is a way for them to address their
grievances and to make their contributions towards the
betterment of their community and society. Action to
elevate women’s empowerment should be integrated
into development planning, peacekeeping missions and
humanitarian assistance,
Thirdly, prevention should be prioritized
through better dissemination. Sharing knowledge
and experiences of women ex-combatants, women
peacekeepers, negotiators and the like to deter conflict
should be supported. That is why it is important for us

18-1088543/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

to have a system-wide United Nations approach or a
platform to disseminate, share and exchange success
stories in that regard.
Fourthly, women need to become self-sufficient.
Whether before, during or after conflict, strengthening
basic capacities of women, such as reading, writing and
economic skills, can go a long way. Training should
focus on developing skills that would help women
build a structured livelihood to obtain a steady income.
Indonesia has also been sharing our best practices
and experiences in empowering women in leadership
through South-South and triangular cooperation.
The many efforts the international community
has made give Indonesia hope that there is sufficient
momentum for women’s participation in peace and
security. However, women and peace and security
should not be reduced to a women’s issue. It takes both
men and women to achieve gender equality, foster
respectful relationships, support safer communities and
become true partners for peace. The hearty cooperation
of both women and men is essential to successfully
tackle the many challenges on the Council’s agenda.
The frameworks and tools are there. We must now walk
the talk.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union,
the Group of Friends on Women, Peace and Security
and the Human Security Network.
We would like to thank Peru for convening this open
debate and the briefers for their reports. Understanding
the impact of armed conflict on women and girls is
central to effectively address sexual violence, prevent
its occurrence and protect those at risk. We will
highlight four points in the context of this debate.
My first point concerns protecting minorities.
Persons belonging to minorities encounter a high risk as
targets of violence. That was exemplified to us today by
the testimony of Ms. Razia Sultana from the Rohingya
community of Myanmar. Equally appalling is the fact
that Da’esh continues to traffic Iraqi Yazidi women
and girls into and across Syria as part of its campaign
targeting minorities. The patterns of violence against
women and girls belonging to minorities are embedded
in underlying structural conditions, including
inequality, gender-based discrimination and neglect
44/80

16/04/2018

for the rights of persons belonging to minorities. As
the sponsor of the resolutions on the rights of persons
belonging to minorities at the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, Austria stresses the
obligation of States to protect minorities from violence
and underlines the necessity of empowering women and
girls belonging to minorities who are often particularly
vulnerable. As Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten stated today, empowerment is a main
building block for protection. We also emphasize
the relevance of early-warning and awarenessraising measures to tackle problems regarding the
situations of minorities, including through the relevant
United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as
regional organizations.
My second point involves countering impunity.
We must do much more to combat and prevent sexual
violence directed against women. Women and girls are
kidnapped, held captive as sex slaves and traded like
goods or animals. The crimes committed against them
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Those responsible simply have to be brought to justice.
Austria wants to see all perpetrators, including Da’esh
and Boko Haram fighters, held accountable for their
repulsive acts of violence against women and girls. As
Special Representative Patten said today, only by truly
fighting impunity will we achieve a deterrence effect.
In order to help establish accountability, Austria has
supported and contributed financially to the creation of
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We also anticipate that the
investigative team to support domestic efforts to hold
Da’esh accountable by collecting evidence in Iraq will
soon generate actionable results.
The third point concerns preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers.
Reports of sexual exploitation and abuse by both military
and civilian personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in recent years have increasingly tainted
the reputation of the United Nations and undermined
its credibility. Austria condemns such behaviour and
welcomes the focus of the Secretary-General on that
important issue and his initiatives in that regard.
Austria will sign the Secretary-General’s compact on
the elimination of sexual exploitation. We also intend
to include this subject in the curriculum of the United
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8234

Nations-certified course on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The course is held on a regular basis
at the Austrian Study Centre for Peace and Conflict
Resolution in Stadtschlaining and is attended by senior
staff in United Nations peacekeeping from around
the world.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. I make the
following comments in my national capacity.

The fourth point involves reintegrating survivors.
Sexual violence in conflict has a significantly
detrimental impact on individuals and communities.
In all too many settings, victims and their children
are stigmatized, discriminated against and rejected by
their communities. An example of determined efforts
to support the reintegration of survivors of sexual
violence is the case of northern Uganda, where during
the conflict with the Lord’s Resistance Army many
serious crimes, including various forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, were committed. Since 2008,
the Austrian Development Agency, together with
the International Center for Transitional Justice, has
implemented four consecutive projects with a focus
on supporting ongoing work on transitional justice
in Uganda, with the aim of reintegrating victims into
their communities.

As well all know, the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) was an important step towards recognizing
women’s role in conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding. When, building on
that initiative, the Security Council adopted resolution
1820 (2008) — almost 10 years ago to the day — it
also took a long-awaited step forward in the struggle
against sexual violence in conflict. Belgium, which
was a non-permanent member of the Security Council
at that time, has always attached great importance to
the implementation of that historic resolution and its
follow-up resolutions.

Against the background of my own professional
experience, I also note the case of the conflict-related
sexual violence that took place in Kosovo in the late
1990s, which is not mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/250). It is important that every
woman and girl who has experienced sexual violence is
recognized, as such recognition may constitute the first
step in a very difficult healing process to overcome the
inconceivable traumas suffered.
Violence directed against women and girls has to be
eradicated in all its forms. Sexual violence in conflict
builds upon the structural violence and discrimination
against women and girls, which is already present in
peacetime. Against that backdrop, Austria recently
launched a campaign, with a fund of €1 million, to
support activities that oppose female genital mutilation
and its effects.
Rest assured that we will continue our work to
achieve gender equality and the empowerment of
women across the board, with a special focus on women
and peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.

In July 2017, my country adopted its third national
plan of action on women and peace and security. The
plan sets forth six major goals intended to improve
women’ situation in conflict zones before and following
conflicts. One of the six major objectives is explicitly
intended to combat all forms of violence directed
against women and girls, and, more specifically, sexual
violence. Exactly as was the case with its precursors,
the plan is to be implemented at the national level
and within the framework of Belgium’s foreign policy
involving partner countries of the Belgian Development
Cooperation, international organizations of which
Belgium is a member and countries in which the
Belgian armed forces are active, as well as countries
with which we enjoy bilateral relations. Our policy is
not solely limited to the area of Government. A report
resuming the progress made in every goal set out in the
plan of action is submitted annually to Parliament.
Beyond the national level, it is essential that
we continue to work so that the women and peace
and security agenda inform any new initiative
involving conflict prevention, conflict management or
peacekeeping. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the
fact that the topic of women and peace and security is
an integral part of the new joint proposals made by the
European Union and NATO, announced in December
2017, and we encourage other regional initiatives to
explicitly include that theme in their mandates, as well
as in their efforts on the ground.

18-1088545/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

Despite the significant work that has been done, the
struggle against sexual violence is far from over. As
we speak, sexual violence against women and girls and
men and boys continues in conflict zones throughout
the world, and those responsible for such acts often
go unpunished. Belgium is deeply concerned about
the instances of sexual violence met with impunity
mentioned in the report (S/2018/250) of the SecretaryGeneral, and urges all parties concerned to follow his
recommendations so as to bring justice the perpetrators,
rehabilitate the victims of sexual violence and ensure
that such violence is not repeated.
In conclusion, I underscore that Belgium will
remain committed to this issue both at the national
level and vis-à-vis the international community,
thereby giving political and operational priority to
the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and its
follow-up resolutions. My country will also continue to
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Lastly, in the
event that we are elected as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the period from 2019 to
2020, we pledge to continue to support and actively
promote the women and peace and security agenda
and its mandate, including the struggle against sexual
violence in conflict situations within the framework of
the decision-making process of the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Ms. Abdelkawy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and the representative of civil society for their
valuable contributions.
The Secretary-General in his report this year
(S/2018/250) mentions that the past few months have
seen positive developments, the most important of
which was the release of many women and girls by
armed terrorist groups. However, those developments
are coupled with challenges, the most important of
which is the need to rehabilitate and reintegrate those
women and girls into their societies.
Recently, terrorist groups have begun to use
sexual violence as a tool to exploit religion or race or
46/80

16/04/2018

as a means of expanding control of territory. Egypt
expresses its concern about the lack of accountability of
terrorist groups, including the organization of Islamic
State and Boko Haram, for sexual violence committed
against women and girls in armed conflict areas. In this
context, we would like to stress the following points.
First, we reiterate our call for the reports of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
to remain committed to the mandates issued in the
Security Council resolutions, so that such mandates
achieve their desired goals in armed conflict areas and
post-conflict situations.
Second, effective development, the eradication of
poverty and the economic empowerment of women and
girls are factors that can help end sexual exploitation
and abuse in armed conflict areas and post-conflict
situations. We stress the important role of the donor
community in that regard.
Third, we welcome the work of the United Nations
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, in cooperation with the United
Nations specialized funds, programmes and agencies,
particularly with regard to building the capacities of
States in armed conflict or post-conflict situations
in the areas of investigation, prosecution, military
justice, legislative reform, protection of witnesses
and reparations. We welcome the work of the United
Nations Action Network against Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We call for coordinated work between the
Team of Experts and the Network to improve the United
Nations response to sexual violence in conflict areas.
Fourth, we welcome action by the United Nations to
address conflict-related sexual violence, including by
increasing the number of women protection advisers on
the ground. In that regard, we have contributed female
staff to the police and military components of United
Nations missions in the Sudan and Western Sahara and
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur since 2009.
Fifth, we support the efforts of the Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to sexual exploitation and abuse, within her mandate,
to address cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations personnel or personnel under the
United Nations flag. We are committed to the zerotolerance policy of the Secretary-General with regard
to sexual exploitation crimes. We continue to work with
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to end all
forms of violence against women in peace operations.
Sixth, the national curricula provided to
peacekeeping troops during training should include
guidance on how to deal with sexual violence. In that
connection, the Cairo International Center for Conflict
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding, in
coordination with the Egyptian Ministry of Defence,
includes the issue of combating sexual violence in
armed conflict in the predeployment training of the
Egyptian military, police or civilian personnel that take
part in peacekeeping forces. The Center also offers
such training to civilian, military and police elements
from Arab and African States that take part in United
Nations peacekeeping.
Seventh, we stress the need for concerted
international efforts to build the capacities of local and
religious leaders to raise awareness in societies and
communities on the need to eliminate the stereotype
and stigma of victims of sexual violence and their
children. It is the perpetrators who should bear that
stigma instead. The victims should not be criminalized.
We commend the role of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif in rejecting
the advisory opinions of terrorist groups on the status
of women in conflict areas.
Eighth, there must be respect for culturally specific
elements of States when dealing with victims of
sexual violence — whether men or women — during
armed conflict.
In conclusion, we call for renewed political and
ethical commitment to the empowerment of women
in conflict and post-conflict areas and States. Women
are key contributors to transitions from conflict to
development and from societies torn by armed conflict to
sound societies able to achieve sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Oehri (Lithuania): At the outset, we thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
convening an open debate on this important issue. We
also welcome the comprehensive report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/250) and its recommendations. We also
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Pramila Patten, and her team for her
dedication to combating and preventing sexual violence
in conflict. We thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and all briefers for their contribution.

S/PV. 8234

Lithuania aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Time and again, since 2008, when Council
resolution 1820 (2008) acknowledged sexual violence as
a threat to security and an impediment to the restoration
peace, we return to the security issue. Time and again,
the Secretary-General’s reports a sickening picture
in 19 countries where rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy and other brutalities
against women and men, girls and boys are employed
by State and non-State actors as tactics of war and
terrorism. Unstable political environments, continued
armed clashes, weak State structures, a climate of
impunity and stigmata related to sexual violence
exacerbate an already grave situation. Yet, most sexual
crimes do not even get reported. Particularly vulnerable
are women in remote rural areas, as well as displaced
and refugee populations that live beyond the protection
of rule-of-law institutions.
The only way to effectively address this scourge
is a comprehensive and integrated approach at the
international, regional and national levels, which entails
prevention, early warning, justice and accountability,
the participation of women in political processes
and political, social and economic empowerment.
Lithuania continuously underlines the importance of
the Secretary-General’s efforts to emphasize conflict
prevention, preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The overarching priority of prevention
should be at the forefront of our fight against sexual
violence in conflict. We should look for early warning
indicators to identify potential conflict situations.
Among the positive steps at the United Nations
level, we would mention the efforts to engage with
the listed national military and police forces for the
development of action plans to address violations,
the deployment of women protection advisers and the
meaningful work of the United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in
providing assistance to Governments by strengthening
their capacities. However, the perpetrators are too often
left unpunished and crimes unresolved, which further
fuels new cycles of violence.
We concur with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that sexual and gender-based
violence should be systematically applied as designation

18-1088547/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

criteria when adopting or renewing targeted sanctions
in situations of armed conflict. Such a tool could be
more widely used to deter sexual violence and to seek
accountability. International justice mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court, can also play a
critical role.
To that end, having strong national institutions
and an adequate judiciary and penal framework is
essential, as is making sure that national civilian and
military justice systems do not lack the capacity and
expertise to prevent, investigate and prosecute sexual
violence. Cooperation mechanisms, including through
awareness-raising campaigns, action plans, capacitybuilding and shared good practices, should continue to
actively promote effective responses to conflict-related
sexual crimes. We commend the partnership between
the Justice Rapid Response initiative and UN-Women.
The deployment of justice experts from their joint
roster to more than 50 missions greatly contributes to
ending impunity for perpetrators.
Another vital issue that we should address is
care for and the protection of survivors of sexual
violence. Such violence affects entire generations,
with the stigmatization of women and their children
having lasting repercussions. Public, religious and
community leaders can personally engage in helping
to shift the stigma from the victims of sexual abuse
to the perpetrators of those heinous crimes. Victims
must have access to justice, accountability and redress
mechanisms in order to ensure their reintegration into
society and their economic empowerment.
Even the best tools that we have cannot tackle
sexual violence in conflict if women continue to be on
the sidelines of peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. Being an active advocate
of gender equality and the empowerment of women,
Lithuania already contributes to achieving those goals
through various initiatives. While striving to deploy
more gender-balanced peacekeeping troop contingents,
Lithuania continuously encourages female military and
police personnel to apply. Training is also crucial to
raising awareness and to improving the implementation
of gender aspects in peace operations. Before their
deployment, Lithuanian peacekeepers therefore
undertake high-quality training on human rights
and gender-related issues, in particular. As a genderresponsive legal and judicial system constitutes one
of the building blocks of a resilient society, Lithuania
remains committed to ensuring accountability for
48/80

16/04/2018

sexual and gender-based violence in conflict through
national and international mechanisms.
Moreover, the President of Lithuania, Mrs. Dalia
Grybauskaitė, chairs the Council of Women World
Leaders, a network that seeks to mobilize influential
women leaders around the world for collective action
on issues of critical importance to women. In June
this year, the Women Political Leaders Summit will
take place in Vilnius, where women from all over
the world will discuss, among other issues, how
women, particularly political leaders, can advance
peace and security. We also commend a promising
achievement — the establishment of the Women
African Leaders Network — and encourage similar
initiatives in other regions of the world.
In conclusion, all Member States should redouble
their efforts to implement Sustainable Development
Goal 5 on achieving gender equality and empowering all
women and girls to become actors rather than victims in
their societies. All countries should review and revoke
any discriminatory laws and practices and challenge
stereotypes that hinder women’s empowerment. Only
then, will the hard-won progress in the area of women’s
rights be maintained and continue to break the cycles of
gender-based violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to congratulate Peru on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Peru for organizing this open
debate and to wish it every success, and the delegation
of the Netherlands for its successful presidency of the
Security Council last month.
I would also like to express my sincere thanks
to Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for the important role that she and her team play in
helping and empowering the female survivors of sexual
violence and the victims of indiscriminate terrorism.
We also thank Ms. Razia Sultana for her briefing
and for the valuable information that she provided on
the Rohingya.
Iraq continues to suffer some of the most dreadful
terrorist organizations, which have committed heinous
crimes against innocent people. These gangs have
abducted thousands of citizens, including children and
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

women whom they have enslaved and trafficked. Many
have been raped and exposed to some of the worst and
most humiliating and inhumane treatment ever.
Based on our responsibility to provide protection
and accountability and to prosecute the perpetrators
of such terrible crimes against the people of Iraq,
we have adopted a number of practical measures,
the most important of which was the signing of the
joint communiqué between the Iraqi Government,
represented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict on 23 September 2016. That
represented the beginning of a joint effort of Iraq and
the United Nations to address the sexual violence and
brutality committed by the terrorist Da’esh organization
and to address some of the challenges faced by Iraq in
ensuring accountability for such crimes and bringing
the perpetrators to justice in line with the relevant
Iraqi laws.
Pursuant to that agreement, Iraq has received
international assistance to document and gather evidence
of such crimes and strengthen the legal framework,
thereby enabling the judicial authorities to find ways
to compensate and support the survivors of rape and
children conceived as a result. In accordance with the
agreement, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her team first visited Iraq
from 25 February to 3 March 2017. That was followed
by two more visits to Iraq by specialists from the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the most recent of which took place from 21 July to
2 August 2017. They held formal meetings with the
relevant bodies to discuss the joint plan of action
expected to be implemented under the terms of the joint
communiqué signed by the two parties.
That was followed by yet another important
step along the same lines. In cooperation with its
international partners, particularly the United Kingdom,
Iraq conveyed a message to the Secretary-General on
9 August 2017, requesting international assistance.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2379 (2017)
on 21 September 2017, which will help Iraq to collect,
preserve and store evidence of crimes committed in
Iraq by perpetrators and to submit that evidence to the
Iraqi judicial authorities so that they can carry out their
judicial duties, including the prosecution of crimes of
sexual violence, building judicial capacities, updating
Iraqi law and ensuring accountability for perpetrators

S/PV. 8234

pertaining to Da’esh. Iraq has therefore taken an
important step towards ensuring accountability,
prosecuting the perpetrators of such crimes and treating
victims fairly.
This year, the Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Haider
Al Abadi, invited the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, to pay a visit to Iraq. During her
visit, the final draft of the executive plan of the joint
communiqué signed between Iraq and the United Nations
was put forward with a view to help in defining fields
of technical cooperation with Iraqi entities to confront
various dimensions of sexual violence in conflict. The
visit was conducted successfully from 25 February to
5 March. The Special Representative was accompanied
by Lord Ahmad, the Special Representative of the
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Minister of
State for the Commonwealth and the United Nations.
Ms. Patten met with the Prime Minister, as well as
the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Labour and
Social Affairs, the President of the Supreme Judicial
Council and religious leaders of all denominations
and other stakeholders. The executive plan of the joint
communiqué was launched, and a safe haven for female
survivors was also inaugurated, the first such haven in
Iraq. In this regard, the Iraqi Government commends
the constructive cooperation and important role played
by the Office of the Special Representative in assisting
Iraq, particularly during the period following the
liberation of all Iraqi cities from terrorist organizations.
Lastly, Iraq would like to thank all its partners who
contributed effectively to the eradication of terrorist
organizations, which have become a threat to all
the nations of the world. The world has realized that
everybody’s interest lies in joint efforts to eradicate
such terrorist groups, wherever they are, and to
cooperate in drying up the sources of terrorism, and
in bringing terrorists to justice, thereby ensuring
victim redress and contributing to an international
envirnment that is safe for all. Iraq expects from all
of its international partners to continue providing
support for the reconstruction process, as well as for
the rehabilitation and empowerment of victims with a
view to their reintegration into society.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Nigeria.

18-1088549/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

16/04/2018

Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Peru for organizing today’s open debate.

of the Multinational Joint Task Force to defeat the Boko
Haram insurgency, which is targeting women and girls.

Our appreciation also goes to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her remarks and farreaching recommendations. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and other briefers for sharing their
perspective on this very important subject.

Our experience in the Lake Chad region is evidence
that, with determined international collaboration,
terrorism can be defeated. In addition, the Government
of Nigeria has taken steps to cater to victims of Boko
Haram terrorism in its various forms — including
rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children and other grave violations — by
putting in motion several legal remedies. Some legal and
social remedies undertaken by the Government include
the diligent prosecution of more than 200 detained
Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as
well as reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes and psychosocial programmes designed
to meet the needs of each victim of sexual violence.
The sustained efforts of Nigeria and its international
partners have culminated in the liberation of territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram.

Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms the
abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of women
and girls by extremist groups, including the heinous
activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region,
particularly in north-eastern Nigeria. The use of women
and girls as sex slaves must also be equally condemned.
In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate will
offer suggestions to address the prevailing challenges
and gaps impeding our ability to acquire the needed
resources to advance the role of women within the
context of the global peace and security architecture.
We acknowledge that the Security Council has
provided the leadership necessary to boost the women
and peace and security agenda, beginning with
resolution 1325 (2000), which set up the framework for
subsequent Council resolutions. In Africa, the African
Union has been a useful platform for the advancement
of the women and peace and security agenda by
emphasizing the engagement of women and youth in
the continent’s development. That has been clearly
reflected in the Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
At the subregional level, in September 2010 the
Economic Community of West African States, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa, developed an integrated plan of action for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan
of action emphasizes the importance of the role of
women in conflict prevention, resolution mediation and
peacebuilding efforts, as well as the rebuilding of postconflict societies.
Building on the subregional efforts, in August
2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to fully
implement the relevant provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan reflects the Government’s commitment
to ensuring the security of women and girls during
armed conflict and enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
We are also collaborating with our neighbours, Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin within the framework
50/80

It is to be noted that 80 per cent of the 2 million
internally displaced persons in the north-east of Nigeria
are women and girls. We have taken concrete steps to
meet their humanitarian needs and to ensure that the
necessary conditions are established to enable the
voluntary return of the displaced persons to their places
of origin in safety and dignity. Indeed, as a sequel to
the aforementioned efforts, we welcome the release of
the abducted Chibok and Dapchi girls. Our efforts will
continue until the remaining ones are released.
I wish to conclude by acknowledging the
contributions of civil society organizations as partners
in the prevention, management and resolution of
disputes. The Nigerian Government will continue to
engage them as key stakeholders and partners in the
women and peace and security agenda. Nigeria remains
fully and firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of the rights of women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations. In this regard, we will work
assiduously to enhance the participation of women in
peace and security initiatives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Sukkar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your efforts as
President of the Security Council this month, wishing
Peru every success. I would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8234

Ms. Pramila Patten, and Ms. Razia Sultana for their
important briefings.

by putting them on equal footing with terrorists
or criminals.

The unprecedented crises worldwide have
contributed to an increase in sexual violence in conflict.
Various groups have used it as a tool of war and terror
against women, girls, children and men too. It leads
to psychological impact that constitutes a threat to the
fabric of society and international peace and security.
It is a painful phenomenon that plagues victims
throughout the world, in conflicts in Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Syria, Mali, Myanmar
and elsewhere.

Refugees are the main victims of terrorism.
Refugees flee the ravages of war plaguing their country
with their children, as they await the return of peace
so that they can return to their homes. They need to be
helped to live in greater dignity so that they themselves
do not succumb to obscurantist and terrorist ideologies.
This requires coordination and a pooling of efforts
among donor countries, host countries, the United
Nations and the international community, with a view
to addressing these urgent issues. Based on working
with groups in various sectors, we have launched a
national plan to activate Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) which is geared towards respecting human
rights and promoting the principles of justice, equality
and sharing.

For example, in Iraq, women and girls in areas
under the control of Da’esh, particularly Yazidi and
other minority women, are subjected to violations of
their human rights and of international humanitarian
law that go beyond anything imaginable. The recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250) describes
the horrors plaguing Rohingya women and calls on
the international community to alleviate the suffering
of these victims, provide them with care and ensure
their reintegration in their societies. It also emphasizes
the importance of accountability and of combating
impunity and discrimination in judgments rendered.
It is important for the United Nations to continue
to monitor and follow up on all mechanisms designed
to protect women and children. Jordan, together with
Finland, is a facilitator of the sixth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and we
take into account the rights of victims — women,
children and men — who have been subjected to grave
violations perpetrated by terrorist groups. We ensure
that they receive treatment and care and are reintegrated
into society.
Despite the fact that Jordan is located in one
of the most tumultuous areas in the world, we have
remained an oasis of security and stability. However,
the conflicts that surround us have helped us to react
with all due speed to prevent certain impacts. In
Jordan, we are accustomed to seeing a great deal of
displacement, including the recent displacement of
refugees from Syria, which has required us to respond.
We have stepped up our national efforts to address
the demographic changes in our country to maintain
security and stability for us in our homeland and for
others. We have made efforts not to stigmatize refugees

The instability plaguing the Arab region is among
the great challenges that imperil the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Jordan
attaches great importance to the implementation of the
Agenda. We seek to establish social peace and security
and deliver on sustainable development.
Syrian women refugees represent 45.3 per cent of
the total refugees in my country, the overall number
of which is 1.3 million people. The female refugees
in this group need specific protection, and Jordan is
addressing this need by providing a large number of
services in the area of health and security.
Jordanian women are active in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in military and police units
in Darfur, South Sudan and Abyei. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s efforts to implement the zerotolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation
and abuse.
Lastly, we all need to bear responsibility and
facilitate the protection of women by including
them in international peace and security efforts and
implementing political, economic and social policies to
tackle the persistent and renewed threats.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s open debate on this very important
issue. Portugal values the fact that the Council
continues to give its attention to the women and peace

18-1088551/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

and security agenda, which is an essential tool for
preventing conflict and for ensuring more effective
responses to today’s complex crises.
As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) notes, conflict-related sexual violence is
accompanied by the violation of other human rights.
Women’s security is clearly linked to the fulfilment
of human rights, be they political, civil, economic,
social or cultural rights. Furthermore, the report also
clearly indicates that sexual violence can cause longterm physical and psychological trauma and shred the
social fabric. It is therefore essential to ensure that all
necessary measures are taken, to strengthen justice
mechanisms, to hold accountable those responsible for
sexual violence, and to end impunity. It is also of the
utmost importance to address the persistent barriers
that prevent reporting wartime sexual violence. We
need more effective and rigorous investigations for
bringing to justice the perpetrators of all these crimes.
Portugal has been implementing resolution 1325
(2000) since the development of our first national action
plan in 2009. Currently, our second national action plan
includes training programmes on gender equality and
violence against women and young women, including
sexual violence, gender-based violence and trafficking
in human beings, in the fields of justice, armed forces
and security forces; the inclusion of issues related to the
women and peace and security agenda in our development
cooperation, notably aiming at the implementation
of resolution 2106 (2013); ensuring that measures are
taken so that all victims of violence, including sexual
violence, have the right to protection and reparation, and
that perpetrators are held accountable; and promoting
awareness-raising programmes on health and human
rights issues, including on sexual violence and genderbased violence.
Preventing sexual violence in conflict is possible
only if all stakeholders are involved in finding durable
solutions. In that regard, it is essential to work closely
with civil society. Civil society organizations often play
an instrumental role in ensuring the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, including
by complementing the work done by military, security
and civilian personnel in conflict and post-conflict
settings and in emergency situations. They are often
essential to preventing and reporting crimes and to
alerting the international community to such crimes,
to restoring the internal stability of their countries and
52/80

16/04/2018

to supporting reconstruction efforts and helping the
population recover.
Finally, allow me to draw the Council’s attention
to the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, which supports the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). It is a relevant
initiative of which Portugal is a proud member.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations.
Ms. Mohammed: First allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to commend
you for convening this important open debate. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250). I would
like to further commend Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Pramila Patten for their insightful briefings. I wish to
further thank Ms. Razia Sultana, of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, for sharing her
experience and some strategic approaches to preventing
sexual violence from being used as a destructive
weapon of war, particularly against women and girls.
The African Union (AU) member States have
undertaken with determination, together with the
AU Commission, to make the women and peace and
security agenda a concrete instrument of the AU Peace
and Security Council and of the international agenda.
The African Union Commission is fully committed to
ensuring that women’s empowerment, gender equality
and access to justice are strong components of its peace
and security architecture and are fully implemented at
local, national and continental levels.
Today’s open debate is all the more relevant as
it places a sharp focus on concrete strategies and
practical implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Over the years, the African
Union has developed strategies to answer the call by
operationalizing, monitoring and evaluating reporting
systems to better ensure the protection of civilians.
The AU stands firmly with regard to its position
of zero tolerance for sexual violence. In that context,
I would like to put forward three specific strategies
the African Union has developed to accelerate the
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

implementation the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda and
to address sexual and gender-based violence.
First, within the African context, protocols,
declarations, laws, policies and strategies for
addressing sexual and gender-based violence, and,
more specifically, conflict-related sexual violence,
are in place. For instance, as of December 2017, 22
African countries had adopted national action plans
on resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions,
including those that specifically address conflictrelated sexual violence.
Secondly, while we recognize the weak
implementation of those normative frameworks, the
African Union’s Office of the Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security has undertaken initiatives towards
bridging the gap between policy and implementation.
Specifically, the Office of the Special Envoy has
embarked on the development of a continental results
framework for monitoring and reporting on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Africa. The framework was validated in
March 2018 by African Union member States and
national action plans were adopted. The framework
provides a unique opportunity to address conflictrelated sexual violence by ensuring that AU member
States are held accountable for their commitments
to preventing sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict, as well as to enhancing women’s participation
in peace processes and ensuring that women’s needs
are met in post-conflict reconstruction processes, in
line with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions.
Thirdly, building on earlier actions to move
forward the implementation of commitments on
the women and peace and security agenda, the AU
Commission continues its efforts to enhance the
agency of women in peace processes through support
to women’s networks that strengthen the role and
leadership of women in key paths to peace, security
and development. Those include two major initiatives
that I would like to mention. The first is the creation of
the Network of African Women Mediators, FemWise,
facilitated by the Panel of the Wise and the Office of the
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, and the
African Women Leaders Network. That was initiated
in partnership with the United Nations through the
Offices of the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security and UN-Women with the support of the
Federal Republic of Germany. The African Women

S/PV. 8234

Leaders Network has recorded important milestones
for women on the ground, including the joint AUUnited Nations high-level solidarity mission to Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which took
place in July 2017 and was led by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral to revitalize women’s participation in peace,
security and development in Africa. Women leaders,
from top leadership to those affiliated with grassroots
organizations, monitored and reported to the Security
Council and the General Assembly sexual and genderbased violence committed against women and girls
in fragile and conflict zones. National chapters of the
Network have been launched in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Côte d’Ivoire, demonstrating the
action-oriented and national ownership of perspectives
of that inclusive platform. It is a Network of and for
women and for action.
We wish to commend the Permanent Missions of
Germany and Ghana for taking the leadership of the
Group of Friends of the African Women’s Leaders
Network to the United Nations as a concrete way to
support and promote that initiative with a guiding vision
to support women’s participation in peace, security and
political processes on the continent through the work of
the United Nations. We thank the 51 cross-regional and
dynamic Member States that have joined the Group and
invite others to join it in order to bolster this agenda on
the international scene.
Let me conclude by saying that the United Nations
agenda on women and peace and security remains a
key priority for the African Union Commission and
its Chairperson. The Council can fully count on the
AU’s support to ensure its concrete implementation, in
line with the Joint United Nations-AU Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed,
respectively, by the two institutions in April 2017 and
January 2018.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for putting this item on the agenda. I would also like to
thank you, Sir, for your statement and to highlight the
good cooperation we have had with the African Union
on the topics that I will mention later.
Conflict-related sexual violence is, as I think
the Swedish Minister said earlier today, a security
challenge. It is also a horrible, despicable example of
a violation of basic human rights. Therefore, I am very

18-1088553/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

grateful again that you, Mr. President, to have put it on
the agenda.
I would like to commend Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Pramila Patten for her tireless
work. I am very happy, having listened to all the remarks
around the table for at least part of the discussion, that
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/250) and her
presentation today, with just a few exceptions, have
been commended by everybody. Germany supports her
work and will continue to do so.
I would like to highlight the depressing findings
about sexual violence as “a tactic of war” and about the
change of demographics and so forth that were referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General and in the
remarks she made earlier today. Using sexual violence
as an instrument to force people into submission is as
grave as using gas for the same purpose. Let me focus
on four points.
First, we must support the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and her team of experts in carrying out her
mandate. Germany is committed to providing support.
We have worked very closely, in particular on the
issue of Iraq. I also appreciate the fact that the Iraqi
Ambassador highlighted the good cooperation between
Office of the Special Representative and Iraq. One of
the most outrageous examples of sexual violence in
recent decades, which has been discussed today, is
the widespread use of sexual violence as a strategy
to terrorize the Rohingya community. We urge the
authorities of Myanmar to work very closely with the
Special Representative to enter into structured dialogue
with the United Nations to assist survivors and ensure
accountability. When the Security Council travels to
Myanmar, I urge it to put this item on the agenda and
take up the proposal put forward by Ms. Sultana for
the Council to meet with survivors of sexual violence.
I believe that the Council would send a clear and
important message if it met with people who suffered
such crimes.
I would like to highlight other activities of the
Special Representative, such as work being conducted
in the Sudan. There is a culture of silence surrounding
sexual violence in Darfur, which is of deep concern. We
encourage the Sudanese Government to work closely
with the Council to grant access to the survivors.
Secondly, I would like to address the issue of
accountability. As the observer of the African Union
54/80

16/04/2018

just stated, sexual violence, zero-tolerance. It is
very important to ensure accountability for all grave
violations of human rights — that is key. We owe it to the
victims. It is also very important to foster reconciliation
and deterrence. I would like to reiterate what was
highlighted earlier with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where action was taken. Those
who committed such crimes must be punished. If they
have not yet been punished, for the rest of their lives
they must look over their shoulder and fear being caught
until they are apprehended. That covers current and
past crimes. A representative today also mentioned the
sexual violence that occurred in Europe during the wars
in the former Yugoslavia. There was no accountability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia or, in particular,
Kosovo, for the tens of thousands of victims.
The Security Council should include sexual
violence as a designation criterion for sanctions
regimes much more regularly. The Council should
also refer cases of sexual violence to the International
Criminal Court. In instances where prosecution is not
yet possible, the collection and preservation of evidence
of mass atrocities must be ensured. Germany supports
the crucial work of the Commission for International
Justice and Accountability in northern Iraq and
Syria. Germany also supports the new International,
Independent and Impartial Mechanism, which, inter
alia, should focus on crimes of sexual violence.
Thirdly, we must adopt a survivor-centred approach.
My French colleague referred to it as holistic support for
survivors. It is important to provide them with medical
and psychological care. Economic opportunities
and legal protection should also be offered to them.
Germany has received a large number of women and
children who have suffered traumatic experiences in
conflicts in Iraq and Syria. We fund projects in Iraq
to enable comprehensive assistance to be provided. I
have already mentioned our good cooperation with the
Special Representative and the Iraqi Government.
The survivor-centred approach links accountability
with psychosocial and livelihood support. Many have
mentioned that stigmatization must be fought. It is very
important that we educate girls and enhance genderbalance efforts. With regard to stigma, I would like to
highlight what our colleagues from Equatorial Guinea
and Poland stated earlier today. They said that we must
focus on the children conceived through rape, who
continue to need our support because of stigmatization.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Fourthly, with regard to the sharing of experiences
and best practices, the issue of empowering survivors
was on the agenda of the annual meeting of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network, which
Germany, together with Spain and Namibia, hosted
last week in Berlin. Special Representative Patten
and others present today attended that meeting. It
served as a platform for sharing experiences and best
practices. My Spanish colleague already mentioned
it and highlighted the fact that methods of improving
accountability for crimes of sexual violence was one of
the subjects discussed. Namibia, Spain and Germany
will provide a briefing of the Focal Points Network
meeting at the end of the month here in New York.
We will extend invitations to those who are not yet
members of the Network to join us. We also support
the sharing of regional experiences through the African
Women Leaders Network. The observer of the African
Union already highlighted the important cooperation
already taking place in Africa, which is compelling
and encouraging. My colleague from Kazakhstan
mentioned that earlier today.
Once again, I thank you, Sir, for including
today’s subject on the agenda. Germany will remain
committed to it. We are also committed to eliminating
and preventing conflict-related violence. The issue
of women and peace and security will remain a top
priority for us.

S/PV. 8234

We cannot deal with the issue of women and peace
and security without addressing the suffering inflicted
on women and their vulnerability in conflict situations,
or without meaningful, coordinated efforts to protect
women and girls. To achieve that, national and
international legislation must be implemented, without
discrimination, to ensure the judicial prosecution of
criminals who commit crimes related to sexual violence.
The State of Qatar has spared no effort in tackling
the tremendous challenge of providing the necessary
support for promoting and protecting women’s rights,
empowering women economically, socially and
politically and working towards the achievement of
gender equality. That would contribute to the fight
against sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, in line with resolution 2106 (2013).
We are aware of the existing link between
trafficking, sexual violence, terrorism and the
transnational organized crime, as stated in Security
Council resolution. Consequently, the State of Qatar
has taken all the necessary legislative and executive
actions to deal with this issue, and we have intensified
cooperation and coordination internationally to
that end.

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased
to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
today’s important debate. We thank Ms., Mohammed,
Deputy Secretary-General, for her important
statement this morning, as well as Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their briefings today.

Based on our position on the need to address the
root causes of conflict that trigger sexual violence as a
result of poverty and unemployment leading to violent
extremism, terrorism and conflict, the State of Qatar
pays great attention to supporting States and regions
that suffer from poverty and face conflicts. That is done
through our foreign development and humanitarian aid
programme, which contributes nearly $2 billion annually
to address such issues. Furthermore, in September 2017,
we concluded a memorandum of understanding with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Silatech Institution in the State of Qatar with a view to
boosting youth capacity in Arab and Islamic countries,
providing rehabilitation and launching projects to
protect youth from violent extremism.

Today’s meeting is an important opportunity to
renew our commitment as the international community
to addressing crimes of sexual violence and supporting
States that face challenges in conflict and post-conflict
settings, as well as to follow up on the measures taken
by the Security Council since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, in order
to end such heinous crimes.

Sexual violence is used as a tool of war and terror
in various regions. We are deeply alarmed by those
practices being used against women in Syria, where
they suffer as a result of forced marriage, sexual
slavery, rape and torture. The State of Qatar expresses
its deep concern over those inhumane practices
against the brotherly Syrian people, in the absence
of accountability pertaining to grave violations to

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

18-1088555/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Syria
Given the gravity of these crimes, which are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity,
the State of Qatar renews its commitment to support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, established by the General
Assembly. It includes specialized experts in the field of
sexual violence.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts
in fighting sexual exploitation and abuse in the United
Nations system. That has led to the voluntary agreement
to end sexual exploitation and abuse. The State of Qatar
signed the agreement as an important step towards
achieving the desired goal of ending sexual exploitation
and abuse in the United Nations system. I renew the call
of State of Qatar for strengthening the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates the
initiative of Peru to hold this open debate, as well as
your personal presence, Mr. President, at this time. We
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict Pramila Patten, and in
particular Ms. Razia Sultana, for their useful briefings.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
After almost two decades since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace and
security agenda remains as relevant as ever in the face
of increasing violence, extremism and deadly conflicts.
The alarming figures in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/250) before us today — noting an increase in
severity and scale of conflict-related sexual violence in
numerous conflict situations around the globe — are
nothing if not testimony to that.
We note with deep concern that sexual violence
has become a routine tactical element of war in many
conflicts. Rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage and
sexual torture constitute abhorrent violations of human
rights and human dignity. In some instances, they
surpass the level of war crimes and reach the scale
56/80

16/04/2018

of crimes against humanity or a genocidal slaughter.
Victims of those crimes do not just deserve justice,
they are entitled to it. It is a solemn duty of the
Security Council as well as the rest of the international
community to do everything in their power to deliver it.
In that context, Ukraine believes that the Security
Council should continue to pay priority attention to the
due implementation of existing women and peace and
security resolutions, in particular to overcome the gaps
identified in the 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). As a non-permanent Security
Council member in 2016-2017, Ukraine did its best to
contribute to that goal. We proceed from the conviction
that any form of violence against women and girls is
a major impediment to security, the restoration of
peace, the achievement of gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls.
Concerted international efforts aimed at elaborating
effective steps to address the issue of sexual violence
will reduce the growing magnitude of violence against
all women and girls, including sexual and gender-based
violence, domestic violence and harmful practices. In
that respect, we welcome the fact that the recent sixtysecond session of the United Nations Commission on
the Status of Women addressed the importance of rural
women and girls victims of gender-based violence
having access to justice and quality services.
Ukraine considers the equal and full participation
of women in all activities in the areas of prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping of the utmost importance. In my country,
the ongoing fulfilment of the 2016-2020 national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is aimed at achieving greater participation by
women in decision-making, in particular in matters of
national security, defence and peacemaking, as well as
ensuring the protection for women and girls, including
preventing and responding to gender-based violence.
The Government of Ukraine pays particular attention
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). For
that reason, due to the excellent cooperation with the
UN-Women office in Ukraine, the effectiveness of the
national action plan’s implementation was assessed by
international experts. Their contribution will be helpful
in updating the national action plan in line with the
evolving situation, as well as in taking into account the
follow-up resolutions to resolution 1325 (2000). We will
finalize that process by June. A State programme on
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

equal rights and opportunities, which was adopted by
the Ukrainian Government just last week, will further
strengthen the State’s response to gender inequalities,
with a specific focus on women and girls experiencing
multiple forms of discrimination.
The recently adopted State programme for the
restoration and development of peace in the eastern
regions of Ukraine until 2021 is another important
element in overcoming the devastating humanitarian
consequences of the Russian invasion carried out by
the Moscow regime as part of its overall aggression
against the democratic world. It is well known that the
conflict has hit hardest the most vulnerable segments
of the population, particularly women in the currently
occupied regions. It has resulted in widespread human
rights violations, including sexual and gender-based
violence in the war-affected areas of the country,
as outlined in the relevant reports by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. Those include a thematic report on conflictrelated sexual violence in Ukraine that puts forward a
number of recommendations to the Russian Federation
and Ukraine.
Unfortunately, as of today, Russia continues to
ignore that document, while the Ukrainian Government
remains committed to addressing that challenge. For
example, on our official request, the UN-Women office
in Ukraine, together with the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, developed a
strategy for preventing and responding to the conflictrelated sexual violence in Ukraine. We intend to
integrate that strategy, or at least some of its elements,
into the 1325 national action plan. We would like to
reiterate our request to the Secretariat to include a
reference to the situation of Ukrainian women and girls
affected by the Russian invasion in Donbas into all the
relevant thematic reports of the Secretary-General.
Finally, let me underline that Ukraine will remain
actively engaged in international efforts aimed at
promoting women’s rights, their participation in
peace negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction
and at protecting women from sexual and genderbased violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on sexual
violence in conflict. We join others in thanking

S/PV. 8234

Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
briefing. We also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and offer our continued support
to her Office and the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict for their important
work in combating those heinous crimes.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, the United Arab Emirates endorses
the Group’s joint statement, delivered earlier by the
representative of Canada.
Ten years have passed since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1820 (2008), thereby recognizing
for the first time that sexual violence is used as a
tactic of war and is therefore a matter of international
peace and security. Since then, subsequent resolutions
have sought to strengthen the United Nations
response aimed at ending those crimes and ensuring
accountability for their perpetrators, but owing to a
lack of implementation, they have sadly fallen short.
It is also impossible to overstate the importance of
gender equality and women’s empowerment in efforts
to prevent and respond to such crimes. In fact, as many
here have said today, gender equality and women’s
empowerment, which are fundamental principles of
United Arab Emirates foreign policy, are core values
that can prevent violence against women when they are
woven throughout a society. That is one of the many
reasons why the United Arab Emirates stands with the
report (S/2018/250) of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict, which rightly affirms that women’s
physical security is inextricably linked to their political,
social and economic status and rights.
Our region is one in turmoil, under siege by
terrorist groups such as Da’esh that use sexual violence
to terrorize and displace populations. To be under
Da’esh’s control is to live with the constant fear of rape
as a weapon of punishment for resisting its sick world
view. The gains made in the struggle against Da’esh
in 2017 were significant, but we must be vigilant
with regard to the continued risk of the trafficking of
women and children who remain under their control.
The Secretary-General’s report makes it clear that most
incidents of mass rape continue to be met with mass
impunity. For example, not a single member of Da’esh
has been prosecuted for sexual violence offences to
date. That sends a dangerous message to groups that
use sexual violence as a tactic of terror with the aim
of destroying lives and communities. This is why the

18-1088557/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

situation of the Rohingya is so alarming. The mass
exodus of the Rohingya community from Myanmar has
created a humanitarian crisis that has rightly captured
the world’s attention. The international community
must ensure accountability for these victims — mainly
women and girls, but also men and boys — who
have been unacceptably targeted for their religion
or ethnicity.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
are key tenets of the world view of the United Arab
Emirates. That is why women’s protection and
empowerment form one of the three pillars on which
our entire foreign assistance strategy rests. It is by
mainstreaming those ideals in our global engagement
that we can prevent sexual violence in conflict by
creating stable, tolerant and prosperous societies. We
must intensify our efforts to combat impunity for these
crimes and to utilize the tools of the United Nations
and the Security Council more effectively to ensure
accountability. With the support of the United Arab
Emirates, the Team of Experts has carried out its
vital Security Council mandate to strengthen Member
States’ capacity to address sexual violence in conflict
in some of the world’s most challenging contexts. The
United Arab Emirates encourages other Member States
to support that work.
The United Arab Emirates believes that smart
foreign policy is inclusive foreign policy, one that puts
the rights of women front and centre and at the heart of
our collective response. The United Arab Emirates will
continue to do all that it can to address those crimes and
promote gender equality and women’s empowerment as
critical elements of the peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Myanmar is striving to build
a peaceful, prosperous and democratic nation after
decades of military rule, isolation and internal armed
conflict. In our efforts to achieve a people-oriented,
democratic society, we are working hard to put gender
equality and women’s empowerment at the heart of our
national development strategies. Our 10-year national
strategic plan for the advancement of women covers
key areas of the United Nations agenda, including
women’s empowerment and the prevention of violence
against women and girls. In 2014 Myanmar also signed
the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict and became the one hundred and fiftieth
58/80

16/04/2018

State to endorse it. We are currently drafting a law on
the protection of women and the prevention of violence
against them that will cover all forms of violence against
women and girls. We have also set up one-stop women’s
support centres throughout the country to support
women and girls who have experienced violence. The
centres provide physical, legal, psychological and
social support. Starting in 2016, we established national
gender-based hotlines to help victims of violence to
report such incidents and get counselling. We are
also revising our child laws to include a provision on
conflict-related sexual violence against children.
Myanmar took a further step towards demonstrating
its firm position on preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence by inviting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten to
Myanmar in December 2017. With regard to the joint
communiqué proposed by the Special Representative,
I would like to say that the Government has already
implemented various measures, such as steps to raise
awareness on preventing sexual violence. Reports on
actions taken by the Government to ensure that the
rights of women are protected and sexual violence
against women and girls is prevented have also been
regularly submitted to the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and included in
the Universal Periodic Review process of the Human
Rights Council. We have also updated this information
for the various United Nations special mandate holders.
We intend to work with Myanmar-based United Nations
agencies on implementing the five priority areas of
cooperation identified by the Special Representative.
This year’s annual report (S/2018/250) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
acknowledges the important steps that Myanmar has
taken to protect the rights of women and children.
However, it is most regrettable that the Tatmadaw,
the Myanmar Armed Forces, has been listed in
the report, despite Myanmar’s genuine efforts to
engage constructively with the Office of the Special
Representative. Moreover, the decision to list it was
made based on unverified allegations, despite our
attempts to interview the alleged victims in camps
in Cox’s Bazar to investigate the cases. We are
disappointed that our request for a proper investigation
to be carried out was denied.
With regard to the alleged sexual violence mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report, the Government of
Myanmar has once again made its position very clear
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

that it will not condone any human rights abuse. If there
is concrete evidence, we will be ready to take action
against any perpetrator in accordance with the law
and without impunity. The recent sentencing of seven
military personnel who were involved in the Inn Din
incident to 10 years in prison with hard labour is clear
testimony to the Government’s strong commitment to
the rule of law. My delegation categorically rejects the
groundless accusations that sexual violence was used as
a strategy to force Muslim people to flee their homes. In
Myanmar, sexual violence is a crime that is abhorrent
to our traditional values and strictly forbidden by our
law and culture.
My delegation stresses that members of our armed
forces are subject not only to our 1959 military act and
military by-laws, but also to existing civilian laws and
traditions. As such, severe legal action is taken against
perpetrators whether they are civilians or members
of the security forces, as has been demonstrated by
a number of prosecutions of military personnel for
sexual violence. Members of the armed forces have
been clearly instructed to strictly follow the military
code of conduct and to refrain from committing crimes,
including any involving sexual violence. A series of
capacity-building workshops have been held to educate
military personnel on human rights, and the curriculum
of our military training schools includes instruction on
laws related to the prevention of sexual violence.
Myanmar strongly objects to the use of expressions
such as “ethnic cleansing” and “genocide” in reference
to the situation in Rakhine state. Such irresponsible
accusations, based on unsubstantiated and one-sided
allegations, fake news and reports tailored for political
purposes, will only exacerbate the current situation and
further polarize the various communities in the region.
We are seriously concerned that such incessant rhetoric
directed against Myanmar can have only a negative
impact on the existing cooperation between Myanmar
and the United Nations, as well as on our ongoing
bilateral cooperation with Bangladesh in our efforts
to find a lasting solution to the current humanitarian
problems and to the complex situation in Rakhine.
As much as we all condemn conflict-related sexual
violence, we should also deplore the exploitation of this
sensitive issue by certain groups as a tool to achieve
their own political goals. The problem of sexual
violence cannot be resolved by naming and blaming.
The international community must take a constructive
approach by sharing information on violations and

S/PV. 8234

assisting Member States in their efforts to address
the issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
thank Peru for organizing this important debate, and
the speakers for their briefings.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Mali, the latter on behalf of the
Human Security Network. I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
Slovenia welcomes the report on conflict-related
sexual violence submitted by the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) and shares deep concern with regard to
its findings. We join others in condemning the grave
violations committed against women and girls, men
and boys in conflict situations. As the report once
again demonstrates, sexual violence in contemporary
conflicts is not a side effect but rather a front-line
consideration and a horrifying tactic of war. All
perpetrators should be held accountable. It is of the
utmost importance to prevent the trend of continuous
sexual violence by fighting impunity. In that regard,
the role of international criminal justice has been
recognized, in particular that of the International
Criminal Court.
At the same time, we recall that the primary
responsibility to protect civilians and bring perpetrators
to justice rests with States. The international
community must therefore assist States in addressing
all these issues, such as when it comes to investigating
and prosecuting perpetrators, including United Nations
and other peacekeeping personnel.
Although the victims of sexual violence are
predominantly women and girls, we should not forget
that sexual violence is also committed against boys and
men, particularly in detention. Much has already been
done when it comes to assistance for victims, but as
long as we are faced with tragic stories we must not
stop doing everything humanly possible to alleviate
their suffering.
Conflict-related sexual violence is not only a
humanitarian or human rights issue, but a security
issue as well. It impedes women in particular from
participating in peace and political processes and
in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.

18-1088559/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

16/04/2018

Preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual
violence are important elements in efforts to empower
women and achieve gender equality. Sexual and
gender-based violence presents a barrier to women’s
participation, not only in peace-related and postconflict activities but also in everyday life.

report highlights that the past year was marked by
the liberation of territories and the release or escape
of numerous women and girls formerly held by armed
or terrorist groups. It is our collective duty to support
those women and girls as they try to piece their lives
back together.

Slovenia is addressing the correlation between
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence in
two draft strategic documents to be adopted this year.
The new action plan on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security
for the period 2018-2020 addresses conflict-related
sexual violence with activities devoted to accountability,
education and training. Violence against women,
including sexual violence, alongside areas dedicated to
empowering women, will also form part of guidelines
on gender equality in development cooperation.

Despite the encouraging news on women and girls
who have been released, it is important to remember that
they will carry the burden of their horrific experiences
for the rest of their lives. Take, for example, Zahra, a
Yazidi woman from Kojo, Iraq, who recalls trembling
at the sight of buses of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) fighters with long hair and beards who had
come to kidnap hundreds of women and girls, blindfold
them and sell them as sex slaves. Ekhlas, another
Yazidi woman, whom members may have heard speak
at the United Nations last year, was raped every day for
six months by ISIS terrorists. She was only 14 years
old. Ekhlas remembers the screams of a 10-year-old
girl who had been taken away by a man four times her
age. She is haunted by the memory of her own abuser,
a man she rightly described as a beast, who made her
want to die. We cannot be silent in the face of such
barbaric acts, which should have been relegated to the
Dark Ages.

At the national level, important achievements have
also been reached in education and training on women
and peace and security, which were systematically
introduced throughout the Slovenian armed forces.
In 2015, a permanent position for a gender adviser in
the General Staff of the Slovenian armed forces was
established, as was a network of gender advisers. We
are proud that those efforts have shown concrete results
and have also been recognized internationally, with
Slovenia ranking fourth in the world on the Women,
Peace and Security Index.
However, there is no time to rest. We will continue
to support United Nations action against conflictrelated sexual violence. Accordingly, we have joined the
Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse as part
of the overall zero-tolerance policy, which Slovenia
strongly supports.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Furman (Israel): As a member of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, Israel aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Canada on behalf of the Group and would like to add
the following remarks.
First, I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten and her team for their
dedicated work and for the Secretary-General’s recent
report (S/2018/250), which focuses on current trends
and provides us with concrete recommendations. The
60/80

Groups like ISIS, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and
Al-Qaida use sexual violence as a terror tactic, but it is
not just they who are guilty. According to a recent report
by Special Representative Patten and other accounts,
the Syrian armed forces, the Syrian intelligence
services and Syrian pro-Government forces are guilty
of employing those savage practices as well. We must
make sure that those who commit these horrific crimes
are brought to justice. Impunity for such crimes must
not be tolerated. Our approach must include a variety
of measures, including the adoption of stronger laws,
more stringent enforcement mechanisms, tougher
penalties for offenders and the provision of safe havens
for victims to seek help, support, medical treatment,
psychological care and legal assistance.
In some instances over recent years, victims of
sexual violence were violated not only by extremist
armed groups and repressive regimes, but also by
United Nations peacekeepers. Among those sent to
protect local populations from harm, there have been
individuals who have abused their positions and
violated the most basic human rights. Such acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse must not be tolerated. We
firmly support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

policy, as well as his compact with Member States
committing to the elimination of sexual exploitation
and abuse, which Israel was among the first to sign.
In that context, we should incorporate more women
in peacekeeping operations. We also wish to reiterate
our support for the victim-centred approach, promoted
through the work of the Victims’ Rights Advocate
and the Special Coordinator on improving the United
Nations response to sexual exploitation and abuse.
As stated earlier, victims of sexual violence
and abuse must be afforded the tools to safely report
these violations, regardless of the identities of
the perpetrators. In that regard, we were glad to hear
of the recent initiative to start a system of communitybased reporting to encourage victims to come forward,
especially if they are assaulted by United Nations
peacekeepers or personnel.
Facing the risk of rejection by their families and
communities, it is no surprise that the majority of
cases of sexual violence go unreported and that victims
face an increased risk of suicide. That is a reality we
cannot tolerate. Sexual violence must be treated as
the crime and as the act of terror that it is. It is the
collective responsibility of the entire international
community — of our Governments, civil societies and
United Nations agencies — to remove the stigma, erase
the shame and come to the aid of victims of sexual
violence. Victims of sexual violence are more than
statistics. Every victim has a name, every name reflects
a life and every life represents an entire world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas
Auza, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the
Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See would like to
thank the Peruvian presidency for putting a needed
spotlight on conflict-related sexual violence and on
how it can be prevented and effectively addressed.
Since the Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000),
the international community has developed a strong
framework to facilitate women’s increased role in peace
and security and has achieved important results and
made substantial progress, in spite of the increasing
challenges and complexities of the international
security landscape. On the side of the victims of
conflict, however, women still suffer far too frequently,
in particular from sexual violence perpetrated during
conflict. Collective national and international efforts

S/PV. 8234

are greatly needed if the fight to minimize and end
violence against women — in particular sexual
violence — is to be won.
First, ever-greater resources and focus must be
dedicated to conflict prevention. The Holy See supports
the efforts of the Security Council, within the limits of
its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations,
to actively encourage Member States to settle their
disputes through dialogue and negotiation. There is no
better means to protect women from violence during
conflict than by preventing the eruption of conflict
itself. Attention must be given to ensuring that women’s
voices are heard and their effective participation is
availed of throughout the whole process.
Secondly, the prevention of every form of violence
against women in conflict and the protection of their
legitimate rights and interests should be an integral
part of peacekeeping operations. The importance of
integrating women in peacekeeping missions can also
be seen from that perspective. Host countries should be
helped to prioritize the prevention of violence against
women during conflict, while ensuring the inclusion
and active participation of women in all stages of
peace processes.
Thirdly, heightened attention and efforts to prevent
violence against women should be sustained in postconflict situations, which, more often than not, remain
chaotic, lawless and dangerous, and are therefore
environments that enable and facilitate violence against
women and failure of prosecution. With the goal of
eliminating the root causes of conflict, the international
community should actively help post-conflict countries
rebuild and ensure that the dividends of peace and
development benefit the entire population.
With regard to access to education, the Catholic
Church has a long and proud history of placing great
emphasis on providing young women and girls with
access to quality education. Young women and girls
today constitute the majority of students in Catholic
educational institutions at every level throughout the
world. That is particularly true in regions where women
and girls still suffer discrimination and in areas where
there are ongoing conflicts. For instance, almost 80 per
cent of the students of Bethlehem University, a Catholic
institution, are young Palestinian women. They become
educators and professionals who contribute greatly to
peace and harmony in families and societies.

18-1088561/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

Survivors of violence in conflict should receive
comprehensive assistance to ensure that they are able to
recover fully from such violations and reintegrate into
their societies. States should maximize their efforts,
at both the national and international levels, to ensure
the prosecution of the perpetrators of these crimes. The
International Criminal Court plays a key role in that
regard by judging crimes that have been recognized
by the Rome Statute as war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including those that may constitute crimes
of genocide.
Women and girls suffer many forms of violence not
only in situations of conflict but also in what we call
normal daily situations. However, as Pope Francis said
during his visit to Puerto Maldonado in Peru:
“Violence against women cannot be treated
as normal, maintaining a culture of machismo
blind to the leading role that women play in our
communities. It is not right for us to look the
other way and let the dignity of so many women,
especially young women, be trampled upon.”
The Holy See is working with the rest of the
international community to continue pursuing the goals
of women and peace and security. Their role must be
recognized and valued and their participation assured.
Without the input and specific skills of women, the most
comprehensive understanding possible of the causes of
conflicts and the most effective solutions to end them
and build peace cannot be attained, and the effective
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence against
women could hardly be achieved.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country would like to thank the
presidency of Peru for dedicating this open debate to
this important subject. We would also like to thank
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General,
and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
their briefings and efforts. We thank as well Ms. Sultana
for her briefing this morning.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations and would like to deliver this statement
in our national capacity.
62/80

16/04/2018

This important subject requires a comprehensive
approach in addressing this heinous crime in order
to deal with it in all its aspects, given the deep and
significant consequences it has on individuals and
societies. It also requires coordinated cooperation
among all the relevant stakeholders. Allow me to
provide preliminary proposals on how to act and move
forward in the future to address this heinous crime.
First, we should step up efforts to resolve conflicts
all over the world so as to impede those who commit
such crimes. That can be achieved by strengthening
the role of the United Nations in mediation, on the one
hand, and imposing sanctions by the Security Council
on those who obstruct peace, on the other hand.
Second, we should provide assistance to affected
countries to help them build their national capacities
in relation to fighting conflict-related sexual violence.
Third, we should enhance cooperation and
partnerships with the United Nations and regional
organizations to address such crimes.
Fourth, we should allocate sufficient resources
for the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, as recommended by the report
(S/2018/250) of the Secretary-General.
Fifth, we should promote efforts to empower
women economically, socially and politically. Sixth, we
must address the root causes of armed conflict to ensure
the sustainability of peace and the non-recurrence
of conflicts.
Seventh, we must provide health care and
psychological, social, economic and legal support
to victims.
Eighth, we must impose stricter sanctions on those
committing such heinous crimes.
Finally, we must pay more attention to
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in
peacekeeping missions.
At the national level, the Government of the
Sudan has put in place a number of plans and policies
on fighting violence against women, particularly in
conflict-affected areas. They include the national policy
on the empowerment of women, adopted in 2007, and
the national plan to combat violence against women for
the period 2015-2030. The Government also adopted a
national plan on women and peace and security in line
with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

The Government of my country has established
many institutional frameworks to protect and advance
the status of women. Child protection units have been
established in the armed forces, a family and child
protection unit has been set up within the police and
the number of female police officers has increased,
particularly in internally displaced persons’ camps in
Darfur. Training courses have been designed to train
those female officers in investigation, international law
and human rights. In addition, a specialized unit has
been established by the Ministry of Social Development
to fight violence against women and girls.
In cooperation with UNICEF, the Government
has made great efforts to support the establishment
of family and child protection units in Darfur. The
United Nations Population Fund has also provided
health services to victims through the Federal Ministry
of Health in order to coordinate follow-up on genderbased violence and, through necessary cooperation
with relevant bodies, to provide social, psychological
and legal assistance to victims.
In order to address the challenges related to
achieving justice and ensuring violators of human
rights, and women’s rights in particular, are held
accountable, a number of specialized prosecution
offices have been established in Darfur states and new
prosecutors have been appointed since 2015. That has
improved the monitoring of human rights violations,
including sexual crimes. In order to improve and
enhance security, additional police units have been
deployed in many areas in Darfur states.
We would like to commend the United Nations
strategy for the protection of civilians. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the country team have made progress thanks to
the early-warning and early-response strategies. That
has been achieved by enhancing interaction with
local communities and amending the weekly schedule
of patrols to coincide with the movement of women
and girls.
The Government of the Sudan wishes to seriously
engage in the international community to address the
impact of conflict by ensuring security and providing
the necessary protection for women, girls and children.
It therefore extended a warm invitation to Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, to visit
the Sudan from 18 to 25 February. The programme

S/PV. 8234

of the visit was coordinated with her Office in New
York. During her visit, she met with a number of
federal ministers to deepen cooperation and eliminate
all causes and factors of sexual violence in areas of
conflict. Ms. Patten also visited North and West Darfur
states, where she examined the situation in a number of
a refugee and internally displaced persons’ camps and
witnessed how security prevails in Darfur states.
The visit in itself is a proof that the Government of
the Sudan is engaged in a constructive manner with the
international community and that that has led to what
we are witnessing today: the restoration of normalcy in
Darfur states after 15 years of an exceptional situation
never experienced before in the history of Darfur. We
believe that the visit gave Ms. Patten and her delegation
an opportunity to witness at first-hand the situation
in Darfur and to collect information from reliable and
credible sources.
However, we have questions regarding part of the
content of the Secretary-General’s report before the
Council (S/2018/250), namely, paragraph 72. The report
states that Sudan border guards committed sexual
crimes in Darfur, knowing that in the Sudan the socalled border guards have not existed for more than two
years. We also have questions regarding other words
and phrases in the same paragraph.
In conclusion, the delegation of my country
reaffirms that the Government of the Sudan will
continue to commit to fully cooperating with the United
Nations and its agencies. We will also cooperate with all
regional and international organizations, above all the
African Union. We would like to welcome in particular
the spirit demonstrated by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and we confirm once again
that the Darfur conflict has ended. Our task now should
be to achieve comprehensive economic and social
development, and that, no doubt, is the panacea to put
all conflicts to an end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We thank the Peruvian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
open debate.
The Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related
sexual violence makes for difficult reading. The report
aptly observes that:

18-1088563/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

“[w]hile significant normative progress has been
achieved in recent years ... words on paper are not
yet matched by facts on the ground.” (S/2018/250,
para. 10)
It is also perhaps telling that the majority of the 47
listed parties from 19 country situations enumerated
in the report happen to be non-State actors. The
analytical perspectives shared on the underlying
causes of sexual violence in times of war and peace
and the multidimensional motivations and drivers that
the perpetrators take recourse to in unleashing such
violence reinforce the complexity and depravity of this
scourge. We consider the report’s recommendations
to be objective, pragmatic and urgent. We urge the
Security Council to ensure concrete deliverables on
the basis of the recommendations to further validate
its recognition of conflict-related sexual violence as a
threat to international peace and security.
At the previous open debate on women and peace
and security, held in October 2017 (see S/PV.8079), we
flagged the need for Rohingya women and girls to have
an opportunity to have their voices heard in the Council.
We acknowledge the powerful testimony given today
by Ms. Razia Sultana, a Rohingya representative, on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. It is a credit to Ms. Pramila Patten, the
Secretary General’s Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, that she could help amplify the
voices of the Rohingya women in the Chamber. We hear
and share Ms. Sultana’s concerns about the protection
needs and challenges faced by the displaced Rohingya
women and girls in Bangladesh.
It continues to be a race against time to ensure
humanitarian assistance and protection for nearly
700,000 displaced people, the majority being women
and children. Humanitarian actors have identified
more than 2,000 pregnant women requiring particular
attention. In general, considerable unmet needs remain
in terms of providing reproductive health care and
services to survivors of sexual violence and others.
It will be critical for the international community
to support the work of the United Nations agencies
concerned and their partners by providing services to
those in need.
In an otherwise socially conservative milieu, the
women- and child-friendly spaces in the camps provide
a lifeline for the survivors of sexual violence and
related trauma. We encourage community leaders and
64/80

16/04/2018

service providers to help the affected women and girls
to come forward to articulate their needs and register
their voices in decisions that impact their lives and
futures. The concerns over stigma need to be addressed
and must be shifted from the victims to the perpetrators
in a demonstrable manner.
Our authorities have looked seriously into reports
of the trafficking and sexual exploitation of Rohingya
women and girls. It would be regrettable if such
incidents were to take place despite the overwhelming
presence on the ground of law enforcement personnel
and humanitarian actors. While recommendations
for additional safeguards are being duly considered,
there is no guarantee against such aberrations other
than restoring hope among the displaced Rohingya by
ensuring the safe, secure and dignified return to their
homes in Myanmar’s Rakhine state. We believe that
Security Council members will be in a position to gather
further insights into the possibilities for the Rohingya’s
voluntary repatriation during their forthcoming visit to
Myanmar and Bangladesh.
It is crucial that priority be given to preventing
conflict-related sexual violence and that we remain
committed to responding to such violence. The Special
Representative’s three-pillar strategy deserves to be
further discussed and elaborated on in the context of
the mutually reinforcing agenda on women and peace
and security, sustaining peace and the Sustainable
Development Goals.
There is no denying that a bulwark against the use
of sexual violence as a tactic of war and of terrorism
can be created only when the structural and genderbased inequalities that are inherent in our mindsets
and societies can be effectively addressed. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development provides many
cross-cutting pathways for advancing women’s
empowerment and gender equality. Yet even that
universal and ambitious Agenda will continue to fall
short unless the gender-related targets are pursued in
parallel with progressive change in prevailing gender
norms across societies.
The culture of impunity often surrounding conflictrelated sexual violence also perpetuates the vicious
cycle. In cases where the State concerned is unwilling
or unable to ensure accountability and justice for such
crimes, the international community, especially the
Security Council, cannot avoid its responsibility. There
have been resounding calls for the Council to consider
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

referrals to the International Criminal Court and for
appropriate sanctions against the entities listed in the
Secretary General’s report. In particular, the Secretariat
also has a responsibility to ensure that the State actors
listed are barred from United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The shrinking resources for protection
and gender experts in peacekeeping missions must
be reversed.
Against the backdrop of the immediate crisis faced
by the Rohingya women and girls, our authorities are
moving ahead with work on developing a national
action plan on women and peace and security through
consultations with all the actors concerned. We look
forward to continued engagement with the Special
Representative’s Office and other partners to translate
our plans and commitments into results-oriented action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mgobozi (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Peruvian
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. Furthermore, we
would like to extend our appreciation to you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the very important
topic of sexual violence in conflict. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Ms. Pramila Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana
for their briefings.
South Africa welcomes the Secretary-General’s
leadership on conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
We note that the effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda directly contributes to
those objectives. My delegation also welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/250) on conflictrelated sexual violence and notes its content.
Of all the evils that occur during a conflict,
systemic and widespread sexual violence remains one
of the most despicable. As an instrument of war, it is a
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We call on all parties to
fully support the survivors of all those atrocious acts
and strongly condemn the use of sexual violence in
all its forms as a tactic of war and terrorism and as an
instrument of torture.
Women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected by conflict situations, especially with regard
to sexual abuse and violence. The lives of the survivors

S/PV. 8234

of sexual violence are changed forever, with many
survivors bearing not only the physical scars but
also the hidden trauma and unwarranted stigma as a
result of those acts. The use of sexual violence as an
instrument of war destroys families and communities,
with the ultimate goal being to divide, dominate and
control society. Ending this evil scourge, addressing
the resulting trauma and holding those responsible for
committing such heinous acts accountable is integral
to the reconciliation and peacebuilding process.
Therefore, my delegation calls on all parties in conflict
zones to make and implement commitments to combat
sexual violence, in accordance with resolution 2106
(2013), on the issueo of sexual violence in conflict.
We must all do more to prevent sexual violence
in conflict. In that regard, we encourage the Security
Council to give close consideration to addressing the
risk factors and early-warning signs of systemic sexual
violence. South Africa believes that that can be achieved
through the inclusion of a greater number of deployed
female peacekeepers, particularly women protection
advisers, in peacekeeping missions, and we call on all
Member States to support the inclusion of such posts in
the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, South Africa has one of the largest
contingents of women peacekeepers deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The contribution of
women to peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts is
recognized as a contributing factor to the effectiveness
and long-term success of United Nations deployments.
Allowing women to talk to women about their
experiences creates a more conducive and safe
environment for women to communicate their immediate
protection concerns, including the reporting of
instances of sexual abuse and their overall perspectives
on the security situation. The ability to speak freely
contributes to the empowerment of women in conflict
situations, which, in turn, provides space for women to
contribute to and participate in the peacebuilding and
reconciliation process.
Access to justice and legal recourse for cases of
sexual violence is another essential component of the
peacebuilding and reconciliation process. Without
perpetrators having to face the consequences for their
actions, there can be no justice for the survivors of sexual
violence, and there can be no peace without justice.
Sexual abuse and discrimination are inextricably
linked to gender inequality, poverty, exclusion and

18-1088565/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

marginalization. My delegation believes that we need
to directly address those contributors to conflict,
including the promotion of gender equality and greater
participation by women in all forms of mediation, postconflict recovery and peacebuilding processes, if we
are ever to tackle the root causes of conflict. Women’s
voices must be prominent during peace negotiations
and conflict resolution processes to ensure that all
those affected by conflict, especially those who are the
most marginalized and vulnerable, namely, women and
girls, are given an opportunity to play an active role in
changing their environments.
In that regard, the necessary legal framework
needs to be strengthened to address all forms of
discrimination against women, including with respect
to land ownership, access to economic opportunities,
employment, education and health care, which are
all essential components of an inclusive, open and
peaceful society.
In conclusion, South Africa continues to prioritize
the participation of women in peace and security
processes, particularly through training programmes
on mediation, dialogue and conflict resolution. We
remain committed to addressing the scourge of
conflict-related sexual violence in all its forms. We
will work vigorously towards a non-discriminatory and
non-sexist global society in which all women and girls
are treated as equal citizens. The end of discrimination
against women will significantly help to address the
root causes of sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency for organizing and presiding
over this important debate. I also wish to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed, Special Representative
Patten and Ms. Sultana for their earlier briefings. It is
very encouraging to see a Rohingya woman address the
Security Council for the first time. This is an important
day for us, and I wish to thank everybody who has
made it happen.
It is an understatement to say that Ireland is a
strong supporter of the women and peace and security
agenda. My country has a deep conviction that women
are critical to everything we are trying to achieve in
conflict prevention and resolution. Just last week,
Ireland celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Good
Friday Agreement, the hallmark of the peace process
66/80

16/04/2018

in Northern Ireland. The participation of women in the
search for peace was crucial to its success.
When two women from the island of Ireland,
Mairéad Corrigan and Betty Williams, received the
Nobel Prize in 1976 for their efforts to bring peace to
Northern Ireland, the Nobel Committee stated that they
“refused to bow to bleak scepticism: they
simply acted. They never heeded the difficulty
of their task: they merely tackled it because they
were so convinced that this precisely was what
was needed. There was no talk here of ingenious
theories, of shrewd diplomacy or pompous
declarations. No, their contribution was a far
better one: a courageous, unselfish act that proved
an inspiration to thousands, that lit a light in the
darkness, and that gave fresh hope to people who
believed that all hope was gone.”
Those are the kind of efforts we must continue to
replicate. Women made a critical difference to peace
and conflict resolution in my country, and we believe
that women can do the same elsewhere.
While much policy progress has been made in
many areas, today we are addressing one area where we
remain very challenged — that of addressing conflictrelated sexual violence. We are ashamed that women
and girls are routinely used as a currency of conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/250) does not
make for easy reading. It is a clarion call to action for
Member States to double down on efforts to address
sexual violence in conflict.
We in Ireland firmly believe that the role of civil
society at the grassroots level is critical for empowering
women in conflict prevention, which the Security
Council reaffirmed with resolution 2106 (2013). Ireland
is particularly concerned to hear reports of the targeting
of high-profile female human rights defenders through
crimes of sexual violence. Today we urge Member States
to take measures to ensure the adequate protection of
women in the civil society space. Ireland also urges the
Security Council to assume its own responsibility in
that regard and to be consistent and timely in its use
of sanctions against perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence.
We all recognize that the majority of victims of
conflict-related sexual violence are marginalized
women and girls, often living in rural areas that are well
beyond the reach of law enforcement and protection.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

Rural women are vulnerable to displacement and are
often forced to flee following struggles for the control
of land and resources. Women’s physical security
is therefore inextricably linked with their political,
social and economic security. Women bear the brunt of
conflict at every level.
As Chair of the Commission on the Status of Women,
Ireland was pleased to see the real vulnerabilities of
rural women highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report and in our agreed conclusions, at this year’s
sixty-second session, on challenges and opportunities
in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of
rural women and girls. I urge Member States to consider
those powerful agreed conclusions, in conjunction with
the Secretary-General’s recommendations on conflictrelated sexual violence.
At the national level, Ireland has incorporated
measures to prevent sexual violence into our second
action plan on women and peace and security. The Irish
Defence Forces have mainstreamed women and peace
and security into their policies, with gender advisers
and gender focal points incorporated into all units. We
have a zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse, which is very strictly enforced.
Ireland believes that engaging men and boys is
critical to preventing sexual violence in conflict.
Irish Aid works hard and supports non-governmental
partners in delivering such programmes. We are also
one of the 14 States that, along with the European Union,
are signatories to the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies. We fully
support the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We admire her
work and enjoy excellent cooperation with her Office,
and we will continue to support her financially.
In conclusion, I wish to return to those two women
from Northern Ireland and their Peace Prize day. The
Committee also said on that day:
“It would be simple to maintain that this is
all self-evident and that anyone could say this in
despair at the meaningless sufferings of war. Yes,
but in reality the solution of each and every human
conflict is to be found in the simple and obvious
action of someone taking the first steps on the road
to reconciliation and cooperation.”

S/PV. 8234

Those two women from Northern Ireland took those
first steps. We can only hope that others follow
their example.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Paraguay, I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/250) on conflict-related sexual violence. We
welcome the initiative of the Peruvian presidency of the
Security Council to convene this debate.
Paraguay has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping activities since 1965. Since then, it has
gradually introduced women into military contingents
and the police force, who contribute to the security
and preservation of international peace. In that regard,
since 2006, my country has seen female career officers
graduate from its Military Academy. Currently,
Paraguay contributes more than 100 military and police
personnel to six United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Based on that experience, my delegation highlights
the value of specialized training for peacekeeping
missions contingents, both before and after deployment,
on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence,
the care of victims and the resources available for
the prosecution and trial of those responsible, while
always respecting the sovereignty of States, the
principle of non-intervention in internal affairs, and
international law. Paraguayan military personnel receive
general training on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict prior to their deployment in peacekeeping
missions, as well as specific and specialized training on
civil-military coordination and on violence and gender
inequality, at the Training Centre for Peacekeeping
Operations in Paraguay.
Based on Paraguayan participation, another area
that we believe should be reinforced is the clear inclusion
by the Security Council of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. The mandate of protection of civilians
against sexual violence, in its broadest sense, must be
explicit and treated as a priority in situations where,
due to the nature of the conflict, civilians are at a high
risk of suffering that type of violence. Those mandates
must incorporate both prevention mechanisms and
protocols to assist victims and ensure accountability
of the perpetrators. To that end, the existing mandates

18-1088567/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

of peacekeeping missions should also be updated
and adapted.
Finally, and from a broader perspective, the
Paraguayan delegation highlights the need to frame
initiatives addressing sexual violence in conflict
situations within efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly Goal 5, on gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls. A
holistic, effective and lasting response to the scourge of
sexual violence in conflict will not be possible as long
as there is an inequality gap between women and men,
discrimination and the economic and social exclusion
of women and girls in every part of the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the observer of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.
Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council as the
NATO Secretary General’s Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security.
NATO’s mandate is based on the alliance’s core
values: democracy, individual liberty and rule of
law — themes that resonate so clearly with the women and
peace and security agenda. The adoption of the women
and peace and security resolutions and the work of the
Council has established a new course in understanding
and responding to the grievous, systematic sexual abuse
of women and girls in and around conflict. Awareness
that conflict-related sexual violence affects not only
women and girls, but also entire communities, is now
entrenched in our collective thinking.
The international community has a responsibility
to better protect women, but we know that protection
cannot exist without the promotion of women’s rights
and acceptance that women’s full participation in all
decision-making is critical. The elevation of sexual
violence as an international peace-and-security issue
has led to an increased expectation that actors, including
NATO, take a more prominent role in addressing
this issue. Without adequate response, conflictrelated sexual violence will continue to significantly
jeopardize stabilization efforts, as well as sustainable
post-conflict reconstruction.
At NATO, we understand that protection is at the
core of the women and peace and security mandate.
NATO-led forces have a responsibility to protect and
68/80

16/04/2018

defend women against violence, but we also recognize
that that cannot be, nor should be, separated from the
issue of empowerment and participation. There can be
no protection without participation.
Under the auspices of the NATO policy on women
and peace and security and its action plan, we address
sexual violence through a comprehensive approach,
as part of the wider women and peace and security
framework. The development of military guidelines
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence has given us a base from which
to work and serves as a practical tool.
However, we recognize that efforts must be
coordinated with other international organizations and
civil society. For that reason, we have established a civil
society advisory panel to garner the views of women
not only from within our borders, but also, and more
important, the views of women from crisis areas, to
help steer our work. Women must be visible in voicing
mechanisms for protection.
Earlier this year, NATO joined forces with United
Nations Special Envoy Angelina Jolie to advance
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence by
mainstreaming efforts through all our core tasks and
functions. We believe that NATO has an opportunity
to be a leading protector of women’s rights, drawing on
the strengths and capabilities of its nations and working
with more than 40 partner countries.
At NATO, we tackle protection through a holistic
approach to address the wider issues that affect women
in conflict and post-conflict situations. We focus on
the importance of protecting women and girls from
violence, but we place equal emphasis on the necessity
of supporting and enhancing women’s participation.
We recognize that the best defence against sexual
violence is prevention. We attempt to make gender
equality a central tenant of all our efforts, and we are
emphasizing and expanding areas of prevention. The
adoption of early-warning indicators, strengthened
civil society dialogue and reinforced public diplomacy
have reinforced our efforts.
Ultimately, in tackling the issue of abuse and
addressing sexual violence against women and girls, we
do more than help individual victims; we set a tone for
respect of fundamental dignities and human rights. In
doing so, we can lay a foundation for lasting stability.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8234

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.

to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth and sustainable development.

Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country, Peru, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We also thank you, Sir, for convening this
thematic debate.

We recognize in today’s world the urgent need to
undertake concrete measures to combat intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons
based on their gender, identity, religion or belief. In
this regard, we commend the United Nations system
for making an invaluable contribution to and playing
an important role in addressing these challenges at the
global, regional and national levels and in assisting
Member States in their efforts to eliminate and prevent
all forms of violence against women and children. To
that end, I wish to express the support and appreciation
of my delegation for the good work of UN-Women and
the effective implementation of the mandates of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representatives on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and Children and Armed Conflict.

We thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, for her briefing on the Secretary-General’s
recent report (S/2018/250) on conflict-related sexual
violence. We also commend Ms. Pramila Patten, the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her insightful briefing.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the African Union.
Allow me to begin by reaffirming the importance
that Botswana attaches to the protection and promotion
of the rights of women and children and its commitment
to addressing all forms of violence against women,
including support for preventing sexual violence
in conflict.
Sexual violence in armed conflict represents
one of the most serious forms of violation or abuse
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Ending violations of women’s
human rights is therefore a moral imperative, and
one that we must collectively address. That heinous
crime is especially rampant in armed conflict and
is used as a tactic of war and terrorism. As a result,
its prevention and eradication amounts to upholding
universal human rights and maintaining international
security. Furthermore, preventing sexual violence is
part of conflict prevention and sustaining peace. In that
regard, we welcome efforts by the Security Council and
the General Assembly to build on the existing zerotolerance policy and improve the system-wide approach
to preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse.
I reaffirm my delegation’s continued support for
women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming in
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). As SDG 5 rightly acknowledges, women
and girls from anywhere in the world deserve equal
rights and opportunities to live free of violence and all
forms of discrimination. We also agree that achieving
gender equality and women’s empowerment is essential

While also recognizing the existing normative
framework established under resolutions 1261 (1999),
1325 (2000), 2272 (2016) and other subsequent
resolutions dealing with women, peace and security and
children and armed conflict, Botswana shares the belief
that efforts to address sexual violence in conflict should
be consistent with and complementary to the United
Nations wider efforts. In this regard, we underscore the
need for greater coordination and collaboration with
all relevant stakeholders to strengthen global efforts
in addressing sexual violence. In this connection, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s launch in 2017 of
the Plan of Action for Religious Leaders and Actors
to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could Lead
to Atrocity Crimes. We recognize the key role that
religious leaders have in influencing mass followers,
and thus their vital role in using their moral authority
to support specific strategies to prevent incitement to
violence in conflicts.
We remain convinced that more needs be done to
address these ongoing atrocities, and my delegation
also wishes to emphasize the responsibility of States
to comply with their relevant obligations to end
impunity and effectively use all available means to
enforce accountability by prosecuting all perpetrators
of such crimes.
In our quest for the empowerment of women in
peace and security, we believe that efforts must be
intensified in promoting women’s active and equal
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,

18-1088569/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

transitional justice and security sector reform processes.
In that regard, we strongly support the involvement
of women in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention.
Regarding women’s access to justice, we call on
all States to take practical steps to address obstacles
to women’s access to justice, including by creating an
enabling environment in which women can easily report
incidents of violence without fear or intimidation.
Furthermore, we urge all States to strengthen the
capacity of their national criminal justice systems in
order to serve victims fairly and with dignity.
In conclusion, Botswana pledges to work with the
international community in developing strategies for
preventing violence against women and children in
conflict situations. We remain optimistic that, given
our collective will and commitment, especially in the
Security Council, we can bring an end to these shameful
crimes against humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to start by
thanking the Peruvian presidency of the Council for
holding this important debate, and all the briefers for
their statements.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and that delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security. I shall make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
It is well known that sexual violence has been used
for centuries as a tactic of war, but the wars on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia — in Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Kosovo — were among the first
to bring reports of mass rape and other sexually violent
crimes into the public eye. Developments since that time
have clearly shown that sexual violence adds to ethnic
and other divisions, entrenches conflict and instability
and leaves horrendous physical and psychological scars
not only on its victims, but also on entire families
and societies. However, sexual violence remains the
least condemned crime from the wars of the 1990s,
before both the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and national courts.
In my own country, Croatia, rape was used as a
method of intimidation and terror during the aggression
to which we were exposed. Some 2,500 people — mostly
70/80

16/04/2018

women but also men — are estimated to have suffered
severe forms of sexual violence during the Homeland
War. Most of these cases remain unprosecuted and
perpetrators continue to go unpunished. As the
punishment of perpetrators remains a priority for
Croatia, the Law on the Rights of the Victims of
Sexual Violence in the Homeland War, adopted in
2015, provides victims with support, recognition and
compensation, even if the perpetrators are never found
or brought to justice.
However, our experience also teaches us that
advanced legal frameworks and international
agreements are in themselves not enough if attitudes
do not change. Beyond laws, we have to change
hearts and minds and challenge cultural and social
norms to get to a point where the victim receives the
support of the community and the perpetrator is the
one who is stigmatized, excluded and penalized by the
whole community.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) paints a grim picture. Despite specific
prohibitions against sexual violence in treaty and
customary international law, as well as the political
momentum and visibility gained in recent years, sexual
violence in armed conflicts and other situations of
violence continue to spread around the world. It is thus
essential that we address the problem comprehensively.
Croatia therefore pays particular attention to ensuring
that the guiding norms and principles of the women
and peace and security agenda are integrated into
our national policies and practices. Our continued
engagement in women and peace and security rests
on our firm belief that the full realization of women’s
rights is an indispensable basis for safeguarding basic
human rights and achieving lasting peace and security.
Croatia has taken steps to integrate the gender
perspective into the national foreign and security
policy through its national policy for the promotion
of gender equality and its first national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), adopted
in 2011. We are currently in the process of developing
our second national action plan, which is expected
to be adopted in the first half of this year and will
cover both our domestic and international activities.
Particular attention has been paid to gender-related
elements in regular police and military education, as
well as in the predeployment training of civilian and
military personnel, with a special focus on prevention
and response to sexual violence, and a zero tolerance
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. In that context,
Croatia strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
efforts to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel, and has contributed to these
efforts by signing the voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse.
With a special purpose to strengthen the role of
women in peace missions and operations, and in line
with the pledge given at the Summit on United Nations
Peacekeeping in September 2014, for the past three
years Croatia has organized predeployment trainings of
women police officers from countries that contribute
to United Nations peacekeeping missions. So far, a
total of 35 women police officers from 19 countries
of Africa, Asia and Europe have participated in this
training programme, the fourth version of which will
be held in May.
Clear guidance on how to operationalize the
protection of civilians mandate, including the protection
of women and girls from sexual violence, is also needed
for peacekeeping missions. We have the opportunity to
use United Nations expertise, including such human
rights mechanisms as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on violence against women. We also need
to achieve greater progress in ensuring the adequate
participation of women in peace talks. Peace accords
that fail to include women in post-conflict governance
often hinder their access to economic opportunities,
justice and reparations.
In conclusion, let me point out that sexual violence
in conflict is such a multifaceted issue that can be
discussed at much greater length, including relating to
forced displacement, forced marriages, sexual slavery
and the plight of children born of wartime rape. At the
core of our efforts to stop this horrendous crime lies our
commitment to conflict prevention and addressing root
causes of human rights violations.
Croatia welcomes the emphasis on the urgency
of ensuring that sexual violence considerations are
explicitly and consistently reflected in prevention
efforts and detecting early-warning signs, as well as
in peace processes, ceasefires and peace agreements,
all security sector reform and other processes in
which the United Nations is involved, as well as in
sanctions regimes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.

S/PV. 8234

Mr. Castro Córdoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the Peruvian presidency for
convening this open debate on such an important issue.
We also thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, Ms. Pramila
Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana for their briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Mali on behalf of the
Human Security Network.
Sexual violence is unacceptable anytime, anywhere.
However, its widespread use as a tactic of terror and a
weapon of war and terrorism, where it is inflicted as
one of the cruellest and most terrible forms of social
coercion, affecting people’s dignity and autonomy
in the deepest sense, is particularly worrying and
reprehensible. Sexual violence perpetuates conflict and
undermines security and stability, disrupting people’s
participation in the political, social and economic life of
their societies. The United Nations, as an Organization,
and we, as an international community, carry a heavy
burden on this issue, having failed to address the
causes of violence and sexual abuse through preventive
measures and to eliminate impunity in such cases.
The primary responsibility for protecting
populations lies with States. It is incumbent upon us to
establish robust legal and institutional frameworks with
a view to laying a firm foundation for preventing and
addressing gaps in the protection of victims, especially
women and girls, and to expand the scope of protection
measures to the most vulnerable populations, such as
ethnic and religious minorities; women in rural areas;
women and girls associated with armed groups; the
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population; as
well as boys and men, who are equally vulnerable to
sexual violence, the prevalence of which is increasing.
Sexual violence as a cause of forced displacement
is equally worrying, as is the growing risk of violence
in the context of mass movements where migrants,
refugees and displaced persons are subjected to sexual
extortion, trafficking and smuggling, harassment and
rape, among other abuses. It is essential that conflictrelated sexual violence be considered as grounds
for granting refugee or asylum status, with victim
assistance policies.
We urge States to criminalize all acts of sexual
violence in the strongest possible terms, including,
where appropriate, by referring them to the International
Criminal Court, in order to completely eliminate
impunity in such cases. These acts of violence are war

18-1088571/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

crimes, and a zero-tolerance policy must be applied to
those who commit, order or condone sexual violence in
conflict situations.
Fully utilizing existing international legal
mechanisms and ensuring accountability are dissuasive
means and vital instruments for ensuring justice for
victims. It is also important to encourage cooperation
and information-sharing, as well as to provide legal
assistance to victims and training for security forces
and peacekeepers. Similarly, in the context of the
United Nations, we welcome such initiatives as the
appointment of an ombudsman for victims’ rights and
the voluntary pact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, promoted by the SecretaryGeneral.
It is fundamental to implement Security Council
resolutions outlining commitments and plans for the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict and to monitor
their implementation. Similarly, sexual violence in
the context of armed conflict and terrorism must
systematically become a criterion for being subject
to sanctions, applied to all those who participate in
the financing, planning, or support of armed groups
with connections to acts of sexual violence. In order
for that to be effective, key actors must collaborate.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
plays an important role in that regard, ensuring fluid
communication and the exchange of information.
Prevention is key. The systematic inclusion of
women protection advisers in the strategic planning
processes of political missions and peace operations,
as well as adequate gender training to help prevent and
respond adequately to sexual exploitation and abuse,
are essential. For all of that to be possible, programmes
must be adequately funded.
It is essential that all such efforts focus on the
victims. Support programmes should be established
for the adequate reintegration of victims into their
social structures, which should contribute to the
re-establishment of the social fabric of populations
suffering the consequences of armed conflicts. Legal
frameworks should be established at the national level
in order to protect victims and combat the stigma
associated with sexual abuse and violence. These should
contemplate reparations and compensation, taking into
account that different forms of sexual violence require
different solutions and responses.
72/80

16/04/2018

Finally, it is essential to involve women and girls
in decision-making processes and leadership positions.
The lack of opportunities, the lack of national policies
for their protection and inclusion, as well as structural
barriers in all areas that promote discrimination
against women perpetuate a cycle of poverty, exclusion
and violence, thereby hampering their enjoyment of
their rights. It is therefore critical to guarantee equal
opportunities, access to education and women and
girl’s economic, political and social empowerment so
that they can assume a vital and transformative role in
their communities during and after conflicts, and can
regain their dignity and enjoyment of their rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
open debate.
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his valuable report (S/2018/250) and strong
commitment to implementing the agenda of preventing
sexual violence in conflict and introducing new
initiatives to make changes on the ground. I would also
like to thank his Special Representative Pramila Patten
for her extensive work and her dedication.
The Czech Republic is deeply concerned about
the persistent occurrence of sexual and gender-based
violence in reported countries. We should step up
our efforts to put an end to the climate of impunity.
Initiatives at a high political level should be translated
into concrete actions in order to ensure that the concept
of accountability is fully implemented on the ground.
The Czech Republic remains determined to help to
combat sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and post-conflict countries. In partnership with
non-governmental organizations, the Czech Republic
is implementing projects aimed at preventing sexual
violence and the abuse of women and girls, including
by setting up health-care and hygiene centres for
marginalized and abused girls and internally displaced
persons in Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, Libya, South Sudan
and Iraq, as well as in Pakistan, Jordan and Bangladesh.
We believe that the culture of violence is related
to socioeconomic factors and arises where various
groups are marginalized. The Czech Republic
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

therefore addresses the root causes of inequalities
in societies by implementing projects aimed at the
economic empowerment of women and their equal
participation in public and political affairs. Such
projects are implemented in Georgia, Zambia, Ethiopia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
The report of the Secretary-General affirms that
cases of sexual and gender-based violence remain
underreported. The equal participation of women
and men in law enforcement agencies creates an
environment that is more conducive to reporting those
serious crimes. The Czech Republic has therefore
become a lead nation of the Jordan III Trust Fund — a
capacity-building project to assist servicewomen in the
Jordanian armed forces.
In January 2017, the Czech Republic adopted a
national action plan on women and peace and security.
The plan contains specific measurable tasks, including
measures to combat conflict-related sexual violence, as
well as all forms of violence and discrimination against
women, girls, men and boys, as a violation of human
rights. In 2015, the Czech Ministry of Defence adopted
its own action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000). In line with the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, such training
is obligatory for peacekeepers before joining the United
Nations or other international peacekeeping missions.
In terms of enforcing accountability, the Czech
Republic continues to support the International
Criminal Court and ad hoc international tribunals.
The Czech Republic supports the global gender
activities of UN-Women through regular voluntary
financial contributions.
As a candidate country to the Human Rights
Council in the elections this autumn, we remain
committed to advancing the empowerment of women,
gender equality and access to justice. Let me affirm
that the Czech Republic remains strongly committed
to preventing and to protecting women, girls, men and
boys from falling victim to such terrible crimes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Pajević (Montenegro): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency for organizing this timely
open debate on preventing sexual violence in conflict
through empowerment, gender equality and access to
justice and for preparing an informative concept note

S/PV. 8234

(S/2018/311, annex). I also thank the briefers for their
valuable inputs to the debate.
My country fully associates itself with the
statements made by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
However, I would like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.
We live in an increasingly divided world, torn by
conflict and political breakdowns, where women and
girls are at a heightened risk of all forms of genderbased violence, from rape to assault, domestic violence
and early marriage, as well as exploitation by smugglers.
Montenegro welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/250), which paints a disturbing
picture concerning country situations. Today we need
to consider which practical steps should be taken to
meet our commitments, to protect women from the
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict by State and non-State actors, to promote
the role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflict and to ensure the building of stable and
just societies.
Preventing conflict-related sexual violence
through empowerment, gender equality and justice
is central to peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
reconciliation. We must support the ability of women
to influence policies that promote peacebuilding and
development and reduce inequality. As experience
shows, female experts can provide additional channels
of communication to local communities that are not
open to male soldiers. They help to build trust and
confidence. They can attend to the specific needs
of women and girls, including with regard to basic
services, health care and education. Women’s voices
must be heard and women must have ownership of the
policies that affect them and all of us.
Montenegro supports international efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, which acknowledges the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and children. We
adopted a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2017-2018.
We actively participate in the work of the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network.
In order to empower women soldiers, increase female
representation and support the recruitment of female
officers and gender training, last year Montenegro

18-1088573/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

contributed to the NATO Jordan III Trust Fund. We will
soon send an experienced gender adviser, responsible for
advice and operational support on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), to NATO headquarters.
Montenegro was among the first five countries
signatories to the Council of Europe Istanbul Convention
on preventing and combating violence against women
and domestic violence. We submitted the first report on
its implementation last year. We support the European
Union Spotlight Initiative to end violence against
women and girls, which was launched in September
last year and is being implemented worldwide with the
United Nations.
It is unacceptable for crimes of sexual violence not
to be reported and condemned and for those responsible
not be held accountable. The United Nations, other
international bodies, Governments and civil society
must all play their part in ensuring a response so as
to eliminate sexual violence in conflict areas around
the world.
We support international peace operations as an
instrument to ensure respect for human rights and
to build sustainable institutions in conflict areas.
Nowadays, United Nations peacekeeping operations
are more focused on protecting civilians than on
monitoring ceasefires. That is why peace operations
should use new technology to strengthen their capacity.
In preparing Montenegrin soldiers to take part in peace
operations and activities, our Ministry of Defence
conducts regular training sessions on preventing sexual
violence in conflict.
Montenegro strongly condemns cases of sexual
exploitation in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as that criminal activity and abuse have no place under
any circumstances in a United Nations flagship activity.
Zero tolerance and zero impunity must prevail as our
only option in order not to tarnish the credibility of the
United Nations.
At the international level, the Security Council
has an important role to play, including through the
sanctions regime. We call on the Security Council
to explicitly include sexual violence as a designation
criterion within the United Nations sanctions regimes
where such crimes are persistently perpetrated.
Survivors of sexual violence must receive adequate
support in order to alleviate their suffering and to assist
74/80

16/04/2018

their reintegration into communities without prejudice
or stigma, which requires education and engagement.
We need to redouble our efforts to prevent conflictrelated sexual violence through the empowerment of
women and by supporting gender equality and justice
at all levels. No perpetrator should be above the law and
no survivor should be neglected.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Syrian Government has worked hard
to strengthen its cooperation and coordination with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, so that the
Special Representative can successfully carry out her
noble work, correct factual information, and refute
all allegations by media propaganda supporting the
Saudi-Qatari terrorist aggression against my country.
This aggression continues to cause Syrian bloodshed
as a result of unilateral measures that run counter to
the basic rules of international law and are adopted by
some members of the Council and beyond against the
Syrian Government for purely political purposes.
The Syrian Government hosted the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in 2015. We
provided her with access to all facilities, including
corrections and rehabilitation centres. We also gave her
the opportunity to meet with many women prisoners
who had committed the crimes of terrorism, theft and
murder, in violation of Syrian law, so that she could
fully carry out her mandate.
We have read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2018/250),
introduced
by
Ms. Pramila Patten. We have noticed an improvement
in the approach of the report to Syrian women suffering
from sexual violence. The report refers to the fruitful
cooperation between the Syrian Government and the
Office of the Special Representative, especially with
respect to enhancing shelter facilities and transportation
services in rural areas. In 2017 we established a family
protection centre, in cooperation and coordination
with the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour and the
Syrian Commission for Family Affairs and Population,
in order to enhance our response to the victims of sexual
violence and provide them with care and psychological
support. In that context, allow us to provide the
following observations.
18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

First, the Government of my country completely
rejects the allegations in the report that the Syrian
Government practices sexual violence. We are surprised
that the Special Representative would rely on fabricated
reports prepared by the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The
Mechanism relies on information gathered from open
sources as well as armed and terrorist groups, notably
the so-called White Helmets, and does not verify the
sources of that information or its credibility.
Ms. Patten should have relied on her Office and
coordinated with the Syrian Government to carrying
out her own investigations in that regard, instead of
relying on those fabricated reports. We find it strange
that the Special Representative would go beyond her
mandate on conflict-related sexual violence and speak
in her very brief report on the participation of Syrian
women in political life. She also promoted General
Assembly resolution 71/248, which was not adopted by
consensus. That constitutes in and of itself an egregious
departure from her mandate.
Secondly, the report does not discuss the suffering
of Syrian women and girls in refugee camps in
neighbouring countries, and this is an essential matter.
In that regard, allow us to express our deep concern
and pain over the ongoing instances of rape of women
and children and the phenomenon of human trafficking,
sexual harassment and organ trafficking in Turkish
camps, and forced marriage in Jordanian camps, and
the sexual exploitation of hundreds of Syrian women by
humanitarian workers from international organizations
working in those camps. This is happening before the
eyes of the entire world.
Thirdly, the report completely ignores the suffering
of Syrian women in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
Palestinian occupied territories. It also fails to describe
the suffering of Syrian women subjected to the worst
violations of human rights and marginalization policies.
The Israeli occupation authorities continue to prevent
Syrian mothers in the occupied Golan from visiting their
children and relatives in Syria. In addition, the Israeli
occupation provides endless support to the terrorists of
the Al-Nusra Front, which practices the worst forms of
sexual violence in areas under its control.

S/PV. 8234

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that Syria
remains committed to supporting international efforts
to end all forms of sexual violence, punishing their
perpetrators and instigators and breaking the silence
and unjustified disregard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this important debate. I also want to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila
Patten, for their valuable briefings this morning. We
would also thank Ms. Razia Sultana, who spoke on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/250).
Sexual violence in armed conflict is now one of
the most serious dangers facing our societies. It is also
a factor of forced displacement and migration that the
world is witnessing. Sexual crimes against women
are beyond imagination. They have become a weapon
of war.
The Kingdom of Bahrain calls for efforts to counter
the stigmatization of victims of sexual violence by
providing them with the necessary support for their
socioeconomic reintegration, which is essential to
protecting the social fabric of post-conflict countries.
We also call for strengthened efforts in the area of
prevention, early warning and rapid reaction. For these
reasons, the Kingdom of Bahrain decided to join the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network.
Bahraini women live in a safe and stable country and
are represented in the Supreme Council for Women.
They provide support services to women in brethren
countries in armed conflict. The Kingdom of Bahrain
continues to denounce in the strongest terms barbaric
acts of sexual violence and calls for the prosecution of
their perpetrators.
At the international level, the Kingdom of Bahrain is
one of the first countries to sign and ratify a significant
number of relevant international instruments, in
particular the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

18-1088575/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

At the national level, the Kingdom of Bahrain has
enacted national legislation based on international
instruments, such as a law against trafficking in persons,
laws establishing the National Institute for Human
Rights and the National Commission for International
Humanitarian Law, and a law for protection against
domestic violence. The Kingdom of Bahrain is eager
to participate in relevant international forums, voice its
opinion and follow up on results. Bahraini women have
participated in many local initiatives and international
forums seeking to activate the role of women in
achieving sustainable peace.
In the context of follow up and implementation of
the Kingdom’s international commitments pursuant to
the conventions and treaties adhered to, many national
committees have been established, most importantly
the Committee to Follow Up on Implementing the
Security Council Resolutions, the High Coordination
Committee for Human Rights, the National Committee
for Combatting Human Trafficking and the High
Committee for the International Humanitarian Law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Morocco.
Ms. Moutchou (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation wishes to thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing an open debate on this topic,
the significance of which is seen in its urgency, acuity
and impact on societies. This debate is timely, as the
proliferation of sexual violence in conflict concerns
us all, making the need for joint action more urgent
than ever.

16/04/2018

In June, we will celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), which in
paragraph 4 stresses that
“rape and other forms of sexual violence can
constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity,
or a constitutive act with respect to genocide”.
Faced with the persistence of these heinous acts,
indignation is no longer enough. Action must be
taken and real solutions proposed to help survivors
rebuild. Effective measures to prevent and respond to
acts of sexual violence can contribute greatly to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In this
regard, allow me to highlight the following few points.
First, the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence must be addressed, promoting peacebuilding
and sustainable human development and encouraging
national efforts to end gender-based discrimination.
Secondly, access to justice for victims must be
strengthened, and impunity must be combated by
bringing the perpetrators and those responsible for
sexual violence to justice.
Thirdly, the participation of women in discussions
on conflict prevention and resolution, the maintenance
of peace and security and post-conflict peacebuilding
must be facilitated, and the empowerment of women and
their full and equal participation in decision-making
must be supported.
Fourthly, religious leaders have an influential role
to play in combating the abuse of religion to justify
violence. They must be encouraged to speak out
strongly, firmly and quickly against violence.

Violence has always been reprehensible, regardless
of who are the victims. However, sexual violence in
times of conflict is even more so. Unfortunately, this
violence persists. It has become systematic, widespread
and appallingly brutal. No woman, girl, man, boy or
old person is spared — not even infants. We strongly
condemn these practices from another era, which
continue to this day. Our debate today is a strong and
eloquent illustration of this condemnation.

Fifthly, cooperation with local actors and
community leaders is crucial, as they can identify
precursor signs of acts of sexual violence, provide earlywarning systems and propose appropriate prevention
and protection strategies.

Sexual violence not only affects victims; it gnaws
at and wears down communities and societies in their
entirety. It seeks to wound the body, mutilate dignity,
destroy the social fabric, destabilize, ruin and terrorize
societies affected by conflict, and nips any effort at
reconciliation and reconstruction in the bud.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General, the penholder of the United
Nations strategy to combat sexual exploitation and
abuse, which gives priority to the rights and dignity of
victims and calls for the implementation of the zerotolerance policy. The Kingdom of Morocco fully and

76/80

Sixthly, the stigma surrounding victims of sexual
violence and children born of sexual violence must be
reverse. These victims must be accompanied medically
and reintegrated socially and economically.

18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

firmly supports this policy of zero tolerance and works
tirelessly, taking all measures necessary to eradicate
these despicable acts. We are confident that this
strategy should change the game. My country, which
is a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, chaired by Canada, and of the Group of
Friends for Gender Parity, led by Colombia, supports
their international commitments to combatting all
forms of sexual violence.
In conclusion, protection, prevention and the
fight against impunity must be the watchwords of our
societies. International law, including international
humanitarian law, must be applied without concession.
It is our responsibility to prevent sexual violence,
protect individuals, respond to the needs of victims,
and ensure that perpetrators are held fully accountable.
It is high time to invest in peace, promote human
and sustainable development, restore dignity to the
victims and make the project of rebuilding societies
and perpetuating peace a reality, so that no one is
left behind. That has been our responsibility since we
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
That is our responsibility and our duty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I have
the great honour and privilege to speak on behalf of
the member countries of the Human Security Network,
an intercontinental network comprising Austria, Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa as an
observer country, and, of course, my own country, Mali.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that is working to promote the integration of the
human security dimension into policies and programmes
at the national, regional and international levels.
On behalf of the Network’s member States, I extend
our warm congratulations to the Peruvian presidency of
the Council on having organized today’s open debate on
preventing sexual violence in conflict through capacitybuilding, gender equality and access to justice. I also
thank the various briefers.
The Human Security Network welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250) and notes
with deep concern the continued use of sexual violence
as strategies of war, terrorism, torture and repression,
as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General. We
are deeply concerned by this sexual violence, whose

S/PV. 8234

victims continued to be targeted in 2017 because of their
religious, ethnic or clan affiliation. It is more necessary
than ever for the United Nations to work closely with
Governments in order to prevent and investigate such
crimes and to provide specialized services to victims,
their families and witnesses.
It should also be borne in mind that sexual violence
generally continues even after a conflict has ended. It
is a factor that increases insecurity in affected areas.
Victims of both genders are often deprived of protection
and access to justice. And the effects of sexual violence
can extend over many years and generations. Worse,
these crimes are often amnestied. The topic of sexual
violence in conflict or post-conflict situations is
considered taboo, and its victims are usually punished
and stigmatized, while the perpetrators remain at large.
The Human Security Network therefore joins today’s
appeals and calls on the Security Council and Member
States to redouble their efforts, particularly in the fight
against impunity.
We must recognize the essential role of international
criminal justice, in particular that of the International
Criminal Court, in deciding cases of sexual violence in
conflict situations. I recall that the Rome Statute — and
this was a great step forward — recognized sexual
violence as a war crime and a crime against humanity.
In this regard, we welcome the 2017 judgment of the
International Criminal Court in the case of Prosecutor
v. Bosco Ntaganda, confirming that such crimes fall
within the jurisdiction of the Court, and that rape and
sexual slavery of children by members of armed groups
can be prosecuted as war crimes under the Rome
Statute. However, we wish once again to recall that the
primary responsibility for prosecuting perpetrators or
those responsible lies with States.
Sexual violence in conflict situations is recognized
as a pillar of security challenges. At a time when
women and girls are often the first targets, men and
boys are also strategically targeted. While it is essential
that we maintain momentum in the fight against sexual
violence, it is also important to stress the importance
of building women’s capacities as part of the solution.
Building women’s capacities and increasing their
participation in decision-making bodies remains the
cornerstone of any response in the areas of prevention
and protection.
The full enjoyment of human rights has been
a priority of the Human Security Network since its

18-1088577/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

inception. The protection and promotion of rights are
a shared responsibility and can be achieved with the
firm commitment and action of the United Nations,
Member States and other actors. The Human Security
Network also stresses the importance of focusing on the
prevention of future violations and rehabilitating and
reintegrating those affected by those heinous crimes
through appropriate medical and psychological care.
In that regard, we commend the appointment of the
Victims’ Rights Advocate, Ms. Jane Connors.
The States members of the Human Security Network
express strong support for the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual abuse and exploitation, and consequently,
a zero-impunity approach for all civilian staff, troops
and police of the United Nations and other international
peacekeeping operations, in accordance with the
Secretary-General’s requests.
Finally, the Human Security Network calls on
the Security Council and Member States to take into
account the recommendations of the report of the
Secretary-General in their efforts to prevent and combat
sexual violence in conflict.

16/04/2018

We are pleased to note that progress has been
made in a number of countries. We must ensure that
this progress is based on evidence about the reality of
the situation on the ground. Ensuring that all cases of
sexual violence are reported is crucial in strengthening
justice mechanisms and accountability. Unfortunately,
the majority of those cases remain unreported owing
to social stigma often attached to the victims of the
crime, fear of reprisals and the systematic barriers and
obstacles that the victims have to overcome. Increased
awareness about the nature of the crime, changes in
perceptions of social taboos and having an efficient
and reliable framework to identify sexual exploitation
are necessary to establish the first step towards ending
impunity and ensuring accountability.
We also note that there are commonalities in
the recommendations for those countries, including
strengthening legal frameworks, the provision of access
to justice, socioeconomic support for victims, strict
screening and training of armed and security forces,
and strengthening frameworks to enhance cooperation
with the United Nations to ensure prevention and
response measures.

Ten years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1820
(2008), which recognized that sexual violence was
being used as a tactic of war and could therefore be
included in the category of war crimes. Today’s open
debate provides an opportunity to reflect on the progress
made and evaluate the way forward in implementing
the Council’s resolutions that aim at preventing sexual
violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.

Most of the victims are women and girls from
marginalized rural communities who do not always
benefit from full legal protections and often face cultural
taboos regarding sexual violence. Therefore, Member
States should not only strive to extend the reach of the
rule of law to all communities, but also ensure that the
law itself provides protection to the victims through
alignment with international human rights standards on
sexual violence and abuse. We believe that the greater
representation of women in governance, especially on
the part of women from rural communities, would raise
the profile of those issues and facilitate positive change.
In addition, we also support community mobilization
campaigns, led by community and religious leaders,
aimed at shifting the stigma of sexual violence from
the victims to the perpetrators.

The Maldives strongly condemns how sexual
violence is being weaponized by targeting victims
based on ethnic, religious or political affiliation, which
destroys social cohesion, leading to forced displacement
and the deprivation of economic resources. We
note with concern that the failure to address those
issues has led to desperate recourse to more harmful
practices, including child marriage, withdrawal from
educational and employment opportunities, and resort
to commercial sexual exploitation.

We wish to underscore the responsibilities of armed
forces and peacekeeping operations in preventing sexual
violence in conflict. It is important not only to ensure
training in international humanitarian and human rights
law in the specific context of sexual exploitation, but
also to establish strict monitoring and accountability
within those systems in order to prevent abuse by those
actors themselves. In that regard, we are pleased to
note that United Nations peacekeeping operations with
mandates on the protection of civilians have established

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Government of Peru, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of April, for convening
this important open debate.

78/80

18-10885

16/04/2018

Women and peace and security

monitoring arrangements and incorporated early
warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence.
The Maldives supports the Secretary-General’s
preventative approach and believes that early warning
indicators should help prevent sexual violence in
conflict-prone areas, in addition to post-conflict
situations, and that this should be factored in when
evaluating risks to peace and security in the Council.
In that regard, we wish to emphasize the importance
of ensuring adequate funding for sexual violence
programmes in conflict-affected situations.
It is clear that sexual exploitation and abuse are
not just a consequence of conflict, but can also be a
weapon that exacerbates conflicts. Addressing the root
causes and ending impunity is the key to ensuring that
this heinous crime is brought to an end. We all need to
work together to find shared solutions to ensure that
all women, men, girls and boys whose lives are already
tarnished with conflict are not permanently scarred by
the consequences of sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security. We would like
to share with the Council the following considerations
in our national capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank the Government of
Peru for taking the initiative of organizing this debate
and for presiding over it throughout the day. We also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for their briefings, and Ms. Razia
Sultana for her courageous testimony on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
Argentina continues to strongly support the efforts
of the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2018/250), and we fully endorse its recommendations
aimed at preventing, combating and eliminating all
forms of sexual violence in armed conflicts, with a
special focus on addressing issues related to prevention,
early warning, contributing factors and rapid responses
in the face of the occurrence of such crimes.

S/PV. 8234

Sexual violence in conflict is one of the most
horrific and abhorrent violations of human dignity,
and poses a singular and undeniable threat to
international peace and security. We must therefore
redouble our commitment to prevention, eradication
and accountability with regard to such crimes. We
must put the victims of such crimes at the heart of our
actions and pool our efforts to address the structural
and underlying conditions that increase the victims’
vulnerability and risk.
The growing use and threat of sexual violence
perpetrated by various State and non-State armed actors
and groups against specific groups — women, children,
minorities, people who have or are perceived as having
a sexual orientation or gender identity other than that
of the norm, among others — constitute the most
serious international crimes and must be prevented and
punished in strict compliance with the law by making
use of available tools and mechanisms, including the
sanctions regimes of the Council.
Preventing and combating sexual violence in
conflict should be at the forefront of all prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts undertaken by
the United Nations and by the international community,
as a whole. One of the key ways to prevent the scourge
is to address the risks and underlying factors that make
women and certain groups particularly vulnerable
to sexual violence. Such factors include, inter alia,
structural discrimination, gender-based violence and
a climate of insecurity and impunity. Efforts and
initiatives aimed at promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls, in all their diversity,
are also important.
With regard to access to justice and accountability
for crimes of sexual violence, it is crucial to build
documentation and investigation capacity and foster
greater cooperation, information-sharing and good
practices in the areas of investigation, documentation,
location, assistance for the victims, extradition and
legal aid in order to end the climate of impunity that
contributes to the proliferation of such crimes.
With regard to crimes of sexual violence, we
reiterate that victims must be at the core of our
prevention, eradication and accountability efforts. It
is therefore essential to protect, assist and reintegrate
all victims of such violations by working with women’s
organizations and other civil society organizations to
provide services, aid and gender-inclusive multisectoral

18-1088579/80

S/PV.8234

Women and peace and security

and multidisciplinary support and compensation, meet
needs and protect the dignity and human rights of
the victims.
Those elements must be taken into consideration
when designing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, special political and peacebuilding missions,
pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000). The goal is to ensure
the inclusion of women in equal conditions and their
access to significant decision-making positions so as
to secure their seats at the negotiating table. We must
ensure that experts on gender, gender-based violence
and sexual violence are included in the various United
Nations missions and mediation teams. We must also
include specific provisions and commitments when
brokering peace agreements and ceasefires and ensure
that more women participate in peacekeeping forces.
We believe that the development of national plans
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) must be viewed as
a tool for building peace and preventing sexual violence
in all areas. That spirit encouraged our country to join
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network
and the Group of Friends on Women, Peace and
Security in Geneva. It also joined the Elsie Initiative
on Women in Peace Operations, spearheaded by
Canada, which aims to increase the number of women
in peacekeeping operations.
Preventing sexual violence in conflict must begin
by building more peaceful societies. That can be

80/80

16/04/2018

achieved only through equality. In keeping with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we can leave
no one behind. There is no peace without inclusion or
justice. Societies with a climate of impunity perpetuate
violence. Argentina takes a comprehensive view of
peace in which gender equity and equality permeate all
public policy. It works to achieve social transformation
geared towards gender equality, which is a sine qua non
for strengthening democracy. Our priority for gender
policy is the elimination of violence against women. In
that regard, gender reforms have been implemented in
the defence and security sector.
Argentina reiterates its commitment to the
Organization’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as its support for the
measures adopted by the Secretary-General on the
issue. Argentina, together with 80 countries, signed the
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that General
Assembly resolution 69/293 designates 19 June as the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict. We encourage all Member States, entities
of the United Nations system and other international
and regional organizations, as well as civil society and
other relevant actors, to participate in the activities to
mark the Day.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

18-10885
