A /68/PV.55

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

55th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 20 November 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Miculescu
(Romania), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/609)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.11)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/68/L.11.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): It is an honour for my
country to introduce this year’s draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/68/L.11).
Transition in the areas of security, politics and
economics has made remarkable progress this past year
under strong Afghan leadership. The year 2014 will
once again be a year marked by such pivotal events as
the presidential elections in April and the termination
of the International Security Assistance Force at the end
of the year. As we approach those watershed moments,
the long-term partnership between Afghanistan and
the international community is evolving. However,
it is essential to understand that redefining that very
relationship should reinforce it. That is also the core
message of the draft resolution before us today. Allow
me to briefly highlight five core elements of the draft
resolution.

First, with respect to transition in the area of
security, on 18 June, President Karzai announced the
final tranche of the transition process. The Afghan
National Security Forces are now in the lead to provide
security throughout the country. Since the inception of
the transition process, the Afghan National Army and
Police have continuously improved their capacities.
Yet challenges remain, and the achievements made
so far remain fragile. The draft resolution therefore
underlines the international community’s resolve to
support the Afghan security forces during the transition
and beyond and reiterates the commitment made at
the Chicago Summit in 2012 to sustain international
support for the Afghan security forces beyond 2014.
We welcome the convening of a loya jirga to
decide on a security agreement with the United States.
That agreement will constitute a cornerstone in the
architecture of international support to Afghanistan
in the years to come. The German Government has
offered to continue supporting the Afghan National
Security Forces in their challenging effort to provide
security for the Afghan people. We are looking forward
to working with our Afghan partners to set the legal and
practical framework for that involvement in the coming
months. In accordance with the Chicago Summit joint
declaration, Germany will work towards a sound legal
basis for our future cooperation, aiming at a Security
Council resolution.
Secondly, the draft resolution is about the long-term
commitment of the international community throughout
the transformation decade. That commitment, declared
by the Government of Afghanistan and its international

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-57251 (E)

*1357251*

A/68/PV.55

partners at the Bonn Conference of 2011 and reaffirmed
at the Tokyo Conference in 2012, rests firmly on
the principle of mutuality. Building on that unique
framework, the international community has pledged
$16 billion through 2015 in support of the economic and
political stabilization of Afghanistan. It has committed
itself to sustaining its support at or near levels of the
past decade through 2017, in line with the principles of
aid effectiveness.
The Afghan Government, in turn, has committed
itself to achieving its governance and development
goals in a determined manner. Indeed, during the past
decade Afghanistan has made remarkable progress
in a variety of areas, including health, education and
infrastructure. However, continued efforts are of
paramount importance to protecting and advancing the
gains made in past years. In that context, I welcome the
resolve of the Government of Afghanistan to fulfil its
commitments within an accelerated time frame.
Thirdly, the draft resolution expresses our
appreciation about the recent progress made in the
preparation of presidential and provincial council
elections. We particularly welcome the adoption of a
legislative framework and the appointment of new
members of the Independent Election Commission and
the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission. A
broad range of political leaders have announced their
candidacies to run in those historic elections. It is key
that the exemplary work of the Afghan authorities
result in a legitimate outcome and that widely accepted
election results yield a peaceful transfer of power.
The electoral process is just one example of the
empowerment and leadership of Afghan institutions.
We expect to see similar ownership and dedication by
the Government in maintaining the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission as an effective institution
for the protection and promotion of human rights.
As reflected in the draft resolution, preserving and
consolidating gains in the protection and promotion of
human rights and the equal participation of all members
of society, especially women, in all spheres of Afghan
life remains critical.
Fourthly, the draft resolution reiterates the
importance of the Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
peace and reconciliation process. For that process to
yield sustainable results, it needs to be inclusive. In
that context, respect for the Afghan Constitution and
its human rights provisions — the rights of women in

2/29

20/11/2013

particular — is essential. The draft resolution expresses
appreciation for the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan in advancing the process and reaffirms
the continued support of the international community
in that regard.
Finally, the Istanbul Heart of Asia Process, which
aims to enhance regional cooperation and dialogue,
is another pillar for a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan. We call on all partners and supporters
to accelerate the implementation of the agreed
confidence-building measures in the coming months.
We commend China for hosting the next Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference, in 2014, and we look forward
to the Process gaining renewed momentum.
To conclude, I would like to express our gratitude
to all delegations that participated in this year’s
informal consultations, in particular to my colleague
Ambassador Tanin and his team for their dedication
and close cooperation.
By adopting the draft resolution once again by
consensus today, the General Assembly will reaffirm
its commitment to a prosperous and peaceful future for
Afghanistan and send a strong message of support to
the Afghan Government and people.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): We come together today
to adopt this year’s draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/68/L.11). I thank all Member States
that participated in a spirit of cooperation for their
support for the efforts of the Afghan Government and
their solidarity with the Afghan people in their struggle
to build a democratic, stable and prosperous future. We
also thank Ambassador Peter Wittig and our colleagues
at the Permanent Mission of Germany to the United
Nations for facilitating the draft resolution.
As we gather to take stock of the situation in
Afghanistan, we are mindful of the monumental
progress made to date. From the ashes of war, over the
past 12 years a new State was founded on the basis of
a democratic Constitution and the will of the Afghan
people. Afghanistan regained its historical place as a
responsible member of the international community,
and the country again became home to all Afghans,
all ethnic groups, men and women. Millions of
Afghan refugees who had escaped war, violence and
devastation returned home. The Afghan flag is now
raised in the far remote ends of the country and around
the world. Today millions of Afghan boys and girls
have access to education. Ninety per cent of people

13-57251

20/11/2013

receive primary health care in hundreds of clinics and
health centres countrywide. We made tremendous
progress in reducing maternal and child mortality,
and people live longer and with more certainty about
their future. Our vibrant civil society and independent
media are emblematic of an emerging democracy in
the region. Big steps were taken to restore the rights
of women, elevate their status and strengthen their role
in society. Afghan people enjoy their democratic rights
and freedoms, which are guaranteed by the Afghan
Constitution. In summary, Afghanistan’s progress has
been huge and, to a larger extent, unprecedented for
a country that is still struggling to leave conflict and
violence behind.
Following a decade of extraordinary engagement
by the international community in reconstruction and
stabilization efforts, Afghanistan is moving towards
a new beginning characterized and guided by the
principles of national ownership, leadership and
strengthened sovereignty. Tomorrow in Kabul, the
consultative loya jirga will confer on the agreement
that is at the core of strategic relations between
Afghanistan and the United States. That is an important
event, following the signing of the Enduring Strategic
Partnership Agreement between the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and the United States of America
on 1 May 2012, following 15 months of negotiations
between the Governments of Afghanistan and the
United States. Representatives of the Afghan people
will have their say on the pact, which will shape our
future in a changing world.
In four months, Afghanistan will hold its next
presidential and provincial council elections. In a spirit
of national unity, Afghans from all segments of society
will go to the polls to choose the new leadership of the
country. That will mark the first peaceful, democratic
transfer of power from one elected President to another.
All efforts are being made to ensure that the elections
are transparent, credible, free and fair. The inclusion
of women as candidates, voters and active civil society
members is essential to those efforts. The Afghan
people expect the outcome of the elections to further
solidify political stability and to strengthen the gains of
the past decade.
At the end of next year, we will enter a new phase
when the international military forces will leave
the country. Afghan forces assumed full security
responsibility in June and will be in charge of the
security and defence of the country nationwide. Beyond

A/68/PV.55

2014, training, advising and assisting the Afghan
National Security Forces will remain imperative. In
that connection, we are in the process of determining,
together with our NATO partners, the structure of the
NATO post-2014 posture in the country.
As we look to the future, Afghanistan is focused
on a number of immediate priorities that are key to the
success of the transition and achieving lasting peace
and stability in the country.
First, on peace and reconciliation, the Government
of Afghanistan is continuing its efforts to achieve a
political settlement, reconciliation and secure durable
peace. Many attempts have been made in the past year
to restart peace talks with the Taliban, through the
vigilant efforts of the High Peace Council as well as
the framework of bilateral and trilateral initiatives. We
have taken additional steps. Despite some setbacks, we
are confident that we will reach a political solution. We
continue our efforts to move the process forward, and
we are encouraged by the commitment and cooperation
of our brotherly country Pakistan, which is vital to the
advancement of the peace and reconciliation process.
Secondly, with regard to regional cooperation,
peace and security in Afghanistan is inextricable from
peace and prosperity in the region. We are working
together with all our neighbours, through different
forums and initiatives, to enhance cooperation in a
number of areas. The Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan is central to our goal of realizing a
secure, stable and prosperous region. We have come a
long way in enhancing the Process by strengthening
the framework of cooperation through dialogue and
by focusing on a concrete set of confidence-building
measures. The senior officials meeting of the Istanbul
Process held in New York in September was another
important step worward. We look forward to working
closely with our Chinese partners in preparation for
the upcoming fourth Ministerial Conference of the
Istanbul Process, to be held in Tianjin, China. In recent
months, the Government of Afghanistan conducted a
number of high-level consultations with the leadership
of neighbouring countries and countries in the region,
aimed at furthering cooperation and collaboration for
the region’s collective security and stability, particularly
during the transition and beyond.
Thirdly, on economic development, moving from
a predominantly aid-dependent to a non-aid-dependent

13-572513/29

A/68/PV.55

economy is at the core of our economic transition. We
are improving our economy, attracting national and
international private-sector investment, strengthening
trade and seeking to make the most of our rich and
untapped natural-resource supply, which will serve as
the backbone of our economy in future.
It is important to emphasize that Afghanistan’s
social and economic development also requires greater
coherence and efficiency with regard to the provision of
international assistance, as well as greater transparency
and accountability. In that respect, we look forward to
further progress in meeting the mutual commitments
set out in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
For our part, we are vigorously pursuing inclusive and
sustained growth, with a focus on strengthening our
infrastructure, and a sound legal policy and institutional
environment, which is essential to the realization of
our self-sufficiency strategy and sustained economic
growth. In addition, we are making every effort to
implement our national development strategy by way
of our national priority programme, into which our
Millennium Development Goals have been integrated.
We underscore the importance of aligning assistance
with the national priority programme and channelling
aid through our core budget.
Fourthly, good governance and strengthening the
rule of law have been central to our efforts. This year,
new steps were taken towards improving governance at
the national and local levels, including in the areas of
administrative reforms and the fight against corruption.
To that end, I should note that President Karzai’s decree
of July 2012 continues to be implemented in Government
ministries, organs, agencies and directorates.
Our good-governance effort is grounded in
a comprehensive approach that entails various
components, including a robust effort to improve
security and overcome the problem of narcotic drugs.
The nexus between narcotic drugs, criminality and
terrorism poses a serious threat to the rule of law. To
that end, we are seriously engaged in implementing our
national drug-control strategy, including our prioritized
implementation plan and benchmarks. Nevertheless,
we underscore once again that a real solution to
the problem of narcotic drugs relies on a holistic
approach that addresses all components — production,
trafficking and consumption. In that connection, let
me highlight again the importance of the principle of
shared responsibility in our joint efforts to defeat the
scourge of drugs. We emphasize, and are thankful for,

4/29

20/11/2013

continued regional and international support in our
continued fight against that menace.
Lastly, the Afghan Government has been fully
committed to its responsibilities to protect and promote
the rights of all Afghan people, including those of
women and girls. By virtue of our Constitution, all
Afghans — the elderly, youth, men and women, boys and
girls — enjoy more rights and fundamental freedoms
today than ever before. We continue to take bold steps
towards the advancement of women and their rights and
to empower them as proactive members of society who
contribute to building a new Afghanistan. In assessing
the plight of Afghan women, it is imperative to not
lose sight of the gains made thus far. We have come
a long way, and continued support and commitment
are essential to the advancement of women’s rights
in the country as we proceed into the transformation
decade. We deem unacceptable any incident of violence
or discrimination against women and are pursuing all
cases with serious attention. Let me note that this year
has seen notable progress in the implementation of the
law to eliminate violence against women. Investigations
and prosecution of alleged crimes against women have
increased significantly. All perpetrators will be held
accountable.
As a country that is committed to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, Afghanistan is fully aware
of the importance of universal values, fundamental
freedoms and rights, as enshrined in our Constitution.
Afghanistan has throughout history been a diverse and
tolerant society, respectful of the customs, traditions
and religious beliefs of all peoples, including those of
other faiths. By the same token, we underscore the need
for awareness and respect for the cultural norms, values
and beliefs of Afghan society. That will only serve to
benefit our enduring partnership on the way forward.
The coming year for Afghanistan is crucial.
We are embracing the challenges of the future with
full confidence. Our commitment to building on the
achievements of the past is as strong as ever. We know
that the journey we embarked upon more than a decade
ago has not come to an end and that the way forward
will not be free of challenges. But, if anything, today’s
draft resolution is a manifestation of the prospects for
success, made possible by the enormous sacrifices
made by the people of Afghanistan, who throughout
history have demonstrated resilience, fortitude and
courage in overcoming the most difficult of obstacles

13-57251

20/11/2013

and achieving success. Our international partners were
central to those efforts, and I would like to take this
opportunity to gratefully thank all our international
friends and partners who stand with us in support and
solidarity as we seek to complete the goal we set out to
achieve in 2001.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.
Like others, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. I
also thank all delegations that participated in the
consultations on the draft resolution (A/68/L.11), in
particular the Permanent Representative of Germany
and his team for so ably facilitating the negotiations. We
look forward once again to its adoption by consensus.
Afghanistan has achieved considerable political,
security, economic and development progress over
the past decade. The draft resolution before us today
highlights many of those advances, for which the
Government of Afghanistan and the Afghan people
deserve much credit. But the gains made are fragile and
major challenges remain.
In the EU statement at the Security Council debate
on Afghanistan on 19 September (see S/PV.7035), we
highlighted the role of institutions in Afghanistan and
reiterated that the full implementation of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework remained paramount
for a successful transition. We stressed the shift from
a military to a civilian focus and underlined that a
political solution was needed for long-term stability
and development in Afghanistan. We also emphasized
that a future peace and reconciliation process should be
Afghan-led and inclusive and should engage all parts of
society. In this statement, we want to make a few brief
remarks on the upcoming elections, human rights and,
lastly, economic development and regional cooperation.
First, with regard to the upcoming presidential and
provincial elections, it will be critical to Afghanistan’s

A/68/PV.55

future that the elections be inclusive and transparent
and lead to a legitimate outcome. We are very much
encouraged by the progress made on the electoral
preparations by the Afghan authorities and stress the
importance of appropriate measures to ensure security
for voters and officials, to combat fraud and to promote
women’s participation. We also believe that domestic
and international election observation will be critical to
the transparency and credibility of the electoral process.
The willingness of the Government of Afghanistan to
facilitate that observation is very much appreciated.
The United Nations is, in our view, a key player
in supporting Afghanistan’s electoral preparations, and
will remain so post-2014. For our part, we are providing
financial and technical support to the electoral
oversight institutions and to voter outreach through
the electoral assistance programme of the United
Nations Development Programme. We remain firmly
committed to supporting the Afghan electoral process
over the coming months.
Secondly, let me turn to human rights. Such rights,
in particular concerning the situation of women and
girls, have advanced considerably in the past decade.
That deserves praise but also demands our continued
collective efforts. We welcome the commitment of
the Afghan Government to implementing Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) and all the subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security. It is
significant that the draft resolution we will adopt
today contains a clear message from all Member States
that our commitment to achieving the full and equal
participation of women in all spheres of Afghan life is
steadfast and unwavering. It is clear that the situation of
women continues to require our attention, as it remains
of considerable concern.
There is still much to be done to safeguard progress
and to ensure the full implementation of statutory
provisions. We encourage paying particular attention
to the progressive implementation of the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the National Action Plan for the Women of
Afghanistan and the law on the elimination of violence
against women. The completion and publication of the
report on the implementation of that law will establish
an important benchmark against which to judge future
progress.
It is also significant that today’s draft resolution
recognizes the risks faced by human rights defenders

13-572515/29

A/68/PV.55

in Afghanistan. Those individuals, groups and civil
society organizations play a central role in protecting
and promoting the rights of others, often at great
personal risk. The draft resolution rightly condemns
the violence against them. In addition, we want to
emphasize the importance of the Government of
Afghanistan’s reaffirmation of its commitment to
maintaining standards to retain the “A” status of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
Finally, I would say a word on economic
development and regional cooperation. Afghanistan
has achieved impressive rates of economic growth
over the past decade. But, recently, the rate has slowed
dramatically as investors wait to see the outcome of the
elections and the transition process. It is critical that the
Government of Afghanistan take all possible measures
to improve the business and investment climate. In the
short term, the Government must show leadership to
ensure that the mining law, the law on the value-added
tax and the anti-money-laundering law are all passed
before the end of the current Administration.
Increased trade and investment can only strengthen
and support the welcome initiatives of the countries
in the region within the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan. To take the Istanbul Process to the next
level, it is important that the Heart of Asia countries
further the delivery of concrete results through the
implementation of confidence-building measures. The
European Union itself is testament to how increased
economic links can provide the foundation for increased
political and security cooperation.
In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to progress in
Afghanistan over the long term. For our part, we will
continue to support the transition process to promote the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan): It gives me great pleasure,
in my capacity as the representative of the country
chairing the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), to deliver this statement on behalf of the People’s
Republic of China, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the
Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and my own
country, the Republic of Tajikistan.
As a close neighbour of the SCO, Afghanistan
enjoys friendly relations with all SCO member States.
Last year, Afghanistan was granted observer status

6/29

20/11/2013

in the SCO, which provided new opportunities for
cooperation with member States.
The SCO members have been closely following the
process of strengthening peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan and support the development of cooperation
between Afghanistan and the countries of the region on
a bilateral and multilateral basis. We are pleased to see
some positive developments in the economic and social
spheres in Afghanistan, in particular in the fields of
infrastructure development, the construction of roads,
railways and power-transmission lines, health care and
education.
We support the efforts of Afghanistan and the
international community to address the problems
of the transition period, reconciliation and postconflict rehabilitation. The SCO member States also
support efforts to make Afghanistan an independent,
neutral, peaceful and prosperous country that is free
of terrorism and drug-related crime. The SCO member
States emphasize that national reconciliation, as an
important component of any Afghan settlement, should
be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned in order to facilitate
the early achievement of peace and stability in the
country. However, we believe that the process can have
a positive effect only if there is strict compliance by
the insurgents with three basic principles, namely, they
must lay down their weapons, recognize the Afghan
Constitution and break ties with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist and extremist organizations.
In the course of its reconstruction, Afghanistan
still faces a number of pressing challenges and
problems. There is no complete stability in its security
situation. We strongly believe that increased terrorist
activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorists
and extremists, along with illicit drug production and
trafficking, seriously undermine the achievements
in the security sphere within the country and beyond
its borders. The tensions and internal conflicts in the
country remain one of the main sources of threat to
regional security and stability.
We believe the illicit production, trade and
trafficking of drugs from Afghanistan to be a threat to
international peace and stability. Countering the illicit
production and trafficking of drugs remains one of the
key components in achieving stability in Afghanistan.
The fight against, and prevention of, the illicit drug
trafficking that has turned the country into a breeding
ground for international terrorism and organized crime

13-57251

20/11/2013

should be an integral part of our common struggle
against terrorism and extremism.
The SCO member States have consistently
supported peaceful reconstruction in Afghanistan
and have provided all feasible support, including
humanitarian assistance, to the Afghan people. We are
ready to continue our efforts aimed at strengthening
trade and economic ties between SCO members and
Afghanistan in order to achieve social and economic
progress in Afghanistan, through the implementation
of infrastructure, energy and transport projects, with a
view to ensuring economic growth and creating jobs in
the country.
We believe that Afghanistan should be involved
in the multifaceted regional cooperation process.
The involvement of neighbouring countries in the
development of Afghanistan while taking into account
the regional context in the post-conflict rehabilitation
of the country would ensure success in the efforts
undertaken by the international community. In that
context, the SCO member States will continue to
strengthen and upgrade regional cooperation within the
SCO framework and other existing relevant regional
forums so as to make the SCO region a region of lasting
peace, friendship, prosperity and harmony.
We would welcome Afghanistan’s involvement
in the activities of the SCO Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure. Afghanistan’s active participation in
the region’s anti-drug activities would be highly
appreciated. We also hope that collaboration between
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the United
Nations will continue to be progressively enhanced in
future.
The United Nations should continue its central
role in coordinating international peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. We support the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in providing and enhancing the necessary
assistance to the peacebuilding and reconstruction
efforts in the country according to its mandate.

A/68/PV.55

Afghanistan (A/68/609) submitted to the General
Assembly. We welcome the imminent adoption by
consensus of the draft resolution on Afghanistan
(A/68/L.11).
China associates itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), by the representative of Tajikistan in his capacity
as acting Chair of the SCO.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, the peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan
has made headway. However, as Afghanistan enters a
crucial stage of its transition period, the comprehensive
construction of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
country will continue to require the coordinated efforts
of Afghanistan and the international community.
China supports Afghanistan in the safeguarding of
its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
and respects the right of the Afghan people to choose
their development path based on the country’s situation
and to successfully achieve the transition. It is our
hope that the international community will continue
its support towards the early achievement of peace
and development in Afghanistan. In that connection, I
would emphasize the following points.
First, China welcomes the efforts of Afghanistan in
preparing for the presidential and provincial elections
in 2014 and hopes that the preparations will move
forward steadily, to ensure the smooth conduct of the
elections in order to lay the foundation for Afghanistan’s
transitional stage. We urge the international community
to carefully consider the opinions and requirements of
Afghanistan and its people in providing technical and
financial assistance for the elections.

The SCO members support the draft resolution on
Afghanistan (A/68/L.11), prepared by a wide group of
sponsors. Its adoption by consensus would facilitate
enhancing the concerted efforts of the international
community in Afghanistan.

Secondly, to achieve peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan, we must fully support
ownership by and the leading role of the Afghan people.
We support the Afghan Government in its ongoing
efforts to accelerate capacity-building. We call upon
the international community to assist Afghanistan in
enhancing its sustainable-development capacity and
supporting the strengthening of its military and police
capacities with a view to taking over the responsibility
for safety and security and to achieving, as soon as
possible, the goal of Afghanistan being run by Afghans
themselves.

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on

Thirdly, we support the continuing support for the
national reconciliation process, owned and led by the

13-572517/29

A/68/PV.55

Afghans. We hope that the High Peace Council will play
an important role in promoting national reconciliation.
We welcome the positive contributions of regional States
in supporting Afghanistan’s national reconciliation
efforts. The international community should support
related efforts by the Afghan Government with a view
to ensuring a conducive environment to that end.
Fourthly, the comprehensive promotion of peaceful
reconstruction in Afghanistan requires the sustained
support and assistance of the international community.
China calls upon the parties concerned to genuinely
honour their assistance commitments to Afghanistan
and to support the country in implementing its national
development strategy, while respecting the priority
development areas defined by the Afghan Government.
China supports the leading role played by the
United Nations in coordinating all of the actors
involved in the international effort to support the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We hope that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will step
up its communication and cooperating efforts with the
Afghan Government.
Fifthly, China supports Afghanistan in improving
friendly, good-neighbourly relations with regional
States through regional cooperation and efforts to
actively respond to commonly faced challenges,
including terrorism and drug-related crimes. China will
host the fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul
Process next year to facilitate the continued positive
role of regional States in promoting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
Related regional initiatives must respect
Afghanistan’s sovereignty, take into account the
legitimate concerns of the States of the region, leverage
the roles of regional organizations such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and proceed on the basis of
broad consultation and consensus on the part of the
interested parties.
China and Afghanistan maintain a tradition
of friendly neighbourliness. We sincerely hope for
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
We have actively participated in the process of
peaceful reconstruction in Afghanistan. We have
provided assistance to the Government and the people
of Afghanistan to the best of our ability in areas
including infrastructure construction, resources,
energy development, training in human resources,
health, culture and education. China is ready to work

8/29

20/11/2013

together with the international community to continue
our positive contribution to peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan and the region.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): As we all know,
Afghanistan is at a historic juncture. And as we near
the end of 2013, we can reflect on the very real and
tangible progress that Afghanistan has made with its
security, political and economic transition.
It has now been five months since President Karzai
announced milestone 2013, with the start of the fifth
and final tranche of the transition to full Afghan
responsibility for security. The announcement marked
a major turning point for Afghanistan, with the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) taking the lead for
security across the county. The 2013 summer fighting
season was the first time in over a decade that the ANSF
has fought the insurgency largely independently. In the
lead, the ANSF has taken the fight to the insurgents,
demonstrating its ability to provide security for their
own people. In the southern province of Uruzgan,
where Australia has focused its own efforts, the ANSF
is on track to take over operational responsibility by
the end of this year. In line with the transition process
agreed by the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) in partnership with the Afghan Government,
Australia’s presence in Uruzgan will end next month.
Our drawdown in Uruzgan marks a change, but, of
course, does not end Australia’s engagement with
Afghanistan. In 2014, our military contribution will
include around 400 personnel, who will play training
and advisory roles in Kabul and Kandahar and, more
broadly, our diplomatic and aid engagement will
continue as a nationally oriented mission.
We know that there are still challenges ahead. A
diminished but persistent insurgency will continue to
seek to undermine peace and security in Afghanistan.
But a strong ANSF, with the continued support of the
international community, will provide security and
stability for the Afghan people during the transition
period.
There is a comprehensive international framework
to support not only Afghanistan’s security challenges
but also the development and economic challenges
through the transition and beyond. At the May 2012
Chicago summit, partners pledged to help sustain the
ANSF from 2015 on and to help support the estimated
annual ANSF budget of $4.1 billion. At Tokyo, in July
2012, partners pledged $16 billion in aid through 2015.

13-57251

20/11/2013

Further progress by the Afghan Government
against the reform priorities jointly identified and
agreed at the Tokyo Conference is obviously vital to
the Afghan Government’s goal of self-reliance and
to the international community’s ability to sustain
providing significant support to Afghanistan. The
Tokyo commitments will assist Afghanistan to
forge a stronger economy. With the drawdown of
forces, Afghanistan’s economic growth and revenue
generation will be crucial to supporting Afghanistan’s
institutional capacities and to fostering long-term
stability. We encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to implement much-needed economic reform,
foster the participation of women so as to maximize
growth, assist capacity-building in Afghan ministries
and support investment that will provide employment
and sustainable livelihoods.
We look forward to the holding of peaceful, credible
and inclusive presidential and provincial elections in
April 2014, as an indication of the progress Afghanistan
has achieved in the past decade. While technical
preparations for that election are more advanced than in
previous elections, it is true that significant challenges
remain, including maximizing voter participation,
especially the participation of women. Those issues
will need to be addressed proactively in order to ensure
a result that will be accepted by the Afghan people
themselves.
We continue to back an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process. As Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) on Taliban sanctions, we are conscious of
the role that the Taliban sanctions regime can play to
facilitate that process. Afghanistan’s neighbours also
have a crucial role to play in helping create a peaceful
and stable future for Afghanistan.
On human rights, Afghanistan needs to lock in
and build on the gains of the last decade, particularly
in relation to the rights of women and girls, as was
mentioned by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, this afternoon. We
continue to urge full implementation of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence against Women and encourage
the Afghan Government to finalize and implement a
national action plan on women, peace and security.
Gender inequality remains a significant barrier to
Afghan women’s active participation in Afghanistan’s
development. Striving to keep women and girls free
from discrimination and the threat of violence is

A/68/PV.55

integral to ensuring that lasting change and peace
endure in Afghanistan.
Finally, Australia recognizes the highly important
role of the United Nations in supporting Afghanistan’s
transition. As Security Council coordinator — or
penholder — on Afghanistan, we look forward to working
to secure a strong mandate with the backing of the
Afghan Government, a mandate that ensures that an
appropriately resourced United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan is able to fulfil that role.
In conclusion, we, along with the international
community, will continue to support Afghanistan at
the national level by providing funding for equitable
development assistance and security force sustainment.
However, national progress and reform is, ultimately,
for the Afghan Government and the people themselves
to determine. We are confident that the people will
seize the opportunity before them to shape their future
and create a secure and prosperous Afghanistan. It
is with that sense that Australia again sponsors draft
resolution A/68/L.11 and looks forward to its adoption
by consensus.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, the Russian Federation aligns
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Tajikistan on behalf of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO). The situation in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan remains the main
focus of the international community’s close attention,
particularly since the country is approaching the
important 2014 milestone, which will largely determine
the trend of events, not only in Afghanistan, but in the
entire region.
We must highlight the efforts of the Afghan
Government to adapt its military to counter the
terrorist threat. However, it is difficult to imagine a
fundamental improvement in the security situation
in Afghanistan. The actions of the opposition have
changed in character. We are particularly concerned by
the fact that an Afghan fingerprint is being detected
more frequently in actions carried out by Central Asian
extremist organizations. And all of that is taking place
against the backdrop of the final stages of completing
the transfer of security responsibilities from the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
It is unfortunate that participants in the international
coalition are often perceived as unjustifiably
accelerating the transfer of security responsibilities

13-572519/29

A/68/PV.55

to the Afghan National Security Forces without
considering the situation on the ground in specific
areas. To avoid any negative effects on the situation in
Afghanistan resulting from the withdrawal of the ISAF
forces, we must ensure that the drawdown of foreign
forces already under way will be compensated by a
strengthening of the military capacities of the Afghan
military. At the end of the day, the Afghans must be able
to independently control the security in their country so
as to effectively counteract extremist groups and drugs
crime.
The plans of the international partners regarding
the format, objectives and legal basis of the remaining
military forces in Afghanistan remain unclear. It
is our hope that we will soon receive an exhaustive
explanation in that connection. Let us speak plainly. It
is unacceptable that there should be a long-term foreign
military presence in Afghanistan that could be used to
inject forces into the neighbouring region, including
in the area under the responsibility of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) or against other
States.
After the culmination of the stabilization process,
a foreign military presence in Afghanistan will no
longer be necessary. Instead of being needed to combat
terrorism, such a presence could become a factor leading
to further irritation at the regional level. We suggest
that the future NATO mission in Afghanistan — if one
remains — should be based on a clear international
legal foundation. The reform of ISAF into a new
international mission without the necessary Security
Council mandate would lead to a serious problem in
terms of further logistical cooperation.
We support the efforts of the Afghan Government
to combat illegal drug production and trafficking, and
we pay tribute to the Afghan National Security Forces
and their anti-drug division, which have suffered
serious losses in fighting that scourge. We are still
puzzled as to why ISAF is not playing an active role in
that field. A source of serious concern is the increase
in the drug flows out of Afghanistan, which threaten
international peace and stability, given their close links
with the financing of terrorism.
Furthermore, that criminal business has a
transnational dimension. We recognize that Afghanistan
will not be able to deal on its own with the problem, the
scale of which has been steadily increasing. That fact
was clearly evidenced by recent data provided by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In 2013,
10/29

20/11/2013

the area dedicated to cultivating poppies for opium
grew by 36 per cent, drug production grew by 49 per
cent and the revenue from those criminal activities
grew by 31 per cent.
As an active member of the CSTO, we would like
to assure the Assembly that our organization is ready
to continue to provide Afghanistan with the necessary
support to combat the illegal production and distribution
of drugs, including by providing anti-drug training for
law enforcement officers through our national training
centres and by supplying them with the necessary
equipment and materials.
We are convinced that, in addition to law
enforcement programmes, we must also develop
socioeconomic programmes that will allow us remove
a significant part of the Afghan population from
involvement in criminal business dealings. We continue
to be seriously concerned about the numerous cases of
civilian deaths as a result of the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force by members of the armed
forces, including civilian deaths caused by the use of
drones.
We believe that the Government of Afghanistan
is adopting the correct approach with regard to
national reconciliation through dialogue between the
High Peace Council and representatives of the armed
opposition. We believe that such a dialogue can have a
positive impact only if Kabul takes a leadership role and
shows unconditional respect for the basic principles of
reconciliation and ensures that the militants lay down
their weapons and recognize the Afghan Constitution
and sever their connections with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations. We must also continue to
effectively support the Security Council’s sanction
regime, which remains the only effective counterterrorism tool.
In the context of the anticipated enhancement of the
United Nations role in the Afghan reconciliation after
the ISAF withdrawal, we believe that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan should remain the
main focal point for international efforts to stabilize
the situation in Afghanistan. We hope that during the
current preparations for the 2014 presidential elections,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will operate strictly within its mandate and maintain a
neutral stance.
Regional cooperation is increasingly playing a
stronger role in stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan

13-57251

20/11/2013

with a view to creating a peaceful, independent and
economically prosperous State. Afghanistan continues
to strengthen its ties with regional organizations.
Among them, the CSTO, which is currently presided
by the Russian Federation, plays a special role. Our
organization is taking effective measures to further
develop and strengthen cooperation with Afghanistan.
Through the Working Group on Afghanistan, under
the CSTO Council of Foreign Ministers, we are
analysing the situation with a view to considering
specific proposals to provide post-conflict support to
Afghanistan, including the fight against the drug and
terrorist threat coming from that country. To that end,
the CSTO conducts the annual anti-drug Operation
Channel.
In April, Afghanistan obtained the status of
observer in the CSTO Parliamentary Assembly. At
the same time, we believe that the so-called Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan can serve as a platform
for exchanging ideas, which can then be implemented
by the regional players, such as the CSTO and the SCO.
Russia is ready to participate in major regional
projects aimed at ensuring the sustainable economic
development of Central Asia and Afghanistan. In
particular, we support the implementation of the
Central Asia-South Asia 1000 project. We are also
ready to contribute to the successful implementation
of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas
pipeline project. We have consistently and respectfully
supported the efforts of the Afghan Government
to create the conditions needed for the long-term
stabilization of the country and the region. Friendly
partnership with Afghanistan is in the national interest
of our countries and in the interest of ensuring stability
and development for the region and the world at large.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
The Kyrgyz Republic supports the adoption of draft
resolution A/68/L.11 on Afghanistan, and we align
ourselves with the statement made by the representative
of Tajikistan on behalf of the States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). I would,
however, like to make a statement in my national
capacity.
The Kyrgyz Republic has always supported peace
and security in Afghanistan and the stable development
and prosperity of the brotherly Afghan people.
Therefore, during its presidency of the SCO and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in 2012-2013,

A/68/PV.55

Kyrgyzstan gave priority to enhancing cooperation
with Afghanistan. In that connection, President
Karzai participated in the SCO summit in Bishkek
on 13 September and had productive meetings with
President Atambaev. In addition, this year, Kyrgyzstan
opened its embassy in Kabul, which will help to
facilitate its bilateral cooperation.
Today, we are witnessing the beginning of the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and the transfer of responsibility to the
Afghan National Security Forces. We believe that the
transfer of responsibility for security should be gradual
and orderly so as to ensure stability. We must ensure that
the withdrawal of ISAF does not lead to Afghanistan
being taken over by extremist groups.
With regard to the withdrawal of the main contingent
of ISAF at the end of 2014, it is necessary to ensure that
there is a functioning transit centre at Manas airport in
Kyrgyzstan. We have fulfilled our obligations with a
view to ensuring support for anti-terrorism operations
in Afghanistan. For 12 years, we have made it possible to
supply military and humanitarian goods to Afghanistan
through the transit centre, which has helped to stabilize
the situation in Afghanistan and combat terrorism and
extremism.
Kyrgyzstan, together with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, is currently
planning to establish a regional investigation centre in
Bishkek, which will develop ideas for the development
of the Central Asian region and Afghanistan. In that
regard, we would like to call upon all interested parties
to take an active part in that process and to help finance
it.
On 10 October, an international conference was
held in Bishkek, entitled “Afghanistan 2014: Prospects
for development of the situation in the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan, challenges and threats to security in
Central Asia in the context of the withdrawal of the
International Security Assistance Force”. More than
130 representatives of international organizations
participated, including ministers for foreign affairs,
diplomatic representatives and experts from 24
countries. We call upon all States to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan, from
using it for geopolitical purposes and from invading its
territory.
We are particularly concerned by the ongoing
problem of narcotic drugs and the increased threat that

13-5725111/29

A/68/PV.55

represents in Afghanistan. It is a serious threat to the
national security of both Afghanistan and the countries
of the Eurasian continent as a whole, including
Kyrgyzstan, as one of the branches of the so-called
northern route, one of the main drug trade routes in the
region.
Despite Kyrgyzstan’s consistent anti-drug policy,
we have not yet been able to fully stop the flow of
drugs from Afghanistan. That situation is aggravated
by the fact that the revenues from drug production
and trade are a major source of funding for terrorist
and extremist groups, which, in turn, poses a threat to
the overall peace and security in the country and the
region as a whole. Therefore, one of the most important
challenges is to step up joint efforts to counteract the
production and black market sales of drugs, both in
Afghanistan and around it, by establishing, with the
United Nations acting as a coordinator, an integrated
system to establish anti-drug belts.
Efforts to achieve national reconciliation are
among the main preconditions for ensuring lasting
peace in Afghanistan. We suggest that the process of
reconciliation should be implemented by the Afghan
people themselves and in the interest of all Afghans.
A comprehensive peace process should be open to all
interested parties that are ready to reject violence and
break off their links with international terrorism, and
respect the Constitution of Afghanistan.
In order to establish stability in the country, it is
extremely important to implement a decisive political
step, namely, to successfully hold the presidential and
regional elections in 2014. It is our hope that the election
of the President will, for the first time in the history
of the country, lead to a transfer of power through a
peaceful democratic process. It is important that the
elections take place in a transparent manner and meet
the interests of all ethnic groups in Afghanistan. That
will provide a solid foundation for the further stable
and sustainable development of the country.
As experience has shown, without the support of
the international community Afghanistan will find it
difficult to address its social and economic problems.
We believe that involving Afghanistan in regional
cooperation and broadening its trade and economic
relations with neighbouring States is key to ensuring
the stable development of the country, as well as
sustainable peace and trust in the region. The Kyrgyz
Republic is a participant in such regional organizations
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
12/29

20/11/2013

Collective Security Treaty Organization and is ready to
make its contribution to that process.
We support the Istanbul Process and the Heart of
Asia conferences. We participate in working groups on
confidence-building measures and are ready to help to
implement regional projects. It is important to carry out
large-scale joint projects in the export of electrical power
and the building of transport infrastructure in the form
of roads and railways. We are ready to expand trade
and economic cooperation and develop infrastructure
projects, including the export of electricity from
Afghanistan as part of the electricity transmission line
project between Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan
and Pakistan, known as CASA-1000, and through
the trilateral agricultural consortium KyrgyzstanTajikistan-Afghanistan with the support of the United
Nations.
We support Afghanistan’s joining the agreement
on cross-border transport within the framework of
the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation. We
are supporting the construction of an international
railroad connecting China, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Afghanistan. We believe that Iran and Pakistan could
also take part in that project to build an international
transport corridor that would extend into Iran and
Pakistan.
In conclusion, allow me once again to assure the
Assembly of the determined support of the Kyrgyz
Republic to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity of Afghanistan, in the interest of establishing
peace and stability in that brotherly country.
Mr. Waheed (Maldives): First of all, we would
like to express our appreciation to the President for
convening today’s important debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. We also commend the Secretary-General
on the recent comprehensive update provided in his
report (A/68/609) and on his activities and those of
his Special Representative, Mr. Ján Kubiš, conducted
both in person and through his leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The situation in Afghanistan is one that concerns
the entire region. To remain in a constant state of civil
war, to lack productive capacity and to be confronted
with one of the world’s most extensive and debilitating
narcotic production operations is to face seemingly
insurmountable odds. The Maldives stands here today
to reiterate our brotherly affection and call upon the
international community to maintain its support and

13-57251

20/11/2013

commitments to the reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan.
Like other speakers before me, my delegation
commends the major milestone reached on 18 June of
this year towards attaining a sustainable peace with
the final step of having Afghanistan’s security forces
assume full responsibility for their own nation’s security.
That and next year’s presidential elections present
two occasions of the utmost importance to efforts to
ensure the success of the democratic transition and the
country’s long-term, peaceful future. We believe that
it is vital that both processes be Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led, and that both be transparent and inclusive.
In that light, the Maldives welcomes efforts aimed
at strengthening Afghanistan’s security forces, while
noting the shortage of some vital resources. We further
note with concern the increase in incidents that threaten
security. We hope that the continued assistance of the
international community will be forthcoming at this
vital time, ensuring that the Afghan forces are fully
equipped to fulfil their responsibility after the gradual
withdrawal of foreign troops. We further commend the
continued capacity-building of the Afghan National
Police, including Afghanistan’s first community
policing conference, to be held on 25 June, where they
will discuss how to strengthen the relationship between
the Afghan Police and local communities.
The work of the United Nations aimed at delivering
services and developing capacity in Afghanistan is
and will continue to be very important. The Maldives
commends UNAMA’s efforts to increase its efficiency
and maintain its work despite an 18.7 per cent reduction
in funding in 2014. We also congratulate the United
Nations Mine Action Programme in Afghanistan,
which, according to its most recent report, will have
cleared over 1,900 minefields in the country. We take
note of the Programme’s call stressing that the recent
funding cuts endanger Afghanistan’s commitment to
becoming mine-free by 2023. We again express our
hope that international assistance to Afghanistan at this
critical time does not continue to waver.
The Maldives believes that increased regional
integration is of the utmost importance and contributes
to confidence-building, which greatly benefits the
stability and prosperity of the country. In that regard,
the Heart of Asia conferences and the Istanbul Process,
supported by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC), represent vital initiatives.

A/68/PV.55

Afghanistan joined SAARC in 2007, which was one of
its first steps towards larger regional integration, and
we are happy to see that it is continuing along that path.
The Maldives is greatly concerned by the recent
data from the report of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime on Afghanistan’s opium production.
Published the week before last, it reflects a new record
in opium production in Afghanistan. The drug trade
and related transnational organized crime presents a
major challenge to stability, not only for Afghanistan,
of course, but for the entire region.
The 2014 presidential and provincial elections
in Afghanistan remain key for a fair, peaceful and
sustainable transition process. The Maldives continues
to stress that we believe that the process must be
fully Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. We therefore
commend the Afghan Government for adopting a legal
framework for the upcoming elections, although it
should be noted that holding democratic elections does
not automatically instil democratic values and that it
will take time to nourish those values. Ownership of
the process and broad participation are important to the
achievement of those goals.
We believe that another part of democratic values
is ensuring the rights of minorities and the rights of
women. In that regard, we welcome Afghanistan’s first
progress report on its implementation of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. Although the current situation with
respect to violence against women remains deeply
concerning, the newly found accountability will give
rise to further intensive efforts to implement that
important Convention.
The Maldives, through our regional and multilateral
support mechanisms, remains committed to ensuring
the peaceful development of a safe, secure, prosperous
and peaceful Afghan nation. We hope that the
international community will learn from the mistakes
of the past and will continue to support Afghanistan in
its efforts to build resilience for a brighter future.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, my delegation would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and other international agencies and civil
society for playing vital roles in building a peaceful and
democratic Afghanistan.

13-5725113/29

A/68/PV.55

The country is now at a critical juncture as
it undertakes the steps for security and political
transition. A significant milestone was reached with
the launch of the final phase of the security transition
in June. The Afghan National Security Forces are now
taking full responsibility for all security operations
throughout the country. At the same time, we are
witnessing worrisome trends. The number of terrorist
attacks has risen, causing heavy civilian casualties
and underscoring the fact that continued international
support for the Afghan armed forces and the police will
be vital as the transition moves forward.
My delegation recognizes that the transition is
not only a security process, but also requires the full
assumption of Afghan leadership and ownership in
the area of governance. In that regard, the presidential
and provincial elections in 2014 will be an important
landmark in the country’s political transition. We
believe that the recent adoption of key electoral
laws will facilitate the establishment of a firm legal
framework for fair and credible elections.
We also welcome the timely appointments of the
members of the two electoral commissions. With only
five months remaining until the elections, the continued
support of UNAMA will be crucial in consolidating the
legitimacy and integrity of the process.
National reconciliation, owned by Afghans and led
by Afghans, will be another important step in moving
the political transition forward. We hope that further
progress will be made in the peace negotiations with
all the relevant stakeholders, with the aim of achieving
sustainable and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
The long-term support of the international
community is dependent upon the Afghan
Government’s progress in key areas under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework, such as the
promotion of human rights, especially those of women.
In that regard, we urge the Afghan Government to
enhance its efforts by fully implementing the law on the
elimination of violence against women and ensuring the
independence of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, among other measures.
The sustained support of the international
community will be vital to Afghanistan’s long-term
stability. Furthermore, it is important that UNAMA
continue to play a central role in the coordination of
international efforts as Afghanistan moves forward
with its transition. Today’s draft resolution (A/68/L.11),

14/29

20/11/2013

to be adopted by consensus, embodies the political will
of all Member States to support the Afghan people in
their political and national reconstruction process. In
conclusion, the Korean Government will continue to
support capacity-building efforts for Afghanistan. By
pledging to provide $500 million to that end over the
period of 2011 to 2015, we are working closely with
the Afghan Government and its people in realizing a
prosperous, stable and democratic Afghanistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan is pleased
to sponsor this year’s draft resolution (A/68/L.11) on
Afghanistan. We thank Germany for steering the
negotiations on this important draft resolution, which
comes at a defining moment as Afghanistan negotiates
momentous political, security and economic transitions
in 2014. The draft resolution is the international
community’s expression of support for Afghanistan as
it intensifies its national endeavours to move towards
peace, stability and prosperity.
The year 2014 marks a watershed for Afghanistan.
While Afghanistan’s real progress over the past decade
is indeed something to celebrate, it is also time for
reflection. The gains must not be wasted or reversed.
Military withdrawal should not be a synonym for
reduced focus. Afghanistan must not be abandoned
again. History has taught us that abandonment will be
bad for Afghanistan, the region and the world. This
time, abandonment is not even an option. Strenuous
efforts are being made to ensure that the planned
transitions lead to a stronger and stable Afghanistan
and that the neighbours and friends of Afghanistan play
a constructive role to achieve that goal.
In order to ensure success, it is important that
the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan
succeed, that Afghan security forces fully shoulder
their responsibilities and that economic reconstruction
takes off. There should be no vacuums in the political,
strategic, security or economic spheres. The war should
come to an end, terrorism must be defeated and national
unity should create conditions for internal stability and
regional cooperation. There are some encouraging
signs in that direction.
The elections planned for next year are an important
milestone. A peaceful, inclusive and participatory
electoral process would consolidate democracy,
reinforce the rule of law and strengthen norms of
broad representation and accountability. We welcome
the announcement made today about the final list of
candidates by the Independent Election Commission.
13-57251

20/11/2013

The most crucial ingredient in Afghan consensus is
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and national
reconciliation process. An all-inclusive, broad-based
dialogue should strive to bring together and reflect the
interests of all groups, political forces and segments of
society.
We know that a military solution is not a panacea
for Afghanistan or a guarantor of long-term stability.
The Doha initiative, regrettably, did not succeed. But
we must not lose hope. That thread must be picked up
again to resume talks — but talks that are conducted in
good faith and lead to results.
The transfer of security responsibility to Afghan
forces earlier this year paves the way for the Afghan
Government to exercise its writ and control over
its territory. Recent independent reports suggest
that Afghan security forces have enhanced their
occupational and operational capability and that NATO
and the United States will continue to play a supportive
role in the post-2014 period. That also reinforces public
confidence in the Afghan security and institutional
structures designed to ensure stabilization.
There is apprehension about the possibility that
the Afghan economy may suffer after the withdrawal
of troops. So far, the economy has been largely run
as or perceived as a war economy, which has been
bolstered by a massive international presence. Pledges
for investment and reconstruction have either not
materialized or the available funding has not been
assimilated.
The international community and the people of
Afghanistan have the means and an opportunity to avert
an economic downturn. Economic reconstruction needs
to be stepped up. Pledges of support must be fulfilled.
Capital, know-how and international entrepreneurs and
businesses must be locked in to maintain economic
momentum for growth.
Our worst fear is that an economic slowdown in
Afghanistan post-2014 may result in more refugees
wanting to move to Pakistan. We would not be able to
absorb them. Afghanistan has done a commendable
job in receiving and assimilating millions of refugees
in the past 10 years, but we still have nearly 3 million
registered and undocumented refugees on Pakistani
soil. In the past 33 years, we have hosted more than
5 million refugees.
Our decision to extend the refugees’ legal
authorization until the end of 2015 is a clear indication

A/68/PV.55

of Pakistan’s commitment to supporting Afghans in
distress. However, the early, honourable, voluntary
and sustainable return of refugees must continue.
The support of the United Nations system and the
international community is critical in that regard. We
strongly urge donor countries and Afghanistan to make
the return and rehabilitation of refugees part of the
planned economic reconstruction.
One of the primary objectives of our Afghan
policy is peace and stability in Afghanistan. We are
convinced that without sustainable peace and stability
in the country, there would be no peace and stability in
Pakistan and in the region. Pakistan and Afghanistan
have a symbiotic relationship, and their destinies
are intertwined, irrevocably and for all time. Our
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, is making conscious and
resolute efforts to forge closer ties with Afghanistan,
oppose immediate security threats, strengthen bilateral
economic cooperation and shape an environment for
regional connectivity.
In the peace and reconciliation process, Pakistan
has no favourites. We will only play a facilitating role.
The people of Afghanistan should be in the driver’s seat
and be the masters of their own destiny. We earnestly
hope that Afghans will unite for the peace, prosperity
and development of their great country.
It is important to have realistic expectations
about Pakistan’s role. Pakistan can exercise influence,
but it does not control the Taliban. We have released
46 Taliban prisoners, including Mullah Baradar, and
have provided safe passage to those considered useful
for the process by the parties. We are encouraging
the Taliban to return to the negotiating table. We will
continue to play our supportive and constructive role.
We are keen to develop and build a deeper and
broader bilateral relationship with Afghanistan.
Positive developments have taken place in that regard.
President Karzai’s visit to Islamabad in August this
year and his wide-ranging and productive engagement
with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif were a manifestation
of the strong commitment of the two countries to
strengthening their relations.
Our countries are bound by ties of kinship, faith
and history. We are working to implement the vision
of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif for a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood. That engagement was
advanced through a trilateral summit in London last

13-5725115/29

A/68/PV.55

month, which was attended by Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif, President Hâmid Karzai and Prime Minister
David Cameron. We thank the United Kingdom for
facilitating the dialogue. I also thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, Afghanistan’s Permanent Representative
to the United Nations, for his warm words earlier today
about the commitment and cooperation of Pakistan,
which he said is vital to the advancement of the peace
and reconciliation process.
We are working on a number of projects to
reinforce regional trade and construct energy and
communications corridors. We want early fruition of
energy projects such as the electricity-transmission
line between Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and
Pakistan known as CASA-1000 and the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline, which
have significant dividends for Afghanistan and other
neighbouring countries. Similarly, the building of road
and rail links and other infrastructure projects, which
are either under completion or on the anvil, will boost
our economies and create broader synergies for the
region.
Pakistan is according importance to developing
and strengthening the health and education sectors
in Afghanistan. We have built colleges, universities
and hospitals in Afghanistan and given scholarships
to Afghan students to study in Pakistani educational
institutions. We have contributed more than $400 million
to Afghanistan’s reconstruction.
Insecurity is the bane of Afghanistan’s and
Pakistan’s common dream of a prosperous future. In
that context, securing borders is the most important
step. Pakistan’s legitimate security interests must be
recognized and respected. We must not allow our sacred
relationship to be manipulated by non-State actors.
We need more aggressive policing and surveillance
of the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. That would deter
terrorists and extremists and the masterminds behind
organized crime, narcotics trafficking and illicit arms
proliferation. A visit by the Afghan Interior Minister
would help address the issue of border management.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
has recorded a 36 per cent increase in poppy cultivation
in Afghanistan this year. That is extremely disturbing.
An integrated and comprehensive response to the drug
issue is required. The United Nations system should
continue to play its important role in that regard.

16/29

20/11/2013

We believe that the United Nations should play
an enhanced role in rebuilding Afghanistan. The visit
of Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson to Kabul
earlier this year underlined the need for United Nations
support to strengthen Afghan capacity and resilience.
While the Organization aligns its activities with
Afghan Government priorities, United Nations support
should be channelled to the political, security and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration fields.
UNAMA’s mandate should be carefully calibrated next
year in order to adjust to the changing milieu.
As I said earlier, Pakistan’s relations with
Afghanistan are driven by a sense of shared destiny.
Our cooperation spans the entire spectrum of relations.
We are committed to a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
No country has suffered more than Pakistan from
instability in Afghanistan, and no country stands to
gain more from peace and stability in that country. We
are confident that the valiant people of Afghanistan
will surmount the current challenges to usher in a
brighter and more prosperous future for themselves
and for the region. Pakistan will be there to celebrate
that transformation with the brotherly people of
Afghanistan.
Ms. Alowais (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The United Arab Emirates affirms its support
for the draft resolution before the General Assembly
today on the situation in Afghanistan (A/68/L.11),
particularly with respect to the completion of the
transitional process and the advent of 2014, which
symbolizes a new beginning for the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and its people, defined by the
restoration of security and stability, the development of
governmental institutions, the holding of elections and
the achievement of sustainable economic development.
The United Arab Emirates commends the progress
made in Afghanistan over the past decade. Despite
this, there is still a dire need for the international
community to stand by the Afghan people through
the important stages ahead and to commit to the
outcomes of the conferences held in Kabul, Bonn,
Tokyo, Istanbul, Lisbon, Chicago and elsewhere. In that
connection, we reaffirm our long-term commitment to
Afghanistan, hoping that its security and stability will
lead to security and stability in the region, including
the United Arab Emirates. It is essential for the United
Nations to continue working in Afghanistan through
the commendable efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative at the head of the United

13-57251

20/11/2013

Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The role
of the United Nations in supporting an Afghan-led
political process must continue.
Although Afghan security forces were given
full responsibility five months ago, the bulk of the
responsibility for assisting Afghan forces through
training and funding lies with the international
community. The United Arab Emirates strongly
condemns the continuing terror attacks committed
by extremist groups, which have claimed the lives of
innocent civilians, including women and children.
In the context of the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates is co-chairing,
with the Republic of Turkey and the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, a working group on the implementation of
confidence-building measures to counter terrorism. In
that framework, the United Arab Emirates has hosted
fruitful discussions on ways to combat terrorism at the
Hedayah Centre in Abu Dhabi, the first international
centre of excellence for countering violent extremism.
Moreover, let us not forget the impact of
anti-personnel landmines and explosive remnants of
war on innocent civilians in Afghanistan. Since 2011,
the United Arab Emirates has allocated $25.8 million
to support mine-clearance operations in Kandahar, one
of the areas that are most affected by mines. Those
operations, which have continued for the past two
years, have cleared approximately 50 per cent of the
hazardous mined areas, contributing to the employment
of more than 1,000 people and providing access to land
for agriculture and infrastructure development.
That demonstrates how security and stability
in Afghanistan are key elements in advancing
socioeconomic development, ensuring access to
aid by all sectors of Afghan society. In 2011, the
United Arab Emirates set up a standing committee
for humanitarian and development assistance in
Afghanistan, consolidating all the efforts of donors and
charitable institutions in that country. The assistance
provided by the United Arab Emirates amounted to
$267.3 million from 2009 to 2012, including projects
such as building Kandahar Airport, completing a road
leading to Helmand province, and providing food and
aid to orphans and persons with special needs.
The United Arab Emirates is working with Member
States and other institutions on joint projects for the
development of the Afghan economy, such as a joint

A/68/PV.55

venture with the United Kingdom to build a highway
linking northern and southern Afghanistan and a joint
venture with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to
vaccinate children in Afghanistan, for which the United
Arab Emirates has allocated $33 million from 2011 to
2013.
Regional cooperation is one of the key pillars for
ensuring security, stability, social and economic growth
in Afghanistan by combating terrorism, fighting the
drug trade and repatriating Afghan refugees. In that
regard, Member States and regional organizations must
redouble their efforts to accelerate the implementation
of confidence-building measures and regional dialogue,
particularly between Afghanistan and the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, since the security and stability
of the two countries depend on both sides. The United
Arab Emirates commends the positive efforts of both
countries to strenghten cooperation, and attaches
particular importance to that matter.
The United Arab Emirates supports the peace,
reconciliation and reintegration process led by
Afghanistan through the High Peace Council, which
seeks to eliminate violence and to ensure respect for
the rights of all Afghans, especially Afghan women.
The United Arab Emirates condemns all attacks on
women. To that end, at the Heart of Asia ministerial
conference in Almaty, Kazakhstan, the United Arab
Emirates announced a two-year, $20-million project
to train Afghan imams, which was launched in May.
The objective of the project is to raise awareness of
moderate Islam in order to safeguard respect for the
rights of all Afghans.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): It gives me great
pleasure to address agenda item 37 on the situation in
Afghanistan, particularly because I served as the first
Special Representative of Japan to Afghanistan and
Pakistan in 2009 and 2010. I wish to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Wittig of Germany and his
colleagues, who ably led the consultations throughout
its entire process. I also thank Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his constructive engagement towards
achieving a consensus on draft resolution A/68/L.11.
Japan is pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution
before us today.
I would like to pay tribute to all the men and
women in Afghanistan who have devoted themselves
to rebuilding their country in the most difficult
circumstances. I also pay tribute to all the citizens of

13-5725117/29

A/68/PV.55

States Members of the United Nations, including Japan,
who have been working to enhance the stability and
development of Afghanistan.
The year 2014 will be a critical juncture for the
future sustainability of Afghanistan, since the country
is expected to achieve concrete results through the
presidential election and by transitioning towards
security. In that regard, we all hope that the Organization,
in particular the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, will play an increasingly important role
in 2014 and beyond in supporting the Government’s
efforts to meet its development goals and achieve
lasting peace. Japan will continue to lend its support to
the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Today I would like to address some key issues
and challenges that Japan believes the Government of
Afghanistan must tackle.
First and foremost, the upcoming presidential and
provincial elections must give strong legitimacy to the
new Government that is to be established. The next
President will take over the heavy duties of President
Karzai, who has tirelessly led the country towards
lasting peace and stability for more than 11 years. In
order to achieve strong legitimacy for the Government,
it is first imperative for Afghanistan to ensure a fair
and transparent election process, starting from the
preparations stage. Secondly, the election results should
be a reflection of the will of the entire population. To
that end, it is indispensable for the Government to
encourage full participation by all eligible voters.
In that light, Japan commends the important progress
made by Afghanistan regarding voter registration,
the adoption of the electoral legal framework and the
establishment of key electoral institutions, to name a
few. However, security still remains key to ensuring
wider participation. Also crucial are the processes
and logistics, such as the voting process itself and the
counting and announcement of final results. Those are
also important challenges.
Last but not least, Afghanistan must hold the
elections in April 2014, as currently scheduled according
to its Constitution. Japan, as a long-term partner of
Afghanistan, is ready to assist with the Government’s
endeavours. We support the work of the Independent
Election Commission through the second phase of the
Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow
project. We also look into joining the election observer

18/29

20/11/2013

mission in order to have a constructive impact on the
election process.
Now I would like to touch upon what we expect from
Afghanistan, in particular from the future Government,
on important challenges.
The Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan held in
July 2012 demonstrated once again the strong will and
commitments by both the Afghan Government and
the international community. The reliable and timely
implementation of the mutual commitments under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is the key
driving instrument towards a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. It is therefore critical that the duties for
implementing the commitments by Afghanistan be
properly handed over to the new Government. In that
regard, I would like to renew the call for Afghanistan
to take sustained and accelerated action to deliver on
its commitments as agreed at the Conference, including
those made in the areas of governance, the rule of law,
human rights and public finances.
In order to help Afghanistan’s efforts, Japan has
been delivering assistance in a faithful and generous
manner. Since January 2002, when Japan hosted the
Tokyo International Conference on Reconstruction
Assistance to Afghanistan, we have contributed a total
of $5 billion for the country’s developments efforts.
We look forward to seeing tangible progress in that
regard at the ministerial meeting to be co-hosted by
Afghanistan and the United Kingdom next year.
I would like to conclude my statement by
emphasizing the importance of an Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process.
Needless to say, Afghanistan bears full responsibility
for advancing the peace process in order to make the
dividends of the security transition irreversible. Japan
calls for sustained political determination by the
Afghan Government.
I would also like to point out that constructive
engagement by neighbouring countries plays a vital
role in the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process. In that regard, it is very encouraging to see the
intensive Afghanistan-Pakistan dialogue over the past
year, as the Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan
and Pakistan mentioned today. At the Japan-Pakistan
summit meeting held in September here in New York,
Prime Minister Abe was assured by Prime Minister
Sharif that Pakistan’s positive involvement would
continue.

13-57251

20/11/2013

We fervently hope to see the Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process supported by mutual trust
among its neighbouring countries. We also hope that
it will bear concrete results in the near future and that
all people of Afghanistan and the region will enjoy the
dividends of peace.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join other Member States
in sponsoring this draft resolution (A/68/L.11) on the
situation in Afghanistan. The draft resolution reflects
the international community’s continuing commitment
to supporting the Afghan people in building a stable,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan through the
2014 transition and beyond.
Over the past 12 years, the livelihoods of the Afghan
people have fundamentally improved. In 2001, there
were only 900,000 Afghan children in school, and all of
them were boys. Today nearly 8 million students are in
school, and more than a third of them are girls. Maternal
mortality was 1,600 per 100,000 births; today it is down
by 80 per cent. Life expectancy for the average Afghan
was 42 years; today it is 62 years and rising. Nine per
cent of Afghans had access to basic health care; today
60 per cent of Afghans live within an hour of basic
health services. There was only one television station,
and it was owned by the Government; today there are
75 stations, and all but two are privately owned. There
were virtually no cell phones in the country in 2001;
today, there are 18 million, covering about 90 per cent
of residential areas. That progress was only possible as
a result of the sacrifices of the Afghan people and their
international supporters.
We are now at a critical moment in Afghanistan’s
history. Last summer, the Afghan National Security
Forces for the first time took the lead in providing
security across the entire country. Afghanistan’s
military and law enforcement are growing stronger
and more capable by the day. Even as the security
transition reaches its final stages, the United States
and our international partners remain committed to
helping the Afghan National Security Forces become
an independent force that is able to secure its own
people and the public trust. That is a commitment that
will extend well beyond 2014.
The single most important milestone in
Afghanistan’s political transition during the next year
will be the peaceful transfer of power from President
Karzai to a democratically elected successor. It is

A/68/PV.55

imperative that the elections be held on time and result
in an outcome that is perceived as legitimate by all
segments of Afghan society. While legitimate elections
by necessity entail competition and debate, we hope
that the upcoming elections in Afghanistan will
represent a unifying moment for the country. Afghans
also recognize that continued international assistance
is contingent upon credible, inclusive and transparent
elections that reflect the will and aspirations of the
Afghan people.
We are encouraged by the hundreds of Afghan
women who are running for positions on the provincial
councils thoughout the country, and we welcome the
support of the United Nations and our international
partners in strengthening the rights and the role of
Afghan women. Societies where women are safe and
empowered to exercise their rights and to move their
communities forward are more prosperous and more
stable, not occasionally but always. Protecting the gains
made for Afghan women is not up to women alone; it
requires engaging civil society, including men, women
and minorities.
While the success of the political transition next
year is essential to the future stability of Afghanistan,
it alone is not sufficient to end the conflict. The
United States firmly believes that an Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation effort is the surest way to end the
violence and to bring lasting stability to Afghanistan
and the region.
The security and political transitions that I have
described will succeed only if they are matched by the
broader commitment of the Government of Afghanistan
to reform its economy and unlock the economic
potential of the Afghan people. Those reforms should
include a comprehensive approach to combating the
narcotics trade that is integrated into the broader efforts
to support governance, the rule of law and economic
development.
Furthermore, unlocking Afghanistan’s potential as
a waypoint in regional trade between Central and South
Asia will also unlock new economic opportunities
across the region. That is the crux of the new Silk
Road vision, which is based on the premise that greater
economic cooperation is critical to achieving stability
and peace across the region.
Finally, the United Nations has played and will
continue to play a critical role in Afghanistan. In
particular, we commend United Nations support for

13-5725119/29

A/68/PV.55

Afghanistan’s 2014 elections. United Nations support
for regional diplomacy, the political process and
coordination between the Government of Afghanistan
and donors in implementing the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework will also be essential as
Afghanistan looks towards 2014 and beyond.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, let me thank
the President for organizing this discussion. I also avail
myself of this opportunity to commend the German
delegation, and Ambassador Wittig personally, for
coordinating the intergovernmental negotiations in an
excellent manner, which has brought us to the annual
draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan. As in
the past several years, India is happy to sponsor draft
resolution A/68/L.11, which has traditionally been
adopted by consensus.
Afghanistan is undergoing a significant period
of transition, which includes the security, political
and economic dimensions. The progress made on the
technical preparations for the presidential elections is
a testimony to the resolve of the people of Afghanistan
to ensure a smooth political transition. The key to
successful elections in 2014 is an election whose
outcome is acceptable to the people of Afghanistan.
The presidential elections will be yet another
significant step towards the political reconstruction
effort in Afghanistan and must continue to be Afghanled, Afghan-owned and, let me add, Afghan-managed.
The rationale behind our addition of the word Afghanmanaged is that we want to stress that the destiny of
Afghanistan is in the hands of the Afghan people. It also
symbolizes the distance that the people of Afghanistan
have covered in the process of transition and
transformation. It will be the third democratic election
in Afghanistan, which is a significant achievement
for Afghanistan and a sign of the maturity of its new
political system. The international community must
strongly support the Afghan authorities’ preparations
in that endeavour and, at the same time, resist any
outside effort to derail the process.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile. The number of civilian casualties and targeted
killings has risen. The condemnable attack on the Indian
Consulate in Jalalabad on 3 August, which led to the
injury of several Afghan security personnel who were
guarding the Consulate and to the killing of several
innocent Afghan citizens, including 10 children, is
another example of the tenuous security environment
in Afghanistan.
20/29

20/11/2013

As we stated previously, India does not have an
exit policy in Afghanistan. India will not be deterred
by such attacks. We do not see that attack as aimed
only against India but also against the efforts of the
Afghan people to overcome the tragic consequences of
the past several decades of war and conflict. I would
like to reiterate our commitment to stand by the Afghan
people and their security personnel, who have shown
exemplary courage in protecting them.
It has been seen that most terrorist attacks in
Afghanistan originate from beyond its borders by
groups closely allied to Al-Qaida and its affiliates. We
would like to reiterate that we must be continuously
watchful of the designs of such terrorist organizations.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
must remain proactive and attentive in its listing and
delisting process of individuals and entities for targeted
measures. The role of the international community in
that regard is critical, not only in providing input to
the Sanctions Committee and other related counterterrorism entities but also in continuing to support the
efforts of the Afghan people to address the security and
terrorist challenges that they face.
In that regard, concerted action is also needed
to isolate and to destroy the syndicate of terrorism,
which includes elements of the Taliban, Al-Qaida,
Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and extremist
groups. It is therefore extremely important that
the transition security plan take into account the
threats posed by those terrorist organizations and
complement the security architecture in Afghanistan.
The drawdown of troops and its implication for the
security arrangements need to be carefully assessed
and appropriate measures must be taken to ensure the
safety and security of the Afghan people.
The time has come for the international community
to reassess the role that it wishes to play in Afghanistan’s
internal political process. In that regard, the issue of
the renewed mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) should be discussed.
Afghanistan has reached a considerable level of political
maturity with the huge political reconstruction effort in
that country. We applaud the role played by UNAMA,
along with other agencies of the United Nations system,
in the political, humanitarian and development spheres
in Afghanistan over the past decade. However, we
believe that we should take note of the maturity of the
political process in Afghanistan. We should therefore
define UNAMA’s political mandate to ensure that it

13-57251

20/11/2013

keeps its focus on supporting the institutions of politics
rather than the political process itself, which must be
left to Afghanistan’s own leaders.
We also believe that UNAMA must expand its
humanitarian and developmental role through better
delivery of assistance in Afghanistan, since the
United Nations is uniquely placed in its access to the
remotest and most isolated communities in the country.
Improving infrastructure, along with access to basic
services, such as health care, education and nutrition,
on a regular basis for all Afghans would create a vital
space for the new Afghan political system to mature
and take firm root in Afghan society. That must
complement and supplement Afghan State institutions
and their initiatives in those spheres, since it is not
capacity substitution but capacity-building that we seek
to achieve in Afghanistan. It would also be useful if
we undertake a serious assessment of the future role
of UNAMA by learning from its experiences and
from the views of other Member States. The objective
should be to see how best the international community
can realistically assist the Afghan people in a fastchanging political scenario. The assessment of issues
facing UNAMA must take into account the problems
of coherence in performing its mandated activities and
the related duplication of resources and a higher cost of
programmes.
Mr. Touré (Guinea), Vice-President, took the Chair.
As Afghanistan moves towards 2014, it would
be entering a new era of development and progress.
Needless to say, the international community’s support
and constant encouragement for Afghanistan will
be critical in that transition. We would like to offer
assurances that India will remain steadfast in its
support to Afghanistan during the period of transition
and thereafter. India once again reiterates its support for
an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled
process of transition and development.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
and would like to make a few remarks in a national
capacity.
We welcome the draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/68/L.11) and support its adoption by
consensus. In doing so, we confirm our appreciation
for the substantial contribution the United Nations
is making to the stabilization of the country. Italy
values the continued efforts that the Secretary-General

A/68/PV.55

and his Special Representative are promoting in that
aim and reiterates its full and convinced support for
their work. We also commend the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission (UNAMA) in leading and
coordinating the civilian efforts of the international
community, whose importance will grow as the military
commitment gradually diminishes.
The term “countdown” epitomizes the current
international debate on Afghanistan, expressing not
only the concerns but especially the expectations and
confidence we partners have with regard to the crucial
deadlines Afghanistan must face between now and the
end of 2014. In that period, the country must complete
the transition process, the decade of transformation
begins, and the International Security Assistance
Force will turn into a resolute support mission. First,
however, come the presidential elections of April 2014,
which will mark, for the first time in Afghan history,
a handoff from one Head of State to another through a
democratic process. Those critical junctures will outline
the features of domestic balances in Afghanistan and
the nature of the country’s future relationship with the
international community.
In the lead-up to the elections, the United Nations
needs to strengthen its support for the Afghan
institutions to enable them to gradually take ownership
of the civil and economic development of the country. It
is Italy’s hope that until the new Head of State has been
proclaimed, the Kabul authorities will undertake every
action needed to guarantee an inclusive, transparent
and credible electoral process and that there will be
common rules of the game that protect and represent
the many facets of civil society, as well as the various
political parties present in the country.
The gradual definition of an institutional framework
to oversee the elections, thanks to the approval of the
new election law and the forthcoming publication of the
final list of presidential candidates, indicates that the
Afghan authorities are moving in the right direction.
A prerequisite for the proper and orderly conduct of
the presidential and provincial elections is security, a
responsibility of the Afghan National Security Forces,
which have made steady progress in the challenging
daily task of controlling the territory.
Italy reiterates its conviction that there can be
no stabilization of Afghanistan without domestic
reconciliation, nor can this stability be lasting without
the genuine and heartfelt contribution of regional
stakeholders. Italy thus confirms its support for the

13-5725121/29

A/68/PV.55

peace process, recognizing the full ownership of the
Afghan authorities, and expects that there will be no
backsliding from gains that have been made in the
areas of democracy, civil rights and gender equality or
concessions to terrorism.
Italy is confident that the recent establishment
of a more cordial climate between Afghanistan and
Pakistan portends positive developments in the
inter-Afghan dialogue and in regional cooperation as
a whole. In the latter regard, implementation of the
confidence-building measures of the Istanbul “Heart
of Asia” process, which Italy supports and encourages,
could make a significant contribution.
In closing, Italy wishes to express its appreciation
of the important space that the Afghanistan draft
resolution dedicates to respect for human rights,
particularly the rights of women and children. For Italy,
that protection is an absolute priority.
We intend to dedicate our efforts and our support
to Afghanistan and its people. At the same time, from
our Afghan friends we are expecting — in the logic
of conditionality, pursuant to the legacy of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework — the achievement
of definite, measurable results not only in human rights,
but also in areas such as the democratic and electoral
process, the fight against corruption and administrative
and economic governance.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, let me begin by thanking the President for
convening this annual meeting of the General Assembly
to review the progress made in building a secure, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/68/609) and to express my appreciation
to Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for
his comprehensive assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan. We had several rounds of discussion with
him, and I really appreciate his efforts.
A short look at the developments in Afghanistan
during the past several years is indicative of the
following facts. First, significant progress has been
made in the political, economic, social and development
areas in Afghanistan. Secondly, the general trend for
construction and reconciliation in Afghanistan is
positive, and efforts are on the right track. Thirdly,
the United Nations and the international community
22/29

20/11/2013

of States, in particular the neighbouring countries
of Afghanistan, are resolute in their strong longterm commitment to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan and its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity. Fourthly, a
number of remaining challenges in Afghanistan and
the interconnected nature of those challenges require
more efforts of the Afghan Government, coupled with
the strong support of the international community.
In the year 2014, two significant events, namely
the presidential and provincial council elections, and
the announced withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan, are crucial in shaping the future of
that country. Successful elections in 2014 are indeed
essential in enhancing the political stability and
national unity of Afghanistan and its advancement in
all other areas. While we support the efforts of the
Afghan Government in organizing those elections well,
we hope that the active participation of all Afghans in
the elections will help enhance the unity and harmony
of all segments of the Afghan population.
We also call for continued international and
regional support for holding free and fair elections
in Afghanistan in 2014. In the political context,
the Islamic Republic of Iran supports the peace
and national reconciliation efforts of the Afghan
Government. We emphasize the importance of fully
observing Afghanistan’s Constitution and the need to
adhere to the principle of an Afghan-led and Afghanowned reconciliation process. Any effort towards
that goal should be undertaken without any external
pressure or interference and without appearing to
reward either those who advocate extremist policies
or the perpetrators of terrorist acts. I should also
emphasize that the United Nations, including through
its Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, should continue
its active role in Afghanistan post-2014.
As in any other country, in Afghanistan security
is a prerequisite for the success of efforts in all areas.
Therefore, enhancing the security of Afghanistan
should continue to be the highest priority. In our
view, the complete withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan in 2014 should be followed by the strong
support of the international community in equipping
Afghan forces at a level commensurate with existing
security threats, in particular from terrorists, illegal
armed groups and organized criminals.
In that context, I would like to stress that special
attention should be paid to combating the interlinked
13-57251

20/11/2013

sources of insecurity and instability in Afghanistan,
in particular the production of and trade in narcotic
drugs as the source of financial support for terrorist,
extremist and illegal armed groups. In addition to
support for the Afghan Government in that regard,
continued international support for the triangular
counter-narcotics initiative among Afghanistan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan is essential. That
is vital, not only to strengthen the security and stability
of Afghanistan, but also to alleviate the serious concerns
of neighbouring States and of the drug-trafficking
transit and destination countries.
To control its nearly 1,000-kilometre common
border with Afghanistan, which is a major transit
route for narcotic drugs from Afghanistan to Europe,
the Islamic Republic of Iran spends over $600 million
annually. Moreover, as I have said before, more than
4,000 Iranian law-enforcement personnel have been
martyred in fighting against drug smugglers. In view
of the rise in opium poppy cultivation, as well as the
advanced techniques used by drug traffickers, Iran
cannot sustain this trend without the strong support of the
international community, including through supplying
adequate advanced border-control technologies.

A/68/PV.55

refugee population across the country by offering them,
among other things, access to free primary health care.
At least 80 per cent of the refugee population benefit
from health insurance.
With respect to education, currently 320,000 Afghan
students are studying at schools and 8,000 are enrolled
in universities in Iran, shoulder to shoulder with Iranian
students. My country spends over $400 million a year
for educational programmes for Afghan refugees. As
a result, the literacy rate of Afghan refugees has risen
from 6 to 70 per cent over the years. While making every
effort for the voluntary repatriation of Afghan refugees,
Iran calls on the international community to allocate
the necessary and adequate funds for the development
ot the educational and health environments, facilities
and equipment for Afghan refugees in Iran, pending
their repatriation.

As part of the regional efforts in combating drug
trafficking and its associated challenges, a regional
training workshop on anti-money-laundering, illegal
financial flows and suspect cash transactions was held
in Tehran in July, bringing together senior experts
from Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries.
Moreover, Iran also hosted the Seventh Regional
Financial Intelligence Unit meeting to enhance
regional cooperation in tackling money-laundering
and suspicious financial transactions. The aim is to
facilitate a common instrument to improve information
exchange with respect to suspicious transactions, as
well as to tackle the profits of drug trafficking.

Sustained
and
comprehensive
economic
development in Afghanistan is critical, not only
to provide grounds conducive to the repatriation
of refugees and to combat challenges such as the
production of and trade in narcotic drugs, but also to
achieve long-term security and stability in that country.
We stress the need to pay special attention to rebuilding
Arghanistan’s
economic
infrastructure.
While
considerable commitments for the reconstruction and
economic development of Afghanistan have been made
at the major international and regional conferences on
Afghanistan during the past several years, they need
to be fully implemented. As an active player in the
reconstruction of Afghanistan’s economy, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has granted more than half a billion
dollars for various projects in Afghanistan and has
supported and implemented many projects in such areas
as roads, railways, energy, mining and agriculture.
I had the honour to chair the bureau concerned with
those areas in Iran before taking up my position here.

Unfortunately, millions of Afghan refugees
continue to live in host countries, in part because of
inadequate international support for improving the
conditions for their return. Iran stresses the importance
of meeting the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan in order to enhance the trend of voluntary
repatriation. Currently, there are over 3 million Afghan
refugees in Iran, the majority of whom reside in urban
areas and are assisted with their basic needs and
essential services. Despite the unilateral economic and
financial sanctions imposed on Iran, my country has
continuously tried to improve the health status of the

Building a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan is indeed crucial, not only for the future
of the Afghan people, but also for enhancing peace and
stability in the region and, of course, in the world in
general. More coherent and better coordinated regional
efforts are therefore needed to ensure the sustainable
socioeconomic development of Afghanistan. The
Islamic Republic of Iran is engaged in a number
of important regional initiatives on Afghanistan,
including those promoting economic cooperation. As
an active participant in the Heart of Asia and Istanbul
processes, Iran welcomes the adoption of plans on

13-5725123/29

A/68/PV.55

confidence-building measures between Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries. Regarding educational
confidence-building measures within the Heart of
Asia process this year, Iran hosted two meetings of the
relevant working groups.
To conclude, I would like to stress that Afghanistan
is passing through an important phase in its history. The
Afghan people are inspired by the prospects of a future
free from violence and war. That nation deserves our
help in taking full charge of its destiny. We are looking
forward to the adoption of draft resolution A/68/L.11
by consensus, which is indeed a good signal indicating
that the international community of States is united in
support of the Afghan people.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): On behalf of
my delegation, I wish to extend our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his most recent report on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/68/609).
This meeting of the General Assembly is
particularly significant, as Afghanistan is on the
cusp of a milestone in its history. There will be two
crucial developments in the year 2014, namely, the
presidential elections and the complete withdrawal of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
Those developments will determine the trajectory of
the country for years to come. The Government of
Afghanistan has also laid out its vision for the future in
its transition agenda up to 2014, which is to be followed
by the ambitious transformation decade 2015-2024.
Progress is firmly in the hands of the Government of
Afghanistan and its people. Nonetheless, that does not
mean the international community can merely hold its
breath and expect a positive outcome. Rather, we must
play an active role in providing assistance and support
to Afghanistan to ensure that the objectives of the
transformation decade can be achieved.
On the political front, Malaysia is heartened by
the positive momentum reported by the SecretaryGeneral on preparations for the 2014 presidential and
provincial council elections in Afghanistan. We join the
international community in expressing our firm support
for those pivotal elections. Malaysia is convinced that a
peaceful, democratic transfer of power in Afghanistan
will provide the Government with the stability needed
for the country’s continued progress and development.
A smooth political transition in Afghanistan hinges
upon a democratic process and outcome that has the
confidence of both the people of Afghanistan and the

24/29

20/11/2013

international community. We commend the Afghan
Government for the various measures taken to ensure
that the elections are free, fair and inclusive. Among
those measures are the enactment of key legislation
designed to strengthen the electoral process and
the timely appointment of commissioners to the
Independent Election Commission.
Political development in Afghanistan is taking
place against a shifting security landscape, with ISAF
scheduled to withdraw by the end of 2014. Malaysia
joins other countries in expressing strong confidence
in the Afghan National Security Forces, which have
assumed full responsibility over security operations in
the country in the final phase of the security transition.
The transfer of responsibility from ISAF to the Afghan
National Security Forces is key to reclaiming and
strengthening Afghan sovereignty. Nonetheless, it
is also imperative that the international community
continue to provide the necessary support to the Afghan
National Security Forces to sustain security efforts
before and after the complete withdrawal of ISAF in
2014.
On that note, we view with concern the security
situation in Afghanistan: there is still an alarming
number of civilian casualties due to terrorist and
insurgent attacks. Malaysia condemns the continuing
attacks on innocent civilians, particularly women
and children, who can never be considered legitimate
targets under international humanitarian law.
On a related note, Malaysia sees the ongoing
reconciliation efforts as a vital component in securing
lasting peace and stability. We support the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme and the progress
it has made in rehabilitating and reintegrating former
insurgents into the community. We stress that the
national reconciliation and reintegration process must
remain Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. At the same
time, we encourage and support Afghanistan’s close
engagement with neighbouring countries, regional
partners and the international community at large in
order to tackle the root causes of insurgency, including
discontent born from the lack of economic opportunity
or inequitable development.
Malaysia reiterates its view that Afghanistan would
benefit enormously from the inclusion and contribution
of women in the political, economic and social spheres.
We support the ongoing efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to strengthen the protection, participation
and empowerment of women. However, the continued
13-57251

20/11/2013

targeting of women in high-profile Government
positions is a cause for great concern. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to take stringent measures
to ensure the safety and protection of women serving
the Government and enhance safeguards for women in
the community.
We recognize that it takes time to change
perceptions and entrenched stereotypical values, but
we sincerely believe that the results are well worth the
effort. We also understand the need to take into account
religious, cultural and traditional sensitivities in
furthering the rights of women, which is a balance that
Malaysia has worked to achieve. Malaysia is willing to
share our experience in enhancing the involvement and
development of women in all facets of life in accordance
with Islamic principles.
Malaysia appreciates the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in cooperation
with the Government of Afghanistan in laying the
foundations for sustainable development and peace in
the country.
Malaysia is also firmly supportive of the various
regional and multilateral forums that focus on
Afghanistan, which provide further avenues for
engagement between Afghanistan and the international
community. We participate actively in the triannual
meetings of the International Contact Group on
Afghanistan and Pakistan, the most recent of which
was held in New York in September, at which the Group
collectively underscored the importance of the roles
played by the United Nations, regional partners and
the larger international community in Afghanistan’s
future. We also recall the successful Tokyo conference
of 2012, during which the international community
made generous pledges in development aid for
Afghanistan, and we welcome the follow-up meeting of
senior officials in July 2013. My delegation hopes that
all parties will honour their commitments under that
framework in order to allow for the continued progress
and development of the country.
For our part, Malaysia stands ready to support
Afghanistan in its rebuilding efforts. The Malaysian
armed forces medical contingent stationed in Bamian
province provided much-needed medical, dentistry and
health-care services to the Afghan people from July
2010 until April 2013. We are willing to explore further
ways in which we can continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan. Malaysia will also continue

A/68/PV.55

to provide opportunities for capacity-building and
human resources development to Afghanistan through
bilateral technical training programmes, such as
the Malaysian technical cooperation programme in
various fields. We are ready to work with the Afghan
Government to identify areas where we can provide
training, areas that are most relevant for the country’s
developmental needs.
The gains made in Afghanistan in the political,
economic and social spheres must be further
strengthened to ensure lasting peace, stability and
growth. The international community has resoundingly
united behind Afghanistan. We must sustain our
efforts to ensure that it receives the backing it needs
to achieve the noble aspirations it has set for itself as a
nation. In that regard, Malaysia continues to stand with
the international community in support of Afghanistan
through 2014 and beyond.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): Romania fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier by Ambassador
Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations. I would also
like to express a few thoughts in my national capacity.
We take note of, and are grateful for, the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on the activities undertaken by
the United Nations in Afghanistan (A/68/609) during
the three-month reporting period. We also express our
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Germany for
admirably conducting the negotiations and introducing
draft resolution A/68/L.11. Romania is a traditional
sponsor of the resolution on this item.
Those documents, and the remarks delivered both
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan and all
previous speakers, represent a solid ground for further
approaches and actions. If one could sum up one main,
common idea from them all, it would be that during the
past decade, despite so many challenges, the Afghan
people, with the international community’s support,
have achieved considerable political, security, economic
and developmental progress. My country is pleased to be
part of that undertaking. During those years, Romania’s
contribution to the stabilization process followed the
path of internal developments in Afghanistan. Thus,
from our exclusively military engagement in 2002, we
became involved in training Afghan military and police
forces, in operational mentoring, in contributing to the
European Union police mission, and in providing close
protection for senior United Nations officials.

13-5725125/29

A/68/PV.55

Let me illustrate that evolution with a few concrete
examples that occurred this year that illustrate Romania’s
contribution to institution-building in Afghanistan.
They are part of my country’s commitments assumed at
the NATO Summit in Chicago with regard to military
matters and at the International Donors Conference in
Tokyo with regard to civilian aspects, as well as in the
framework of Romanian-Afghan bilateral relations. I
wanted to give those examples because they reflect the
path towards normality.
In March, Romania’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
jointly with United Nations Development Programme,
launched a pilot programme for Afghan diplomats. The
purpose was to familiarize 10 young Afghan diplomats
with Romania’s and the region’s foreign policy and
perspectives. The training programme is financed
through development assistance funds that the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs has been allocating for Afghanistan
since 2007.
Another example, which involved reflecting
together on the future, was the Bucharest Forum 2013,
entitled “Anchoring the New Silk Road, Linking Three
Seas: Caspian, Black Sea and the Adriatic”, organized
last September by the Aspen Institute of Romania.
The Minister of Economy of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, Mr. Abdul Hadi Arghandiwal, was a
guest. I could cite more examples, but I would like to
underline my country’s clear political commitment to
maintain its military participation in the International
Security Assistance Force until the end of 2014, and
its availability to train, advise and assist the Afghan
National Security Forces in the framework of the post2014 NATO-led mission in Afghanistan. From that
point of view, we welcome the recent developments in
the United States-Afghan dialogue on the status of a
future foreign presence.
Finally, I would like to point to a topic of particular
interest for Romania that turned out to be a lesson
learned from the engagement of the international
community in Afghanistan, and that is the importance
of the cooperation between the United Nations and
the regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, I would like to express our appreciation for
the collaboration and joint actions of the Special
Representatives of the United Nations, European Union
and NATO to support the Afghan authorities and people
in their quest not only for peace, security and stability,
but also for democracy, rule of law, human rights, and
social and economic development. Romania will always

26/29

20/11/2013

support the complex Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
quest. We are confident that one day it will lead to the
peaceful, stable and prosperous future that Afghanistan
deserves.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the Head of the
European Union Delegation, Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting.
Like others, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/68/609) and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. I also
appreciate both the work and effort of the delegation
of Germany, which convened constructive and fruitful
consultations on the draft resolution (A/68/L.11), and of
all the delegations that participated in the process.
In our view, the draft resolution reflects many of
the challenges that lie ahead with regard to the role of
institutions in Afghanistan in the transition process. I
would like to single out the upcoming presidential and
provincial elections, human rights and the rights of
women and girls in particular. The expected consensual
adoption of the draft resolution is significant in both
formal and substantial terms. The international and
regional actors, including the United Nations and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
have expressed their willingness and readiness to assist
the Afghan Government, and they remain strongly
committed to progress in Afghanistan. Let me reiterate
some elements that we deem to be important.
The first is national ownership. We welcome the
recognition that all processes should be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned. The commitment of the Government
of Afghanistan to continue in the process of transition,
stabilization, peace and reconciliation in general and
the active participation of Afghan representatives in
consultations on the draft resolution in particular are
promising political elements for future developments.
Second is the dynamics of the process and the
need for good news. The measurability of progress
in Afghanistan is the best evaluation criterion. In
assessing the current situation there, we have in mind
the challenges that remain and those that may appear on
the stony road to stability. But we also need good news.
We need positive stories and examples to encourage
the Afghan people not to turn back from the road to
stability, security and freedom. I am sure that over the
past decade progress has been achieved in all areas of
life and society.

13-57251

20/11/2013

Regrettably, most of the news coverage is related to
the number of attacks, the fragile security situation or
persistent non-military threats. By no means should we
underestimate those challenges. It would be a mistake
to bury our heads in the sand. However, it would also be
a mistake if we did not properly promote good practices
and progress. They are significant mobilization factors
for many investors and politicians, but above all for the
Afghan people. For instance, we can simply compare
the text of this draft resolution with documents adopted
10 years ago to see what has been achieved and what
remains.
The third element is economic development and
sustainability, Afghanistan is a country with trillions
of dollars’ worth of mineral resources. That is both an
opportunity and a challenge. It may be a temptation for
many, as well as a vehicle for development for most. But
our decisions must be right, fair and global. To make use
of those resources, long-term financial resources and
investments are needed for infrastructure, technology
and transportation. And any long-term investment
requires stability, transparency and an appropriate
legal framework. Which road will we choose after
2014 — the road to years or maybe decades of conflict,
or the way to stability and prosperity? That question is
addressed not only to the international community and
the Afghan leaders but to all the population. I am sure
the Afghan people know what the right answer is.
The fourth is regional cooperation. Without any
doubt, regional cooperation is among the promising
examples of the improved situation. The unprecedented
intensity of regional dialogue and confidence-building
measures among Afghanistan and its neighbours
should contribute to an enhanced ability to jointly
combat non-military security threats, including illicit
trafficking in humans and drugs. It should also promote
trade and development in border regions. International
and regional initiatives such as those led by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan process, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe should play an important role.
In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the
conferences on Security and Cooperation in the Heart
of Asia held in Istanbul, Kabul and Almaty, which
launched and further developed the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure

A/68/PV.55

and Stable Afghanistan. We are looking forward to the
fourth Heart of Asia ministerial conference, to be held
in Tianjin, China, in 2014.
The Slovak Republic reiterates its commitments to
continue assisting Afghanistan in the fields of security
stabilization and social and economic development.
The Slovak Armed Forces will continue to provide
the required capabilities to the International Security
Assistance Force led by NATO until the end of its
mission in 2014. Slovakia intends to contribute to the
new NATO post-2014 training, advisory and assistance
mission as well. The Government of Afghanistan and
the international community must ensure that the new
mission has a sound legal basis and that the necessary
conditions are met for the successful fulfilment of its
mandate.
In addition to our military contribution,
Afghanistan remains the priority of Slovakia’s official
development assistance. The nature of our development
assistance reflects many issues that have already been
mentioned in this statement and by many delegations.
We note Afghanistan’s progress, and we support
institution-building that complements and contributes
to the development of an economy characterized by
sound macroeconomic policies. We encourage the
development of a financial sector that provides services,
inter alia, to microenterprises, small and medium-sized
enterprises, and households.
We firmly believe that this is the way forward.
We should speak less and do more in responding to
current and future challenges. We definitely should
speak more about the positive developments that have
been achieved so far. We believe that assistance to
Afghanistan in the field of security stabilization must
be complemented by common projects focused on
support for Afghan economic development and trade
relations. We must continue to reiterate the importance
of respecting the rule of law and human rights. They
are connected to a transparent and stable business
environment and improved accountability, which in
turn attract international stakeholders and investors.
We must encourage regional cooperation, which will
provide the opportunity for border regions to be fully
integrated in the stabilization processes.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic is
pleased to join other Member States in co-sponsoring
the draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/68/L.11). The draft resolution reflects the fact that

13-5725127/29

A/68/PV.55

the international community remains committed to
supporting the Afghan people in building a secure,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan through the 2014
security and political transition and beyond. Let me
thank the German delegation for the excellent work
they have done in steering the negotiations on today’s
resolution, as well as the Government of Afghanistan
for their constructive engagement.
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add the following remarks in our national
capacity.
We recognize the remarkable transformation that
Afghanistan has undergone over the past decade. Still,
there will be many difficult months ahead, and many
challenges will need to be faced and resolved before
the country reaches the stability and prosperity that the
Afghan people definitely deserve.
The Czech Republic has supported the efforts
of the Afghan Government to provide security for
Afghan citizens since 2002. From 2008 to 2013, we
were involved in reconstruction and development
assistance in Logar province, where we assisted with
a local Afghan project to provide higher education in
agriculture. Overall, the multifaceted engagement of
Czech soldiers, policemen and civilian experts, as well
as humanitarian non-governmental organizations, has
been the most complex and most difficult in the history
of the Czech Republic.

20/11/2013

Mutual Accountability Framework remains a key aspect
in that regard. In our view, it is very important that the
Afghan reform effort be quickly restored and intensified
after the elections. It is also of crucial importance that
Afghanistan continue its efforts to safeguard basic
human rights and principles, in particular the rights of
women and girls.
The Afghan presidential elections of 2014 present
an opportunity for the Afghan leadership to show
its commitment to the principles of the Afghan
Constitution. Conducted in a free, fair, inclusive and
transparent manner, the elections would present a
major step towards a vision of a peaceful future for all
communities in Afghanistan.
During the previous presidential elections in 2009,
the Czech military provided security for voters in
the remote and volatile district of Azra in the Logar
province. Almost 20,000 people out of the 29,000
voters registered at that time turned up to cast ballots.
We hope that even more voters will participate in 2014
and that the Afghan security forces will succeed in
keeping the elections safe.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Let me at the outset thank the
delegation of Germany for the efforts that it has made
to bring today’s draft resolution (A/68/L.11) to the
table. I also would like to thank all the delegations that
participated in the consultations on the draft resolution.
We are glad to co-sponsor the draft resolution and are
looking forward to its adoption by consensus.

In the light of the ongoing security transition and
the increased capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces, the Czech Republic has been gradually phasing
its military personnel out of Afghanistan. However, that
definitely does not mean that Afghanistan will no longer
be given priority on our foreign policy agenda. We fully
share the view that the international community must
stay engaged in Afghanistan. The Czech Republic will
continue its support beyond 2014 into the transformation
decade. The Czech Government has already approved an
on-budget financial contribution to support the Afghan
National Security Forces and economic development.
That assistance will complement existing funding
under Czech development assistance and will be spread
over the years 2014 to 2017.

We welcome the positive signals coming from
Afghanistan in the past year. The military has assumed
a full leadership role in security matters for the entire
country. Preparations for the 2014 elections are ongoing,
with timelines, operational frameworks and proposed
polling sites in place. More than a year after the Tokyo
Conference, we are glad to see increased efforts
being made within the Tokyo Framework to ensure
the concrete implementation of mutual commitments,
on the part of both the Afghan Government and the
international community. We are also happy to see
indications that the Afghan Government is taking
its responsibilities towards its people seriously and
is ready to move forward in terms of human rights,
democratization and good governance.

It must be emphasized that the long-term
success of the transition and the sustainability of the
international assistance are entirely in Afghan hands.
The implementation of commitments under the Tokyo

Despite the positive signs, major political, economic
and security challenges remain. The security situation
remains volatile, and unacceptable human losses,
especially in terms of civilian casualties, continue to

28/29

13-57251

20/11/2013

occur. Natural disasters such as floods and earthquakes,
epidemic diseases, chronic poverty and increasing
internal displacement pose grave humanitarian threats.
The most vulnerable segments of society, especially
women, boys and girls, continue to be at risk.
As Afghanistan moves forward in its political and
security transition, we must remain in touch with the
realities on the ground. The ongoing display of will by
the international community will strengthen the Afghan
people’s hopes for the future and will help ensure that
a smooth transition is under way. As Afghanistan’s
regional and international partners, we should spare no
effort to contribute to the vision of a secure, peaceful
and self-sufficient Afghanistan. That is in the mutual
interest of all of us.
As the international presence is being reduced,
the importance of regional cooperation for achieving
stability, security and prosperity is being increasingly
recognized. In fact, regional ownership and
sustainability are interlinked. The viability of Afghan
structures and institutions will be significantly
strengthened, if it is supported by regional cooperation
and ownership.
From that perspective, we are glad to observe
the increased momentum in the Istanbul Process, an
element that is recognized in the draft resolution before
us. The spirit of regional ownership and solidarity, the
engagement and technical support of the United Nations
and its agencies, and the interest and support of the
international community have made that possible. We
would like to take this opportunity to commend China
once more for offering to host the next Istanbul Process
ministerial meeting.
Trilateral and quadrilateral initiatives have also
shown themselves to be important tools for fostering
regional ownership in the heart of Asia. We welcome all
such initiatives, as well as the constructive role played
by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in support
of Afghanistan. Further connectivity will facilitate
economic development, stability and self-sustainability
and help create a more favourable business environment
in Afghanistan.

A/68/PV.55

We attach particular importance to the completion
and maintenance of local railroad and land routes,
the development of regional economic projects and
the enhancement of civil aviation capabilities. We
welcome all efforts to enhance regional connectivity
and economic growth.
Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the
Afghan people and will continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for so many decades.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 37.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.11, entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/68/L.11, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Brazil, Bulgaria, China,
Cyprus, Egypt, Eritrea, Finland, Georgia, Guatemala,
Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Mauritius, Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.11?
Draft resolution A/68/L.11 was adopted (resolution
68/11).
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 37?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

13-5725129/29
