S/PV.8695

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8695th meeting

Thursday, 19 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft/Mr. Barkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aljarallah
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 4 December 2019 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/925)
Eighth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/934)
Letter dated 16 December 2019 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/952/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-42307 (E)
*1942307*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8695

In that regard, the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA,) on the Iranian nuclear issue,
and resolution 2231 (2015) are crucial to nuclear
non-proliferation as well as regional and international
security. We are encouraged by the broad international
support for the Plan and the resolution. Their full and
effective implementation is key to ensuring the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme and to securing
tangible economic benefits for the Iranian people.

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 4 December 2019 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/925)
Eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2019/934)
Letter dated 16 December 2019 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/952/Rev.1)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Mr. Skoog and Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de
Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of Belgium,
in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President,
for convening today’s meeting on non-proliferation,
which remains a cornerstone of international peace
and security and a top priority for the international
community.
2/24

19/12/2019

We therefore regret the withdrawal of the United
States from the JCPOA, in May 2018, and the recent
steps taken by Iran to reduce its nuclear-related
commitments under the plan. Certain actions taken by
the United States since its withdrawal from the plan are
contrary to the goals of the plan. The reimposition of its
national sanctions, lifted under the plan, as well as its
decision not to extend waivers for the trade in oil with
Iran and certain non-proliferation projects, may also
impede the ability of Iran and other Member States to
implement the plan and resolution 2231 (2015).
Since July, under the monitoring of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran has surpassed
JCPOA-stipulated limits on its uranium enrichment
level, as well as limits on its stockpiles of heavy water
and low-enriched uranium. It has taken steps related to
centrifuge research and development, and commenced
injecting uranium hexafluoride gas into the centrifuges
at the Fordow facility. Iran has stated that all those steps
are reversible and that it intends to remain in the plan.
It is important that Iran return to full implementation
of the plan and refrain from further steps to reduce its
commitments.
We welcome the initiatives of the other participants
in the JCPOA, which should be given full effect as a
matter of priority. In that regard, the recent decisions by
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden
and Norway to join the Instrument in Support of Trade
Exchanges are positive developments. Those actions
can contribute to the goals of facilitating legitimate
business with Iran and the preservation of the plan.
The Secretary-General encourages Member States and
others to work with JCPOA participants to achieve
those important goals. At the same time, Iran should
carefully consider and address the concerns expressed
by Member States about its activities in relation to the
restrictive measures set out in annex B to the resolution.
Over the course of this year, tensions in the region
have, worryingly, escalated. We witnessed attacks
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

against oil tankers, strikes against a civilian airport
and a highly sophisticated and synchronized attack
against oil facilities in Saudi Arabia. Combined with
acrimonious rhetoric, those developments have brought
the region dangerously close to a serious confrontation.
Such an eventuality would be devastating and must be
prevented at all costs. The Secretary-General continues
to call on Member States to exercise maximum restraint
and prevent further escalation amid heightened tensions.
I will now turn to the measures set out in annex B
to the resolution, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
eighth report (S/2019/934) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and subsequent information
obtained during the reporting period.
First, on the implementation of the nuclearrelated provisions, we have not received new reports
on the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of nuclear and
nuclear-related dual-use items contrary to paragraph
2 of annex B. It is vital that the procurement channel
work effectively and efficiently to promote increased
international engagement with Iran. All Member States
and the private sector are encouraged to fully utilize
and support that channel.
In that connection, we recall the 3 May 2018
announcement by the United States that involvement in
certain nuclear-related activities set forth in paragraph 2
of annex B may be exposed to its national sanctions. We
also note the announcement by the United States that,
effective 15 December, it will terminate the sanctions
waiver related to the nuclear facility at Fordow.
Exemption provisions in resolution 2231 (2015) allow
for the transfer of items, materials, equipment, goods
and technology required for the nuclear activities of
Iran under the plan, subject to the relevant notification
requirements.
Secondly, several Member States have provided
divergent views on Iran’s test-firing of ballistic missiles
during the reporting period, as well as a reportedly
failed launch of a space-launch vehicle in August.
Paragraph 3 of annex B calls upon Iran not to undertake
any activity related to ballistic missiles designed to
be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using such ballistic missile technology.
France, Germany, Israel, the United Kingdom
and the United States viewed the missiles reportedly
launched by Iran to be category I systems under the
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), and are
therefore designed to be capable of delivering nuclear

S/PV. 8695

weapons. By contrast, Iran and the Russian Federation
stressed the lack of any reference to the MTCR regime
in paragraph 3 of annex B. They further stated that
Iran’s ballistic missile activities were not inconsistent
with paragraph 3, as those missiles were not designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
Related to ballistic missiles activities, the
Secretariat also received information from the United
States that several shipments of hydroxyl-terminated
polybutadiene, a substance that can be used in solid
missile fuel, were transferred to Iran in July and
August 2017. We are examining that information and
will update the Council accordingly.
Thirdly, regarding arms-related restrictions, the
Secretariat confirmed that 23 optical sights for RPG-7type rocket propelled grenade launchers, part of a larger
consignment seized in Aden in December 2018, were
delivered to end-users in Iran in 2016. That suggests
that those optical sights may have been transferred
from Iran to Yemen after 16 January 2016, which would
be inconsistent with Iran’s obligations under resolution
2231 (2015). We had already indicated in our previous
report (S/2019/492) that the grenade launchers found in
that seizure had characteristics similar to the Iranianproduced RPG-7-type launchers, such as markings and
heat shields.
Further on the arms restrictive measures,
the Secretariat — at the invitation of Saudi
authorities — examined the debris of the weapons
system used in the 14 May attack on the oil facility in
Afif, the 12 June and 10 August attacks on the Abha
international airport and the 14 September attack on the
Saudi Aramco oil facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais.
Although the Houthis claimed responsibility for the
attacks on Abqaiq and Khurais, their announcements
on the number and type of weapons systems used do not
correspond to the information that we have seen. The
Houthis claimed that the attacks involved 10 unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs). However, the number of impact
points observed by the Secretariat shows that the
attacks involved a larger number, and different types,
of weapons systems — which is consistent with the
information provided by Saudi authorities. According
to them, the attacks involved at least 18 UAVs and
seven cruise missiles. In addition, since the publication
of the report, the United States has shared additional
information with us regarding the debris of one of
the UAVs, which indicated that that UAV traversed a

19-423073/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

19/12/2019

location about 200 kilometres north-west of Abqaiq
shortly before the strike.

Secretariat is still reviewing the information and will
report back to the Council with additional details.

At this time, we are unable to independently
corroborate that the cruise missiles, or the recovered
components we inspected, are of Iranian origin. I would
like to stress, however, that that is our preliminary
finding. We are still very much in the process of
reviewing the components and subcomponents
recovered, as well as collecting and analysing
additional information on those cruise missiles. For
example, we recently received confirmation that some
of the cruise missile components were in fact not made
by the identified manufacturers, but could have been
copies. The Secretary-General intends to report back to
the Security Council on our further findings.

Finally, we were informed of additional travel
allegedly undertaken by the Commander of the Al-Quds
Force of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, Major
General Qasem Soleimani, to Iraq in October 2019. We
also were informed of alleged cooperation between a
Member State’s academic institution with an entity on
the 2231 list, as well as several ongoing cooperation
agreements in the construction sector between foreign
entities and other entities on the list. The Secretariat
has requested clarification from Member States and
will report back to the Council.

Regarding the UAVs, the Houthis in Yemen are
not known to be in possession of the specific delta
wing-type UAVs used in those attacks. The UAVs were
found to be equipped with a type of vertical gyroscope
that had been observed on an Iranian UAV reportedly
recovered in Afghanistan in 2016. Parts of the UAVs
were also produced and transferred between Member
States after 16 January 2016, and as recently as 2018.
Based on our preliminary assessment, the SecretaryGeneral is also unable to independently corroborate that
the UAVs, or the recovered components we examined,
are of Iranian origin. As with the cruise missiles, the
Secretariat is still actively reviewing the components
and subcomponents recovered, as well as collecting
and analysing additional information on those UAVs.
The Secretary-General intends to report back on our
further findings.
In addition, I would like to bring to everyone’s
attention to the arms-related information that had
become available since the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. At the invitation of the United States,
the Secretariat travelled to examine arms and related
materiel alleged to be of Iranian origin, which the
United States seized in international waters off the
coast of Yemen on 25 November 2019. The seized items
included anti-tank guided missiles, surface-to-air
missiles, as well as parts of cruise missiles and anti-ship
missiles. The anti-tank guided missiles that we saw had
production dates as recent as 2018. Their containerlaunch units also had characteristics consistent with the
Iranian-produced Dehlavieh anti-tank guided missile.
We had made a similar observation of other anti-tank
guided missile container-launch units seized in Yemen
in our sixth report (S/2018/1089) to the Council. The
4/24

The Secretary-General considers the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) by all
Member States as an integral component of our
collective prevention efforts. That has assumed greater
importance in the context of current tensions in the
Gulf. The Secretary-General therefore calls on Member
States to avoid confrontational actions and explore
avenues for dialogue and cooperation in the interest of
international peace and security.
Let me conclude by acknowledging the leadership
of His Excellency Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
in his role as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and to assure him once again
of our full support. I would also like to thank the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission for our continued cooperation.
The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: It is an honour to back in the Security
Council, now in my new capacity as Head of the
Delegation of the European Union (EU) to the United
Nations. I address the Council today on behalf of the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, in
his capacity as Coordinator of the Joint Commission
established by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). I would also like to extend my gratitude to
Secretary-General António Guterres and Mr. Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Ambassador of Belgium
serving as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for the great collaboration over
the past months. In addition, I would like to convey my
deep appreciation for the work done by colleagues in
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

the Secretariat, including in relation to the procurement
channel — as just mentioned by Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo — and work to prepare the
latest report (S/2019/934) of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the resolution.
Today we are witnessing a major challenge, as
the JCPOA is under increasing pressure. We have
a responsibility, as members of the international
community, to prevent it from falling apart. The
remaining parties to the JCPOA at the latest Joint
Commission meeting, on 6 December, emphasized the
key importance of full and effective implementation
by all sides, as well as their determination to pursue
all efforts to preserve the agreement. The reasons are
clear, and it is important to remember where we were
before the JCPOA.
The plan rolled back Iran’s nuclear programme, set
strict limitations, blocking Iran’s access to plutonium
and high-enriched uranium, and established the most
robust verification mechanism by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Once the JCPOA
was agreed upon, more than four years ago, Iran fully
complied with the nuclear-related provisions for three
and a half years, including for 14 months after the
United States withdrew from the plan and reimposed
unilateral sanctions. That has been verified and reported
by the IAEA through the Agency’s robust monitoring
mechanism on the Iranian nuclear programme.
However, earlier this year, Iran decided to embark
on a worrisome path of decreasing its nuclear-related
commitments. That is something that the European
Union deeply regrets, and we strongly urge Iran to
change its course of action. The JCPOA is a nuclear
non-proliferation agreement with obligations on all
parties. Alongside the implementation by Iran of its
nuclear-related commitments, the lifting of sanctions
that allows for the normalization of trade and economic
relations with Iran constitute essential parts of
the JCPOA.
In that regard, the European Union and all 28
member States deeply regret the withdrawal of the
United States from the agreement. The United States
subsequent reimposition of unilateral sanctions and its
decision not to extend waivers with regard to trade in
oil are having a significant impact on Iran’s economy.
In addition, the United States decision not to fully
renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects
could bear significant security implications.

S/PV. 8695

The EU expresses its strong support for the
continuation of key nuclear non-proliferation projects
that are an essential part of the JCPOA. We welcome
continued efforts by the Arak Working Group
co-Chairs — China and the United Kingdom — in
taking the Arak modernization project forward. We
also welcome the efforts of Russia to continue the
implementation of the project at Fordow for the
production of medical stable isotopes.
The European Union, for its part, lifted its
sanctions in line with its JCPOA obligations. It
remains committed to work on the preservation of
the agreement, including towards the objective of
normalizing economic and trade relations with Iran.
We welcome the fact that efforts have been intensified
in recent weeks, particularly on the Instrument in
Support of Trade Exchanges (INSTEX), with a view to
facilitating legitimate trade with Iran, consistent with
international laws and European regulations, as well
as to support the needs of the Iranian population. We
welcome the decision announced on 29 November by
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway
and Sweden to become shareholders of INSTEX
along with the original shareholders, namely, France,
Germany and the United Kingdom.
The JCPOA is a key element of the new global
nuclear non-proliferation architecture, and we should
not forget that it was unanimously endorsed by
resolution 2231 (2015). It is the only tool available
to provide the international community with the
necessary assurances on Iran’s nuclear programme. It
is essential that we continue to preserve this tool and
not let it derail into an irreparable situation. That is
why the EU continues to be resolutely committed to the
JCPOA. We continue to support it and are determined
to work with the international community to preserve
it. We should not assume that another opportunity will
be presented to the international community to address
Iran’s nuclear programme in such a thorough manner
as the one presented by the JCPOA. The EU has been
consistent in its commitment to the continued full and
effective implementation of the Agreement, as long as
Iran abides by its commitments. That has been repeated
in numerous statements.
The course of action taken by Iran to reduce its
nuclear-related commitments is deeply worrisome. In
a statement on 11 November, together with the Foreign
Ministers of France, Germany and the United Kingdom,
the High Representative of the European Union

19-423075/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

expressed extreme concern about the latest step taken
by Iran with regard to restarting uranium enrichment
activities at Fordow.
A number of projects are being implemented in
support of annex III of the JCPOA, on civil nuclear
cooperation, particularly in the field of nuclear safety
and regulatory support. Annex III helps us to gain
a better understanding of Iran’s nuclear needs and
gradually build confidence in Iran’s programme. It
also plays a significant role for Iran, as it balances the
limitations of the nuclear programme with civil nuclear
development and longer-term engagement.
Established under annex IV of the JCPOA, the
procurement channel remains a unique non-proliferation,
transparency and confidence-building instrument. It
is a key mechanism to prevent the misuse of nuclear
and dual-use items and to ensure that exports of such
items are consistent with the JCPOA. We recognize
the challenges brought about by the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA and the re-imposition of
sanctions. The procurement channel, however, remains
a Security Council mechanism, and the decision on a
proposal for transfer is endorsed by all its 15 members.
In the eighth Joint Commission report on the status of
the Procurement Working Group’s decisions and on any
implementation issues, submitted to the Facilitator on
4 December and subsequently circulated as a document
of the Security Council (S/2019/925), the remaining
participants stated their commitment to continue
reviewing proposals in an impartial and independent
manner. In that context, it is a positive signal that the
channel keeps receiving proposals, albeit at a decreased
pace. A substantial amount of outreach has been
conducted during the past few years, and countries
around the world are aware of the procedures of the
channel. Our outreach efforts will continue, together
with colleagues from the Secretariat and the Facilitator.
We expect that all Security Council members will
continue supporting the channel’s preservation in line
with resolution 2231 (2015).
While the JCPOA addresses nuclear non-proliferation
aspects, a series of events outside the nuclear domain
are increasingly worrisome. The EU continues to urge
all actors to reduce tension, refrain from escalatory
rhetoric and prevent a military build-up in the region.
The European Union has repeatedly urged Iran to
refrain from activities that could deepen mistrust, such
as ballistic missile tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).
6/24

19/12/2019

The EU is a strong promoter of multilateral
diplomacy and continues to advocate for dialogue and
constructive engagement. It is thanks to the JCPOA
that the EU has been able to hold discussions with Iran
on the situation in the region. The EU-led discussions,
together with France, Germany, Italy and the United
Kingdom, focus on exchanging views with Iran on
regional stability. That dialogue, as well as other
channels of communications between the European
Union and Iran, continues to be a useful platform for
discussions on shared interest and concern. The absence
of direct channels of communication might easily lead
to spaces where the risk of misunderstandings and
miscalculations thrives.
Let us not forget what the purpose of the JCPOA
is: it is a nuclear non-proliferation agreement. Let us
not forget what it has been able to deliver: it kept Iran
fully compliant with its nuclear-related commitments
for three and a half years. Let us not forget that there
is no credible, peaceful alternative. That is why the
EU, together with other partners of the international
community, will continue to work relentlessly to
preserve the JCPOA while calling on Iran to reverse its
course of action.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Pecsteen
de Buytswerve.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I speak in my capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). I would like to begin by thanking
the Secretariat for its valuable support in the discharge
of my duties.
Throughout my mandate, my mission has been to
support the implementation of the resolution on behalf
of the Security Council, with a special focus on three
particular areas, namely, dialogue, transparency and
the maintenance of the procurement channel. Of course,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is currently
faced by many challenges.
I now turn to the eighth report of the Facilitator
(see S/2019/952/Rev.1). The report has been approved
by all the members of the Council, whom I would like
to thank for their constructive contributions. The report
of the Facilitator is essentially a factual account, the
objective of which is to inform the Council, in parallel
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

with the reports of the Secretary-General (S/2019/934)
and of the Joint Commission (see S/2019/925), of the
activities that took place in the 2231 format. The report
covers the activities that took place between 16 June
and 16 December 2019, some of which gave rise to
disagreements within the Council and are presented
as such. As the text is rather technical in nature, I
will not review all its constituent elements. My report
is at Council members’ disposal for reference and
information. Nevertheless, allow me to highlight the
following three points.
First, I would like to recall the two meetings of the
Council held in the 2231 format during the reporting
period. On 26 July, members of the Security Council
discussed a proposal by the United States to maintain
and update the individuals and entities on the list
established pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). That
proposal led to disagreements relating to the procedures
for updating the list. On 13 December, the members of
the Security Council discussed the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on resolution 2231 (2015), prior to
its public release.
Secondly, in my role as Facilitator, I also held
several bilateral consultations with Member States and
their representatives, including the Islamic Republic
of Iran, to discuss issues related to the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). Informal consultations with
the members of the Security Council concerned were
also held with a view to reaching consensus on the text
of my report. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the members of the Council for their flexibility
in that regard.
Thirdly, there are references in my report to
the two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) during
the reporting period, in August (see S/2019/737) and
November (see S/2019/901). The six additional reports
issued by the Agency during the period are also listed
(see S/2019/952/Rev.1, para. 12). Those reports cover
the latest developments in the implementation by the
Islamic Republic of Iran of its nuclear commitments,
notably in the following areas: enriched uranium
stockpile; enrichment activities; centrifuge research
and development activities; activities related to the
Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant; and heavy water
inventory. I cannot overestimate the central, impartial,
factual and professional role played by the Agency in
the implementation of the JCPOA as it continues to

S/PV. 8695

carry out its verification and monitoring activities in
the Islamic Republic of Iran in line with resolution 2231
(2015).
More generally, I have to conclude that the JCPOA
is at a crossroads. The various letters circulated within
the 2231 format reflect the state of the discussions
among the parties. The communications are listed
and summarized in detail in my report, including
the responses from the Permanent Mission of Iran.
The points of disagreement regarding the restrictive
measures outlined in annex B to resolution 2231 (2015)
are also indicated.
First, concerning Iran’s activities related to missiles
and space launchers, I note the various letters sent by
several Member States describing those activities as
incompatible with annex B, on the one hand, and Iran’s
counter-arguments, which are based on a different
reading of paragraph 3 of that annex, on the other.
The differences in the interpretation of paragraph 3
are a recurring issue. Other letters focused on possible
Iranian arms transfers in the region, which are another
source of disagreement.
The current context of compliance with the entire
JCPOA obviously affects activities in the 2231 format.
I note the concerns that have been expressed following
the strengthening of the economic sanctions imposed
by the United States since its withdrawal from the
plan, and more recently the end of nuclear exemptions,
which has had an impact on compliance with resolution
2231 (2015), originally adopted unanimously by the
Council. Those concerns also extend to the successive
disengagements announced and implemented by Iran
and duly reported by the IAEA.
Lastly, I note that no proposals were submitted
through the procurement channel for the Security
Council’s approval during the reporting period. The
procurement channel is definitely at the heart of
the JCPOA and must be able to continue operating
effectively and efficiently in order to fulfil its role.
In conclusion, I join with the other bodies
responsible for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), the Secretary-General and the Joint Commission
in deploring the deterioration of the current context,
which affects compliance with resolution 2231 (2015)
and the JCPOA. Matters of international peace and
security require collective responses, which is the
raison d’être of the Council. The JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) constitute one of those responses and enjoy

19-423077/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

the support of the international community. In reference
to paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015), I therefore call
on all
“Member States, regional organizations and
international organizations to take such actions as
may be appropriate to support the implementation
of the JCPOA, including by ... refraining from
actions that undermine the implementation of
commitments under the JCPOA.”
The President: I thank Ambassador Pecsteen de
Buytswerve for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/934) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015). We note the work of
the Permanent Representative of Belgium as Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of the
resolution’s provisions. We welcome the new Head
of Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, although I must say that I am used to seeing
him here in a different capacity.
We share the Secretary-General’s position on
the withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the
reimposition of unilateral sanctions against Iran,
which are contrary to the aims of both the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) and undermine Iran’s
ability to comply with their provisions. The current
report constitutes clear evidence of Washington’s
violations of its obligations under resolution 2231
(2015), specifically its paragraphs 1, 2 and 7, and
under Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that those actions should be condemned as
well as deplored by the international community. We
are in effect encountering the paradoxical situation in
which a permanent member of the Security Council is
not only failing to comply with a resolution adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter, among other things,
8/24

19/12/2019

but is actively threatening all other Member States with
unilateral sanctions for implementing the resolution’s
provisions. We do not quite understand how it is
possible to strengthen international peace and security
by directly undermining Security Council resolutions.
Using sanctions as a stick in a blanket response to any
concern not only does not work but spawns new crises.
Iran cannot be expected to meekly comply with
Council resolutions that the United States itself is
undermining. Iran has a legal right, enshrined in
paragraph 36 of the JCPOA, to take measures in
response to United States violations of the Charter or
resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been notified about
all of Iran’s steps to reduce its voluntary obligations and
they have been supervised by the Agency’s inspectors,
in full compliance with the provisions of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Additional Protocol to Iran’s Safeguards Agreement.
All of those measures are reversible under the entirely
logical condition of compliance with the obligations set
out under the JCPOA and the Charter.
A fully functioning procurement channel and
cooperation with Iran on the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes are key elements in the full
implementation of both the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) itself. The work of those non-proliferation
mechanisms must not be disrupted. Such actions can
have only one aim, which is to create tension around
the Iranian nuclear programme and thereby deepen the
manifestations of crisis in the Middle East.
Today we are witnessing an artificial escalation of
the situation in the Persian Gulf, jeopardizing peace and
security in the region as well as the international efforts
to settle the conflicts there. The so-called evidence of
Iran’s guilt that has been provided is neither convincing
nor corroborated by the report of the Secretary-General.
We believe that there is an alternative to escalation.
We have to strengthen the general atmosphere of
trust in the region. We want to remind the Council
once again that in resolution 598 (1988), the Security
Council instructed the Secretary-General to work with
the stakeholders in the region to develop measures to
strengthen its security and stability. That work is now
needed more than ever. Russia is ready to support that
by working in contact with our regional partners and
all interested parties. The ultimate aim must be to form
a genuinely inclusive security architecture that reflects
the legitimate concerns of all the countries of the
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

region. Our concept for strengthening security in the
Persian Gulf under international guarantees remains
relevant, and its implementation could and should begin
with the holding of a conference attended by States
of the subregion, with a view to eventually including
other Middle Eastern countries. For its part, Tehran has
proposed its own initiative for strengthening regional
peace and security.
We are sorry to see that the report suffers from a
chronic lack of evidence in the parts concerning Iran’s
missile programme and supposed arms shipments out of
Iran, as well as various violations that Tehran is alleged
to have permitted of the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) on asset freezes and travel bans on individuals.
The problem of amateur inspections by representatives
of the Secretariat who do not have the necessary skills
or mandate to conduct them persists. That leads one to
ask why, if the Secretariat cannot confirm that there was
a violation of resolution 2231 (2015), does it constantly
include those subjects in its reports?
The only practical step that can be taken to save
the JCPOA is the remaining parties’ implementation of
their obligations under the agreement. We must abandon
fear and selfish motives and prioritize the tasks of
maintaining the viability of the JCPOA, which is a vital
achievement of multilateral diplomacy. We believe that
constantly raising the stakes and one-upping each other
about who cares most about the agreement will only
result in extreme attitudes. We must not allow political
pressure, economic strangulation and blackmail
through military might to gain the upper hand.

S/PV. 8695

on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/934) on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would also
like to thank both the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union, who
spoke on behalf of the Joint Commission, for their
briefings to the Council.
The agenda item for this meeting is
“Non-proliferation”, and I would like to reiterate the
principled position of the State of Kuwait on all issues
relating to nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
We condemn the use of nuclear weapons and all weapons
of mass destruction, anywhere, at any time and by any
party, since any such use constitutes a grave violation of
international law. Peace, security and stability cannot
be established in the world while such weapons exist.
Five years ago, on the basis of on those principles and
fundamental parameters, we welcomed the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), because
we believe strongly in multilateralism and are fully
committed to all United Nations resolutions, as we
are to efforts to achieve security and stability in the
Middle East, which continues to suffer from unstable
security conditions.

In conclusion, I would particularly like to emphasize
that the Russian Federation remains committed to the
unconditional implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. We support the Secretary-General’s call
in his report for refraining from provocative statements
and actions that could have a negative impact on
regional stability. We will continue to strive for a
dialogue aimed at finding compromises and a balance
of interests. That is the only way. Only coordinated
collective action can bring the current situation back
under control.

We have read the Secretary-General’s eighth
report on the annex B provisions of resolution 2231
(2015), which contains a comprehensive summary of
the implementation of the resolution’s nuclear- and
ballistic-missile-related provisions, as well as measures
to strengthen it. We took note of the report on Iran’s
implementation of its commitments relating to its
nuclear programme, as verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We also noted with
concern the Secretary-General’s report on the steps
taken by Iran since July to reduce its compliance
with its nuclear-related commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. We would like to stress
how important it is for Iran to continue implementing
all its obligations pursuant to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and its Safeguards Agreement with
the IAEA, as well as to ratify the Additional Protocol
to its Agreement so as to ensure its continued status as
a non-nuclear-weapon State.

Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our thanks and
appreciation to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her comprehensive and valuable briefing

Based on the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015),
the Secretary-General’s report is not limited to the
nuclear component but also covers the implementation
of controls on activities related to ballistic-missile
technology and the transfer of conventional weapons.

19-423079/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

We would like to express our concern about some
elements in the report, including information and
specifications on the origin of the ballistic missiles
and unmanned aerial vehicles used to target Saudi
Arabia and of the weapons seized in international
waters. Although the Secretariat has not yet finished
its investigations, this remains a very serious issue that
poses a threat international peace and security. Based
on our position condemning the use of ballistic missiles
and drones in September to sabotage and attack
Saudi Arabian facilities supplying oil to international
markets, we emphasize our firm position on the need
to maintain the region’s security and stability as well as
the safety of its peoples. We further stress the need to
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of States
and to respect their sovereignty, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law as well as the principles of good-neighbourliness,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the non-use or
threat of use of force, and the rejection of all forms
of sectarianism.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates once
again how important it is to ensure that the Security
Council continues to uphold its responsibilities in
pursuing the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
in a comprehensive manner, in order to ensure that Iran
and other States comply with their obligations not only
with regard to nuclear non-proliferation but also in
other areas covered by the resolution.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the UnderSecretary-General and the Head of the Delegation of
the European Union. It is also very good to have our
Iranian colleague with us.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s eighth report
(S/2019/934) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2014) and we offer our thanks to the Secretariat for
its continued professionalism and its support to the
Secretary-General in enabling the production of
the report.
When I spoke to the Council in June, I said that
the United Kingdom remained committed to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) (see S/PV.8564),
and that commitment stands. The JCPOA is critical to
the wider global non-proliferation architecture and vital
to our national security and the shared security of our
partners and allies. We believe it is the best means for
averting a nuclear-armed Iran. As we have said before,
we regret the decision by the United States to leave
10/24

19/12/2019

the JCPOA and reimpose sanctions on Iran. We have
said that at our most senior levels and on the public
record, and we understand the impact this has had in
Iran and on the Iranian people. Our commitment to the
JCPOA and its instruments, including the procurement
channel, is evidenced by our work as co-Chair of the
Arak modernization project and with our E-3 partners
on the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges.
We therefore deeply deplore Iran’s decision to reduce
compliance with the JCPOA. We made our concerns
clear at the Joint Commission on 6 December. Iran’s
actions are extremely serious. They are hollowing out
the non-proliferation benefits of the nuclear deal and
not all of them are reversible.
As the United Kingdom, we have made clear our
determination to find a way forward and to address
Iranian non-compliance through the JCPOA, including
the dispute resolution mechanism. That is not a step
we want to take, but Iran’s actions are leaving us little
option other than to respond within the parameters of
the agreement. Should we be forced down the path of
triggering the dispute resolution mechanism, we would
do so in order to find a diplomatic way forward with
the aim of protecting the agreement. Iran faces a stark
choice. It can either continue down this damaging path
or take immediate steps to get back into compliance
and rebuild international confidence.
Turning to ballistic missiles, in November the
E3 — France, Germany and the United Kingdom — wrote
to the Secretary-General regarding Iran’s development
and testing of ballistic missiles and related technology.
Over the past year, Iran has tested the Shahab-3
medium-range ballistic missile, unveiled the Burkan-3
medium-range ballistic missile and attempted to
launch the Safir satellite launch vehicle. All of these
actions are inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015). Iran argues that the provisions
in resolution 2231 (2015) are not legally binding. It has
also taken issue with the E3’s use of Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR) categories to define nuclearcapable missiles.
We should be clear. The definition encapsulated
in the MTCR is the most objective, widely accepted
standard of nuclear deliverability in the world. It is
internationally recognized and observed by States that
seek to prevent the proliferation of ballistic-missile
technology capable of carrying weapons of mass
destruction. For many States, it is incorporated into
their national legislation. The purpose of the provisions
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

in annex B, paragraph 3, is to give the international
community confidence that Iran is not developing
technology capable of serving as a means of delivery
for a nuclear weapon. In undertaking the activity
described in the E3’s communications to the Security
Council, Iran is not providing this confidence.
Turning to regional activity, during the last
year there has been a continued increase in Iran’s
destabilizing activity around the Middle East, including
activities that are inconsistent with resolution 2216
(2015) and other resolutions. In May and June we saw
attacks on commercial shipping near Fujairah and
in the Gulf of Oman. A thorough United Kingdom
assessment concluded that both attacks were almost
certainly the work of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps. Likewise, the Corps was almost certainly
responsible for May’s attack on the Yanbu pipeline,
near Afif. In September we witnessed a large-scale
drone and missile attack against Aramco oil facilities
in Saudi Arabia. That was a reckless, destabilizing and
completely unacceptable attack affecting more than
5 per cent of the world’s oil and gas production.
As the United Kingdom, France and Germany
have made clear, we are confident that Iran bears
responsibility for that attack. The Houthi claim of
responsibility is implausible for a number of reasons,
not least the scale, sophistication and range of the attack.
We note the Secretariat’s continued efforts to collect
and analyse information on the weapons used in the
14 September attack, and we welcome the Secretariat’s
observation that the number of impact points at the oil
facilities was consistent with the figures provided by
Saudi Arabia and inconsistent with Houthi statements.
We look forward to hearing the Secretariat’s findings
in due course.
Iran has also transferred missiles to a number
of armed groups, in violation of several Council
resolutions, including resolutions 2231 (2015), 2216
(2015) and 1540 (2004). The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/934) details concerning
evidence regarding the transfer by Iran into Yemen of
unmanned aerial vehicles and optical sights for rocketpropelled grenade launchers. Such proliferation is
destabilizing for the region and escalates already high
tensions; it should stop.
Current tensions in the region remain deeply
concerning, further escalation is in no one’s interest. I

S/PV. 8695

want to once again call for de-escalation dialogue and
full respect for international rules.
I note the interest of some members of the
Council and of Iran in resolution 598 (1987), about
regional dialogue. At the right time, and if genuinely
intentioned, this may be able to play a useful role, but I
think both timing and intent are critical ingredients if
any initiative along these lines is to get off the ground
in the right way.
We continue to hope that Iran will take steps to
regain the confidence of the international community
and assume its rightful role as a prosperous, responsible
Power constructively engaged in the region. We respect
the Iranian people. We have deep respect for Iran’s
civilization and the achievements of its past, but I urge
Iran not to undertake any more actions that would take
it further beyond JCPOA limits and instead to work
closely and in good faith with other participants to
implement its commitments fully and to help reduce the
escalating tensions in that region of the world.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the briefers for their statements
and the Secretariat for its thorough and detailed report
and for its commitment and professionalism. It may rest
assured of our full support.
We are meeting today for the eighth time in
this format since the entry into force of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), on 16 January
2016. Its adoption was the outcome of the tireless
efforts undertaken by the international community
to achieve the common goal of ending the serious
nuclear-proliferation crisis in the region. The merits
of the agreement in terms of non-proliferation have
been established and verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which confirmed that
up until July 2019, Iran had complied with its nuclear
commitments. The E3 and the European Union (EU),
for their part, fully complied with their commitments,
including the lifting of sanctions set out under the
agreement, and went beyond that by making efforts to
facilitate legitimate trade between Europe and Iran.
Today’s meeting is being held amid alarming
uncertainty. Like the Secretary-General, France
deplored the decision by the United States to withdraw
from the JCPOA and to reinstate national sanctions
against Iran. We are deeply concerned by the nuclear
measures taken by Iran since July last, which the IAEA
has described in its various reports. These recurrent

19-4230711/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

actions are at variance with the provisions of the
JCPOA and indicate a regrettable departure from the
agreement on the part of Iran and a serious threat of
nuclear proliferation. Iran must immediately return to
full compliance with its commitments under the JCPOA
and refrain from taking any additional measures at
variance with the agreement.
The commitments that have been undertaken do
not stop with the JCPOA but extend to cover the whole
of resolution 2231 (2015). We are especially troubled by
the information highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report vis-à-vis the ongoing non-compliance by
Iran with several of the agreement’s provisions. I am
referring here to various arms transfers to two other
actors in the Middle East, which must end. We have
taken note of the information in the report regarding
the dual attack conducted on 14 September last
targeting Saudi oil facilities. It is clear for us that Iran
bears responsibility therefor, as we established last
September with our British and German partners.
Furthermore, Iran continues to carry out particularly
destabilizing missile-related activities. I would mention
its efforts to develop a ballistic programme that is at
variance with resolution 2231 (2015). Iran is deploying
efforts, which France has flagged in the Council
on a number of occasions along with its British and
German partners, to improve the precision, reach and
lethality of those missiles. Beyond the development
of a domestic programme, Iran continues to engage in
ballistic material and technology transfers to State and
non-State actors in the Middle East, which attests to its
non-compliance with several Council resolutions; these
transfers are particularly destabilizing. It is vital that
Iran put an end to such activities and fully abide by the
resolutions adopted by the Council.
Given the mounting nuclear and regional
tensions in the Middle East, there is a vital need to
de-escalate and reach a political settlement through
ongoing diplomatic efforts and a commitment by all
parties. France, alongside its partners, stands ready
to engage to create the necessary conditions, promote
the achievement of a political settlement and foster
a de-escalation of tensions. Our commitment to the
JCPOA remains intact, as does our determination to
pursue our efforts on the basis of a broad and long-term
approach to its preservation. As the Foreign Ministers
of France, Germany and the United Kingdom and the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy underlined on 11 November,
12/24

19/12/2019

we remain ready to consider all mechanisms of the
JCPOA, including the dispute resolution mechanism,
to resolve issues related to Iran’s compliance with its
commitments under the JCPOA.
All stakeholders must do their part to preserve our
leeway to act and make progress. It is our collective
responsibility, and in the interest of all parties, to work
together to preserve the nuclear agreement and reach a
diplomatic settlement within the existing framework.
France calls on everyone around this table to rally
around that objective in the interest of preserving
international peace and security, of which the Council
is the guarantor.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the briefers for their remarks
this afternoon and for their commendable work in
effectively implementing the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015).
We welcome the eighth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/934) and the latest report issued by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In
that regard, we wish to highlight the verification and
monitoring undertaken by the IAEA to ensure the
implementation of the JCPOA and the use of nuclear
energy for exclusively peaceful purposes.
The Dominican Republic strongly supports
the JCPOA and its full implementation, as it is a
successful product of diplomacy, multilateralism
and the non-proliferation architecture. It is therefore
imperative to continue to undertake comprehensive
efforts to preserve it and not to toss aside the years
of hard work that led to its adoption. In that regard,
we welcome the good offices of the stakeholders, as
well as the cooperation of other States in upholding
the agreement, as is the case of the European Union,
which has implemented various measures such as the
establishment of the financial institution Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges to promote legitimate
commercial activities to ease the economic restrictions of
the unilateral sanctions imposed on Iran. In that regard,
we regret the withdrawal of the United States from the
agreement, the reimposition of sanctions and the recent
cancellation of exemptions on nuclear non-proliferation
projects under the plan and commercial oil activities.
At the same time, we note with concern that as
a result of the reimposition of sanctions in July, Iran
has begun to reduce its commitments agreed to in
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

the agreement, including by exceeding the limit of
3.67 per cent of enriched uranium. We therefore urge
Iran to avoid taking further steps that would violate
the agreement, the nuclear architecture and the trust
placed in it by the parties. We call on Iran to return to
full compliance with the provisions of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015), as the most viable way to ensure
that its nuclear programme is peaceful and solely for
the well-being of the Iranian people.
Together, we encourage Iran to address the concerns
raised by various States, including several parties to
the plan, regarding activities that do not keep with the
restrictive measures set forth in paragraph 3 of annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015), which calls on Iran not
to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
designed to deliver nuclear weapons. Moreover, we
call on Iran to avoid destabilizing activities, such as
alleged transfers of weapons and related technologies
to armed groups and States in conflict, which are also
inconsistent with the aforementioned resolution.
In conclusion, we wish to underscore that
the Secretary-General’s report indicates that Iran
continues to comply with the Additional Protocol to its
IAEA Safeguards Agreement, as well as transparency
measures, which we commend. For that reason and
taking into account that the Iranian authorities have
stated that the recent reduction of the country’s
commitments is a reversible step, we understand
that the JCPOA can be preserved. To achieve that,
however, the parties must narrow their differences
through dialogue that facilitates the easing of tensions
and the achievement of a solution that guarantees that
Iran will not increase its nuclear capacity or pose a
threat to international peace and security, especially
in the Middle East, while it is safely reintegrated into
the commercial and banking world and receives the
previously agreed on economic benefits.

S/PV. 8695

international nuclear non-proliferation regime and
maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East.
The Iranian nuclear issue is reaching a critical
turning point, and the implementation of the JCPOA is
being put to a severe test. Dialogue and negotiation point
to a realistic avenue to settle the Iranian nuclear issue.
The full and effective implementation of the JCPOA is
the only correct and effective way to resolve the Iranian
nuclear issue and ease the current situation. All the
parties concerned should work together to restore the
balance of rights and obligations under the plan.
China is concerned about the United States
unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA and its increase
of unilateral sanctions against Iran. In the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/934), he also states his
belief that such steps on the part of the United States
continue to run contrary to the goals set out in the
JCPOA and the resolution and may also impede Iran’s
ability to implement certain provisions of the plan or
the resolution. The Secretary-General’s observation
warrants serious attention on the part of the Council
and all the parties.
China has noted that Iran has remained largely
restrained in reducing its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA, and that it has stressed that all the
steps that it has taken in that regard are reversible
and subject to the monitoring and verification of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). All the
parties to the agreement should exercise restraint and
stay within the framework of the Joint Commission to
strengthen consultations, resolve their differences and
refrain from taking steps that might further complicate
the situation.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador
Pecsteen de Buytswerve and Ambassador Skoog for
their briefings and commend the parties concerned for
their efforts.

China commends all the parties to the agreement
for their courage and efforts. We appreciate Russia’s
continued efforts to take forward the modification of
the Fordow nuclear facility. We welcome the European
Union’s positive progress in setting up the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges, and we support France
in its continued diplomatic good offices. We further
support the IAEA in its continued objective and
impartial position in monitoring and verifying Iran’s
nuclear activities.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
endorsed by the Security Council, is a significant
achievement of multilateral diplomacy and an essential
component of international order based on international
law. It is of crucial importance for safeguarding the

China has always been committed to settling the
Iranian nuclear issue through political and diplomatic
channels and remains committed to consolidating the
international nuclear non-proliferation system and
safeguarding international regional peace and stability.

19-4230713/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

China is a negotiator of and participant in the JCPOA,
as well as its staunch defender and enforcer. China
will continue to work with all the parties to make new
progress in the modernization of the Arak heavy-water
reactor. We will continue to be objective, impartial
and responsible in our tireless efforts to uphold and
implement the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
China commends the Secretary-General’s report
for its call to uphold the agreement, protect the
freedom to pursue legitimate business with Iran,
support the procurement channel and maintain
regional stability. In the meantime, the report should
reflect the implementation of the resolution in an
objective, balanced and comprehensive manner so as
to ensure the accuracy of the information and fully
address Iran’s legitimate concerns and lawful rights
and interests.
The 2231 format of the Council is not a sanctions
mechanism. The Facilitator of the format and the
Secretariat should act strictly in accordance with their
mandate and function. In the current circumstances, all
the parties need to exercise caution in addressing Iran’s
missile launches and accurately interpret the relevant
Council resolution in order to avoid any negative
impact on the overall picture of the implementation of
the JCPOA. China notes Iran’s repeated statements on
the conventional and self-defensive nature of its missile
programme and hopes that the parties will take the
Iranian position seriously.
The proper handling of the Iranian nuclear issue is
closely linked to the maintenance of peace and stability
in the Middle East. Recently, the Middle East has seen
continued tensions and rapidly evolving hotspot issues.
China calls on all the parties concerned to remain calm,
exercise restraint, resolve disputes through dialogue
and consultation, refrain from taking actions that might
escalate regional tensions, respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries and refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of others. China
supports the Gulf countries in conducting dialogue on
regional security issues and supports the countries of
the region in their efforts to resolve conflicts.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, we would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing and to welcome once again our old
friend Ambassador Olof Skoog, who is now wearing a
different hat. We of course also thank Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium for his briefing on
14/24

19/12/2019

the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would
like to highlight several points.
First, Indonesia continues to support the full
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and of resolution 2231 (2015) as a whole.
We continue to regret the United States withdrawal from
the JCPOA and its further reimposition of unilateral
sanctions. While we understand the difficulties in the
implementation of the JCPOA in the context of the
United States sanctions, we are also concerned by Iran’s
moves to reduce its JCPOA commitments. Indonesia
strongly calls on all parties to remain committed to the
full and effective implementation of the JCPOA and of
resolution 2231 (2015), in good faith.
We commend the independence, professionalism
and impartiality of the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in verifying and
monitoring Iran’s implementation of its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA. We call on Iran to
continue to cooperate with the IAEA. Furthermore,
the deal is not only about non-proliferation, but also
about the economic interests of Iran. In that regard,
we continue to support legitimate trade activities with
Iran and welcome the decisions of Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden to join
the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges, as
elaborated earlier by Ambassador Skoog.
Secondly, we continue to note with concern the
differences in the interpretation and implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). Annex B of resolution 2231
(2015) is designed to improve transparency and create
an atmosphere conducive to the full implementation of
the JCPOA. It is therefore pertinent to implement that
resolution as a whole, together with the JCPOA. We
urge the parties to engage in a constructive dialogue to
solve those differences. In the same spirit, in order to
create an atmosphere conducive to implementation and
ensure stability in the region, we call upon Iran to take
into consideration the lawful concerns of other States
when carrying out its activities.
Thirdly, as a proponent of a balanced implementation
of the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Indonesia continues to
believe that the JCPOA is an essential element of the
global non-proliferation architecture. The JCPOA
was a significant diplomatic achievement endorsed by
the Security Council through resolution 2231 (2015).
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8695

Now the international community must live up to its
obligation to fully support it.

Nations to refrain “from actions that undermine
implementation of commitments under the JCPOA”.

We must also not forget our commitment to
achieving a world free of nuclear weapons. As a party
to the NPT, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty and the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, and as a main proponent of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, Indonesia calls on all
to support global nuclear disarmament. To that end, we
fully support the process towards the establishment of
a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, the first conference of
which has just concluded its first session. That takes us
one step closer to a world without nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction.

We are deeply concerned about Iran’s lack of
compliance with the JCPOA. The deliberate steps
Iran has taken since July violate core provisions and
increasingly undermine the value of the JCPOA for
nuclear non-proliferation. We urge Iran to reverse those
measures and return to full compliance without delay.
Let me note here that the issue of Iran’s compliance is a
matter of concern to all remaining JCPOA participants.
That issue is being addressed intensively within
the formats of the JCPOA, in particular at the latest
meeting of the Joint Commission on 6 December, as
well as during the ministerial meeting of the JCPOA
participants that was held on the margins of the highlevel week at the General Assembly. We will continue to
work hard to find a viable solution within the framework
of the JCPOA to this compliance issue. Together with
our E3 partners, we are ready to use, in good faith, all
available instruments provided by the JCPOA. Our goal
is and remains to preserve the JCPOA.

In closing, we call on everyone to demonstrate their
full commitment to peace, stability and the rule of law.
Only when we achieve those ends can we have a safe
and prosperous world for all.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) for their briefings. I would also like to
extend a particularly warm welcome to Ambassador
Olof Skoog in his new role as Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations and thank
him for his briefing. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat team for delivering yet
another thorough, well-evidenced and balanced report
(S/2019/934).
The turn of events since we last discussed the
implementation of resolution 2231 in June (see
S/PV.8564) is very worrying. Nevertheless, our
assessment remains the same. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) is firmly based on the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
strengthens the global nuclear non-proliferation
architecture. The JCPOA is an important asset for
security in the region and beyond. Preserving the
JCPOA is therefore in our shared European security
interests and, as we see it, in the interests of all.
We welcome and reiterate the Secretary-General’s
call for the full and effective implementation of
the JCPOA by all participants. We have upheld our
commitments under the JCPOA and will continue to do
so. We also wish to recall that paragraph 2 of resolution
2231 (2015) calls on all States Members of the United

Turning to annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), the
full and effective implementation of annex B is highly
important for regional and international stability. Again,
the findings of the Secretary-General with regard to
Iran’s ballistic missile activities and arms transfers give
rise to serious concerns. Iran is continuing to advance
the scope and precision of its ballistic missile arsenal,
as we have outlined in a number of E3 letters to the
Secretary-General, most recently on 21 November.
Tests and launches of ballistic missiles designed to be
capable of delivering nuclear weapons are inconsistent
with paragraph 3 of annex B. In our view, that includes
space-launch vehicles using such missile technology.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the
continued indications of illicit arms transfer activities
by Iran, in particular with regard to missiles and
missile technology, as we highlighted in the joint E3
letter of 21 November. It is extremely troubling that
the recipients of missile technology transfers seem to
be armed non-State actors. Such proliferation is highly
destabilizing and could aggravate the conflict dynamics
in the region in a serious way. Iran must cease those
transfer activities at once.
The Secretary-General’s report also points
to possible violations of the travel ban and assets
freeze provisions of the resolution. Those need to be
investigated. We strongly call on Iran to comply with

19-4230715/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

all provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), including
annex B, and we encourage all States to continue taking
appropriate steps to ensure effective respect for and
compliance with the provisions contained in annex B.
As other representatives referred to this earlier,
let me say that we fully stand behind the scope and
methodology of the report. Resolution 2231 (2015)
mandates the Secretary-General to examine and report
on the implementation of the entire resolution, including
all its annexes. Therefore, we fully support the 2231
(2015) team of the Secretariat looking into cases of the
possible illicit transfer of missiles, missile technology
and conventional weapons.
With regard to the Aramco attacks, we welcome
the fact that United Nations experts are involved in
the ongoing investigations. We look forward to further
reporting to the Council, and I recall and reaffirm the
assessment announced on 23 September by the E3
Heads of State and Government.
Before concluding, let me stress that we all need to
contribute to the easing of tensions in the region. The
dynamics of the past six months are dangerous and need
to be redirected towards de-escalation, restraint and
dialogue. We strongly support such efforts, which are
crucial to ensuring security and stability in the region.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I will now speak in my national capacity.
Belgium aligns itself with its European partners
in resolutely defending the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. It is one of the great successes of nuclear
non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy. Since its
entry into force, it has made it possible to guarantee
the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Moreover, the action plan is more than a
nuclear agreement. It is a confidence-building tool and
the result of 12 years of intensive diplomatic efforts,
based on dialogue and respect for the parties.
Like the Secretary-General and the majority of the
members of the Security Council, Belgium therefore
regrets the withdrawal of the United States from the
action plan. Belgium also regrets the reimposition
of unilateral sanctions by the United States, their
repercussions and the recent lifting of related nuclear
exemptions. Those measures prevent not only Iran,
but other United Nations Member States as well, from
implementing their commitments under resolution
2231 (2015), adopted unanimously by the members of
16/24

19/12/2019

the Council and supported by a large majority of the
international community.
Together with Denmark, Finland, Norway, the
Netherlands and Sweden, Belgium has just announced
its accession to the Instrument in Support of Trade
Exchanges, as my country attaches the utmost
importance to the preservation and full implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action by all
parties concerned.
At the same time, Belgium regrets Iran’s increasing
failure to honour its commitments under the action
plan. Like our European partners, we reject any lessfor-less approach and call on Iran to return to full
compliance with the action plan as soon as possible.
We also call on Iran to comply with resolution 2231
(2015) in its entirety, including the restrictive measures
in annex B. In that regard, I commend the professional
and impartial work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We have every confidence in the Agency’s
work and call on all parties to cooperate with it in full
transparency in verifying compliance with obligations
under the action plan.
We share our European partners’ concerns about
Iranian ballistic activities and arms transfers in the
region, particularly following the seizure of equipment
in Aden in December 2018. We call on Iran to refrain
from such activities, which are incompatible with
resolution 2231 (2015). They deepen mistrust and
contribute only to exacerbating tensions in the region.
Regional concerns must be addressed through proactive
dialogue and negotiations with all actors in the region.
Furthermore, all relevant Security Council resolutions
must be respected.
Belgium calls on stakeholders to exercise restraint.
Continuing to dismantle this successful nuclear
agreement, which is working, will not put us in a better
position to discuss regional issues or immediately
resolve the threats that it is already addressing. As we
approach the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, we believe that
it would be wise, on the contrary, to support it. The
action plan is based on the three main pillars of nuclear
disarmament to which the international community
subscribes, namely, non-proliferation, disarmament
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve and Ambassador
Skoog for their insightful briefings.
My delegation joins others in welcoming the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/934). I wish to reaffirm
South Africa’s commitment to the full implementation
of the resolution.
South Africa welcomes the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as an important and, indeed
timely and relevant, non-proliferation instrument,
which came out of intense diplomatic efforts and
complex negotiations among China, France, Germany,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, the United
States, the European Union and the Islamic Republic of
Iran in 2015. My delegation therefore fully supports the
Secretary-General’s view that such diplomatic efforts
must be preserved and be built upon.
South Africa notes the four steps undertaken by
Iran to partially cease the implementation of some
of its commitments under the JCPOA, which came
understandably 14 months after the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA. Notwithstanding the
merits of such undertakings by Iran, South Africa
wishes underscore that it remains of the utmost
importance for Iran to continue to comply with the
provisions of the JCPOA. Likewise, it is also critical
for all the remaining parties to the JCPOA to fully
implement and abide by its provisions.
South Africa continues to regret the decision of the
United States to withdraw from the JCPOA, and we share
the disappointment expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report regarding the United States decision not
to renew waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects
in the framework of the JCPOA. It is our view that the
decision of the United States will inadvertently affect
the ability of Iran to fully implement the provisions
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). It would
be important to recall that the lifting of sanctions,
especially on certain nuclear-related materials, was
part and parcel of the JCPOA.
While we commend the benefits of the JCPOA as
an essential instrument of nuclear non-proliferation,
we wish to stress that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the only guarantee that those weapons will
never be used again by anyone under any circumstances.
South Africa wishes to remind the Council that nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually
reinforcing processes. A lack of progress on nuclear

S/PV. 8695

disarmament will inadvertently affect the gains made
in the area of nuclear non-proliferation. South Africa
also wishes to underline the importance of respecting
the inalienable right of States parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
South Africa is a staunch supporter of nuclearweapon-free zones as one of the major contributors
to nuclear non-proliferation and critical building
blocks towards achieving the goal of a world without
nuclear weapons. In that regard, my delegation wishes
to highlight the urgent need for the establishment of a
zone in the Middle East free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction and, accordingly,
we take note of the political declaration agreed at the
Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone
Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass
Destruction, held from 18 to 22 November.
Finally, with regard to the broader security of the
region, South Africa joins others in expressing its
concern about the growing tensions in the Persian Gulf
and their impact on international peace and security.
South Africa urges all parties involved to exercise the
utmost restraint and not allow the situation to get out
of hand. The Council must support initiatives aimed at
the restoration of peace and stability, not only in the
Persian Gulf but also in the broader Middle East region.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the eighth report (S/2019/934) of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We
also wish to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her detailed briefing; Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of
Belgium, in his capacity as Facilitator, for the excellent
work he has carried on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); and Ambassador Olaf Skoog, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, for his coordination of the Joint Commission
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
My delegation takes note of the findings of
the eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and calls on
Member States, as well as all stakeholders, to comply
with the recommendations related to the nuclear issue,
including arms transfers, travel bans, assets freezes and
ballistic missiles. Concerning the illicit transfer and the

19-4230717/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

discovery of remnants of arms that may have fuelled
conflicts in the Middle East, Côte d’Ivoire is in favour
of the establishment of a consensual investigation
mechanism in order to shed light on all aspects of
those allegations.
Turning specifically to the issue of ballistic
missiles, my country calls on all stakeholders to reach
an agreement on the interpretation of the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015) in accordance with the letter
and spirit of paragraph 3 of annex B. We remain
convinced that many points of contention could be
resolved through the Joint Commission established by
the JPCOA in its annex IV. My delegation also calls for
capacity-building for Member States to enable them to
better master the procurement channel procedures for
the efficient implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Furthermore, with regard to the situation in the
Persian Gulf and in the Strait of Hormuz in particular,
my country calls on the parties to exercise restraint.
We urge all those concerned to refrain from any
action likely to rekindle regional tensions and threaten
navigation in that vital strait for trade.
We note with concern that, despite efforts by
the international community to limit the quantity of
nuclear weapons across the globe, the non-proliferation
architecture — one of the pillars of our collective
security — continues to be undermined. We would
therefore like to reiterate the urgent need for all States
to spare no effort to safeguard international peace and
security, which constitutes the very foundation of many
multilateral frameworks, notably the United Nations
and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), as well as the JCPOA.
Although we are concerned by the latest
developments regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
uranium enrichment rates, Côte d’Ivoire remains
convinced that the Iranian nuclear issue can be resolved
only within the framework of the JCPOA. We would
therefore like to reaffirm our full support for the
agreement and call for the further implementation of that
text, which was arrived at following long and intense
negotiations. My country welcomes the cooperation by
the Iranian authorities in that regard, as demonstrated
by the excellent verification work carried out by the
International Atomic Energy Agency on the ground
following the conclusion of the JCPOA. In its regular
reports, the Agency highlights the non-diversion of
declared nuclear material and the absence of undeclared
18/24

19/12/2019

nuclear material and activities. It also affirms that Iran
continues to apply, on a provisional basis, the Additional
Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement it entered into as
part of its ratification of the NPT.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls for the unity of
the Council on the Iranian nuclear issue with a view
to maintaining opportunities for its swift and final
resolution. We call upon all parties to maintain their
level of commitment to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action in order to build confidence and step up
cooperation to that end, while honouring all of their
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). My country
reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful resolution of
conflict and to dialogue as the most effective and lasting
means to settle disputes, no matter how complex.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank today’s
briefers for their respective informative presentations.
Poland supports the procurement channel
and the Procurement Working Group, as well as
the coordinating role of the European Union. We
believe that that transparency, non-proliferation and
confidence-building measure ensures the conformity
of relevant transfers with resolution 2231 (2015) and
contributes to supporting the non-proliferation regime.
We note, however, the decrease in the number of
proposals put forward in the latest reporting period.
Poland welcomes the latest report (S/2019/934)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We consider it a well-balanced
document. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), which constitutes an integral part of the
resolution, is an important achievement of multilateral
diplomacy — a key element of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture. However, the JCPOA is
at a crossroads, as has been rightly pointed out by the
Facilitator, Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve.
We regret that the future of the agreement has been
called into question as a result of the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA and actions taken by the
Islamic Republic of Iran since May 2018.
We join other European Union partners in expressing
our concern over steps taken by Iran to reduce its
nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA, as
reported by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Those actions by the crucial stakeholder of the JCPOA
might not only endanger its further implementation,
but may also make it difficult for the international
community to defend the JCPOA in its current form.
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

Poland echoes the Secretary-General’s call on Iran to
reverse those measures and refrain from taking further
steps to reduce its agreed commitments. We welcome
the International Atomic Energy Agency’s efforts to
strictly monitor and verify Iran’s commitments in
order to guarantee the exclusively peaceful nature of
the Iranian nuclear programme in line with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
JCPOA. Poland has full confidence in the Agency’s
professionalism and impartiality.
We call on Iran to uphold its commitment to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to never seek to develop
or acquire any nuclear weapons. We also call on Iran
to continue to apply the Additional Protocol to its
Safeguards Agreement and to formally ratify that
Protocol in the near future.
Poland is deeply concerned with the findings
of the Secretary-General’s report concerning Iran’s
engagement in ballistic missile tests and launches,
its continued illicit transfers of arms, missiles and
missile technology to actors in the region and its
on-compliance with travel-ban provisions — actions
that are inconsistent with annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). Dangerous trends associated with the
proliferation of missile-related goods and technologies
in the Middle East contribute to regional instability. We
encourage Iran to cooperate closely and constructively
with the international community in efforts aimed at
de-escalating tensions in the Middle East.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador
Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Ambassador of Belgium and
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for the comprehensive and detailed briefings
they just delivered. We also welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks the
Secretary-General for his eighth comprehensive and
balanced report (S/2019/934) on recent developments
in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). These
updates are important and certainly clarify key aspects
related to the Iranian nuclear programme.

S/PV. 8695

We agree that the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), unanimously endorsed by the
Security Council on 20 July 2015, is the faithful result
of the firmness of the international community on
proliferation issues and requires the full and effective
compliance of the signatory parties to achieve its
maximum potential.
We continue to commend the rigour, professionalism
and integrity of the work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as the mandated body for
verifying and monitoring the full implementation of
the JCPOA. Its support for the full implementation of
the plan, providing the international community with
its assessments and monitoring in the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in line with resolution 2231 (2015), is an
unequivocal confirmation of its work.
Equatorial Guinea has always considered the
JCPOA as the best option for resolving Iran’s nuclear
problem and therefore a sustainable way to reduce some
of the tensions in the Middle East. It is obviously in our
interest to express our concerns about the deterioration
that began 8 May 2018 in relation to this issue. We call
on all the parties concerned to review their positions
and to find some readjustment that will restore the
achievements of dialogue and multilateral diplomacy in
the proliferation regime that was established in 2015.
We are concerned by the IAEA’s assertion in
this latest report on the activities announced and
undertaken by the Islamic Republic of Iran to reduce
its commitments under the plan. It is important that
it conclude and confirm the ongoing verifications of
the non-diversion of declared nuclear materials and
assessments with respect to the absence of undeclared
nuclear materials and activities. It is relevant and
necessary that Iran pursue its implementation of the
Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement and
the implementation of the transparency measures
undertaken in the plan.
We agree with the stressed importance of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and resolution 2231
(2015), which we see as effective and essential tools
for nuclear non-proliferation and for stability in the
Middle East and the world at large. It is therefore the
responsibility of all parties to ensure strict compliance
with the commitments undertaken with respect to
these legal instruments and the restrictive measures
contained in annex B of the resolution.

19-4230719/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

Before concluding, we reiterate our confidence
in diplomatic efforts to find a sustainable solution to
this long-standing conflict, the consequences of which
threaten Iran’s economic stability and adversely affect
the well-being of its nation.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the valuable information provided by Assistant
Secretary-General Rosemary Di Carlo. We also
thank Ambassadors Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, as
Facilitator of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and Olof Skoog, representing the European
Union, for their briefings.
In line with its foreign policy objectives regarding
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
Peru attaches high priority to compliance with
resolution 2231 (2015), whereby the Council endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We
believe that that instrument, and the follow-up and
monitoring regime it provides for, reflect the values of
multilateralism and diplomacy in peacefully resolving
acute international disputes or situations of high
tension. The JCPOA should therefore be preserved.
We are following the implementation of the plan with
particular attention, both in the Security Council and
in the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). With regard to the latter, we
take note of the comprehensive report submitted by its
Director General.
Peru, like other Members of the United Nations,
regrets the withdrawal of the United States from the
plan, the reimposition of national sanctions and the
application of various actions that hinder the capacity of
the parties to implement it in its entirety. We also deplore
the measures that Iran has taken in response since the
middle of this year, aimed at reducing its commitments
under the JCPOA. We urge the Iranian authorities
to reverse these measures, to exercise restraint and
moderation, and to prioritize diplomatic channels.
To this end, we must stress the crucial supporting
role that IAEA plays in the implementation of the plan.
We particularly highlight its rigorous and impartial
work, and the value of its comprehensive reports on
its verification and monitoring activities in Iran. We
also consider it vital that the Council remain united
in its responsibility to ensure the full validity and
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
20/24

19/12/2019

(2015), so as to preserve the non-proliferation regime
and maintain international peace and security.
Finally, given the delicate situation in the
Persian Gulf, we join calls on the leaders of the
main stakeholders involved to show concrete signs
of moderation, commitment to peace and respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.
I am very grateful to today’s briefers.
The eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/934) on resolution 2231 (2015) describes an
abundance of Iranian activity carried out in flagrant
disregard of Council resolutions. We appreciate the
Secretary-General’s detailed report on the 14 September
attacks on Saudi Aramco oil facilities. As we have said
numerous times, Iran is responsible for those attacks.
The United Kingdom, France and Germany have
joined us in that assessment. There is simply no other
plausible explanation. Only Iran could have carried out
an attack of this complexity and scope. The weapons
used in the attack did not have the range to come from
Houthi territory. The unarmed aerial vehicles (UAVs)
had numerous characteristics in common with Iranian
designs, and the damage at the oil facilities shows that
the attack came from the north, not from the south, as
one would expect if the Houthis were responsible.
The Council should pause and consider what
that means. The Islamic Republic of Iran attacked
a sovereign nation from its own territory. That
provocative act must be condemned by all nations,
regardless of their stance on the nuclear deal. The
Council must hold Iran accountable. The SecretaryGeneral’s report also confirms that Iran continues to
destabilize the region, prolong violence in Yemen and
support the expansion of terrorist groups and proxies.
For instance, the Secretary-General highlights Iranian
transfers of advanced missile technology to Hizbullah
in Lebanon and the Houthis in Yemen. Further, Iran
continues to saturate the Middle East with arms, in
violation of resolution 2231 (2015). Among numerous
examples are rocket-propelled grenade-launchers
shipped to Aden, cruise missiles passed to the Houthis
and drones and explosives provided to Syria by the
Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps.
In late November, the United States interdicted a
vessel carrying arms off the coast of Yemen. That follows
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

the pattern of Iranian shipments to the Houthis. In this
shipment was a large amount of advanced weapons,
including sophisticated components of anti-ship cruise
missiles, land attack cruise missiles, air defence
missiles, UAV components and anti-tank missiles. Our
investigation into those weapons is ongoing. We expect
to provide additional details in the near future. We
have also given United Nations arms experts access to
that material.
Imagine what the Houthis might have done with
those Iranian weapons. With a cruise missile, they
could once again attack a civilian airport as they did
and Abha, Saudi Arabia, last year. With an Iranian
anti-ship missile, the Houthis could take aim at the
world’s shipping as they did when they hit a Turkish ship
carrying wheat in 2018. When Iran supplies weapons to
it the proxies, the threats are not abstract — just one
of those missiles could spark a regional confrontation
none of us wants.
Iran also continues to defy the Security Council’s
call in resolution 2231 (2015) to refrain from activities
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons. Meanwhile, the Commander
of the Al-Quds Force of the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard, Major General Soleimani, travels freely around
the region to help Iran’s proxies plan attacks and crush
peaceful protests. We remind all Member States that
they are obligated to prevent Soleimani’s entry into, or
transit through, their territories, pursuant to resolution
2231 (2015).
Regarding the assets freeze, Iranian Revolutionary
Guard firms on the resolution 2231 (2015) sanctions list
continue to work in third countries, in violation of the
resolution. That shows the importance of updating the
resolution’s list of sanctions individuals and entities with
accurate information. Such updates will help Member
States ensure full compliance with the assets freeze.
Iran’s provocations are relentless, and their
attempted explanations for each of the ones I have just
discussed strain credibility. In that way, Iran repeatedly
demonstrates its contempt for the Security Council. As
noted in the report, following Iran’s announcement
that it would begin uranium-enrichment activities
at the Fordow facility, the United States announced
the termination of the sanctions waiver regarding the
centrifuge cascade modification project, effective
15 December 2019. The United States rejects Iran’s use
of nuclear brinksmanship to normalize is destabilizing

S/PV. 8695

behaviour. Iran originally constructed Fordow as a
fortified underground bunker to secretly enriched
uranium. There is no legitimate reason for Iran to
resume enrichment at that site. Iran must immediately
cease its enrichment activity there.
The United States is willing to engage in dialogue
with Iran to negotiate a deal that will better serve
international peace and security, but we will not sit idly
by while Iran continues to destabilize the region. We
will do everything in our power to curb malign Iranian
behaviour, and we urge our partners on the Council to
do the same.
I also want to raise an issue of grave concern to the
United States. Iran’s response to recent protests across
the country has been brutal. The United States strongly
condemns Iran’s response, and we stand in solidarity
with the Iranian people. Although we still do not have a
full picture of the regime’s repression and human rights
abuses during those protests, we are deeply troubled
by what we do know. Videos from the scene show
that 40 to 100 protesters were massacred by Iranian
Revolutionary Guard forces in Mahshahr. It is likely
that the regime’s crackdown has been even been more
brutal than reports to date indicate.
The United States welcomes recent statements of
concern by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, but more must be done. We urge the
United Nations to focus on this matter, and we stress
that the relevant United Nations entities and Special
Rapporteurs should conduct a thorough investigation
into the Iranian Government’s response to the protests.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The Security Council is once again considering
the implementation of one of its most important
resolutions, namely, resolution 2231 (2015), which is
being vehemently violated by a permanent member of
the Council — an unprecedented development in the
history of the United Nations. In that regard, I wish to
express my appreciation to the other 14 members of the
Council for lending their valuable support to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
When the Council, through its unanimous adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), endorsed the JCPOA, the

19-4230721/24

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8695

whole world acclaimed a significant achievement of
dialogue and multilateral diplomacy and acknowledged
its indispensable contribution to international peace
and security. The resolution emphasizes that
“the JCPOA is conducive to promoting
and facilitating the development of normal
economic and trade contacts and cooperation
with Iran” (resolution 2231 (2015), thirteenth
preambular paragraph).
As the Secretary-General
recent report,

rightly

notes

in

his

“An essential part of the Plan is the lifting of
nuclear-related sanctions on the Islamic Republic
of Iran, allowing for the normalization of trade and
economic relations.” (S/2019/934, para.1)
Furthermore, based on the JCPOA, China, France,
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United
States committed to ensuring Iran’s access in the areas
of trade, technology, finance and energy, and the United
States committed to preventing interference with Iran’s
realization of the full benefits of the lifting of sanctions.
On 8 May 2018, the President of the United States
issued a presidential memorandum entitled, in part,
“Ceasing United States Participation in the JCPOA”.
In fact, the United States decided to illegally withdraw
from the JCPOA and, in contravention of its international
obligations, re-imposed all of its sanctions, which had
been lifted in accordance with the JCPOA. That and
subsequent developments rendered the JCPOA with
respect to Iran’s benefits almost fully ineffective. In
certain respects, the situation now is even worse than
before the JCPOA was concluded. Since then, the
application of the United States unlawful sanctions
has been extended to other States and, in essence,
the United States is punishing them for honouring
their international commitments in accordance with
resolution 2231 (2015) — another unprecedented
development in the history of the United Nations.
What the United States sanctions are intended to
achieve amounts to collective punishment of the general
public, which is prohibited even in armed conflicts.
They are also targeting the most vulnerable groups of
ordinary people in order to create discontent within
society — as such, that is inhumane in nature.
The United States sanctions are also targeting
different sectors of the Iranian economy, including the
oil and banking sectors, which is negatively affecting
22/24

19/12/2019

the daily lives of millions of Iranians. Contrary to the
claims of United States, its sanctions are neither short
of war or better than or an alternative to war; they are
actual war but by another means and name, pure and
simple. The United States, by weaponizing food and
medicine and with total disregard to the ruling of the
International Court of Justice of 3 October 2018, has
even extended its sanctions to other humanitarian goods.
Officials of the United States have confirmed that
the pain of sanctions for ordinary people is intentional
and part of a political strategy. The United States
Secretary of State has gone on record at least twice with
his conditions for allowing food and medicine to flow
to the Iranian people.
By any measure, the United States sanctions are
illegitimate, immoral, inhumane and cruel. It is a
shame that the United States bullying has resulted in the
discontinuation of exports of certain medicines to Iran,
causing a nightmare for some patients. For instance, a
European company, under the pressure of United States
sanctions, has stopped exporting special bandages for
patients suffering from epidermolysis bullosa, a rare
genetic condition resulting in easy blistering of the
skin. A 2-year-old girl from the city of Ahvaz, Ava, an
epidermolysis bullosa patient, is one of the “butterfly
children” — so called because their skin is as fragile
as a butterfly’s. To avoid infection, butterfly children
should be covered by special bandages. Not even
those bandages stop the pain. However, the alternative
is horrible, as it peels kids’ soft skin at the time of
removal. Nowadays, the importation of those special
bandages for epidermolysis bullosa has become almost
impossible, endangering the lives of innocent children
like Ava. Now butterfly children are feeling the pain of
the inhumane United States sanctions with their hearts
and souls. Ava was relieved of pain forever when she
passed away in June. Her story reflects only the tip of
the iceberg, as children and adults with cancer and rare
diseases are struggling in silence with death. Killing
children and patients takes no courage.
The United States maximum pressure policy and
sanctions are tantamount to economic terrorism and are
killing innocent people. Those who have been involved
in designing, advocating and executing those sanctions
must therefore be held accountable. The SecretaryGeneral is expected, consistent with his mandate
under paragraph 7 of presidential note S/2016/44, to
thoroughly report on United States sanctions and their
inhumane impact.
19-42307

19/12/2019

Non-proliferation

The United States has further illegally sanctioned
nuclear measures authorized under resolution 2231
(2015), thereby preventing Iran and other States from
implementing their commitments. Moreover, activities of
the procurement channel have been negatively affected.
Despite all the hardships inflicted on the Iranian people
as a result of the United States unlawful sanctions, Iran,
at the request of other JCPOA participants and based
on their assurances of compensation, waited for a year
and continued to fully implement its commitments.
On 6 July and 24 September 2018, Iran was assured
by JCPOA participants of compensation, especially in
establishing effective financial channels, the export of
oil, shipping and insurance, and protection from the
extraterritorial effects of United States sanctions. None
of those assurances have materialized to date.
Iran has been, and continues to be, committed
to the implementation of the JCPOA. That fact has
been confirmed time and again by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), including after the
reintroduction of unilateral sanctions by the United
States. However, the unilateral implementation of the
JCPOA is not sustainable. The deal needs more than
one willing and able party to be fully implemented.
After exercising strategic patience for a year, in the
face of apparent continued inaction by the European
participants in the JCPOA, and after witnessing that
the promises made to Iran were not honoured, Iran
was left with no other option than to act and take the
necessary measures to rectify the imbalance created
in the JCPOA. In doing so Iran, which had already
triggered and exhausted the JCPOA dispute-settlement
mechanism, eventually applied the remedy manifestly
recognized by the JCPOA and the Security Council.
That decision was carefully crafted to save the JCPOA.
Iran has ceased performing its commitments in part
in accordance with paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA.
To give room for diplomacy, a step-by-step approach
with two-month intervals has been designed. Iran’s
steps are reversible, but the damages inflicted upon
Iran and the Iranian people due to illegal sanctions are
not reversible at all. How can the opportunities that
have been lost, the economy that is affected and, above
all, the precious lives that have perished, as well as the
suffering of the Iranian people, especially children, the
elderly and patients, be reversed?
Iran has ceased implementing only some voluntary
measures. They have not affected Iran’s cooperation
with the IAEA. They are also not inconsistent with

S/PV. 8695

our safeguards-related obligations. The Agency has
repeatedly confirmed that Iran is subjected to the most
robust verification system in existence anywhere in the
world. It is noteworthy that in 2018 the number of all
IAEA safeguards inspections around the world stood
at 2,195, while up to November this year Iran was
subjected to more than 688 inspections, amounting to
1,376 person-day of inspections.
Iran has always respected its commitments and
responded to logic with logic and respect with respect.
However, we cannot and will not accept bullying from
any quarter. Our response to threats and intimidation
is in kind. At the moment, best efforts in good faith
are being made by Iran to sustain the JCPOA. As soon
as the full implementation of the JCPOA by other
participants is guaranteed, Iran will immediately
reverse all its measures. If there is a will for the full
implementation of the JCPOA by all concerned, there
is a way. However, Iran cannot remain indifferent to
the continuation of illegal sanctions and the lack of
a compensatory response to those sanctions by other
participants. Iran will take the necessary measures
to secure its national interests, and our options are
not limited. At the same time, any unnecessary and
unwarranted measures against Iran will be met with
decisive action, as has already been conveyed at the
highest level to our JCPOA partners.
The United States offer of unconditional talks with
Iran is disingenuous, emanating from its habit to enter
dialogue from a position of strength, and it is not based
on an equal footing. The call for dialogue with Iran
and the simultaneous insisting on the application of a
maximum pressure policy against the Iranian people
are mutually exclusive. Iran does not negotiate under
the threat of a sword. The United States has to make a
strategic decision. As an American proverb goes, you
cannot have your cake and eat it too. Either the United
States rejects diplomacy and continues with its horrible
and outdated maximum pressure policy, while scolded
by the Iranian people and branded at the international
level as an untrustworthy partner, or it can act as a
normal country and undo the sanctions. In that context,
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) by the
United States will pave the way for a genuine dialogue
to start within the framework of the nuclear deal.
Since the conclusion of the JCPOA, a few countries
have attempted to expand the involvement of the
Security Council to issues beyond Iran’s peaceful
nuclear programme. In the course of the nuclear

19-4230723/24

S/PV.8695

Non-proliferation

negotiations, we resisted the temptation of some
participants to include extraneous matters in the final
document, and hence did not agree either to touch Iran’s
legitimate defensive capabilities or affect its role in the
region, including in the fight against terrorism. Recent
attempts to link those issues, including through the
misinterpretation of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),
are completely unjust.
Acquiring legitimate means of defence is an
inherent right under international law. We are living in
a volatile and insecure region. Furthermore, the sale of
a large amount of heavy weaponry to our region has
turned it into a powder keg. Those who ask Iran to limit
its legitimate conventional capabilities are making
lots of money from exports of deadly weaponry to the
region. Under no circumstances will Iran compromise
on its security.
Iran does not possess nuclear weapons and
committed in the JCPOA to never seek, develop or
acquire them. Accordingly, Iran’s missiles are not
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons,
and therefore are outside the purview of resolution
2231 (2015). The term “designed to be capable”
was deliberately chosen pursuant to cumbersome
negotiations in order to exclude Iran’s conventional
missiles from the scrutiny of the resolution. That notion
is well reflected in Iran’s statement following the
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/PV.7488). The
arbitrary reinterpretation of the resolution by recourse
to non-legally binding definitions of an informal,
and yet exclusive, 35-member club like the Missile
Technology Control Regime is totally misleading and
therefore unacceptable.
In conclusion, our observations with regard to the
Secretary-General’s report are contained in my recent
letter to the Council and cover our views on issues
that have not been addressed in my remarks today. I
take this opportunity to also make a few comments
regarding the observations made by some members on
issues irrelevant to this meeting’s agenda.
First, on the attack against the Aramco oil
facilities, we have repeatedly and categorically

24/24

19/12/2019

rejected all allegations against us in that regard. As
the Council might recall, immediately — I repeat,
immediately — after the attack, both the United States
and Saudi Arabia claimed that Iran was responsible for
the attack. Such claims were fully consistent with their
typical practice in similar situations insofar as they
first accuse Iran and then pretend that they will conduct
a thorough investigation. The predetermined outcome
of such an investigation has been, and continues to be,
predictable. They consistently result in some forced
photos or videos or fabricated documents proving Iran’s
so-called direct or indirect involvement.
Secondly, today the Council has also been
misinformed regarding the ongoing situation in the
Middle East. The common denominator of the past
and present situation in the Middle East is that the
United States, through its divide-and-rule policy,
has consistently and continuously fanned and fuelled
regional conflicts. In turn, Iran has been and will
remain a strong force against insecurity, terrorism and
extremism in the region. One living example of that is
our assistance to the Governments and the peoples of
Iraq and Syria in defeating Da’esh.
Despite all these attempts, nothing can disconnect
the strong historic, cultural and religious fraternal bonds
among the countries of the region. We have always
supported the establishment of a security structure
in the Persian Gulf area. The recent initiative of our
President, known as the Hormuz Peace Endeavour,
is the right plan introduced at the right time. We are
prepared to engage with our neighbours to arrive at a
mutually agreed plan as soon as possible.
Thirdly, raising Iran’s internal matters in this
meeting is in gross violation of the very basic principles
upon which the Organization is founded. Paragraph 7
of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations clearly
prohibits the Organization’s intervention or interference
in the internal affairs of States. We totally reject the
allegations raised against my country in that regard.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

19-42307
