VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

threat not only to the oppressed peoples of southern
Africa, but also to all African States and particularly
to the independence of the front-line States, and to
international peace and security,
Regretting that the Security Council has not been
in a position to take binding decisions to prevent any
collaboration in the nuclear field with South Africa,
Also concerned at the frantic efforts made by the
apartheid regime of South Africa to acquire nuclear
weapons,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the oppressed
peoples of southern Africa to self-determination, independence and the enjoyment of the natural resources of
their territories;
2. Again reaffirms the right of those same peoples
to dispose of those resources for their greater wellbeing and to obtain just reparation for the exploitation,
depletion, loss or depreciation of those natural resources, including reparations for the exploitation and
abuse of their human resources;
3. Vigorously condemns the policies of maintaining
the economic interests of certain Western and other
States, as well as the activities of multinational corporations, and the increasing collaboration by some
of those States and multinational corporations with the
racist regimes in southern Africa, especially in the
political, economic, military and nuclear fields, which
impedes the enjoyment of human rights of the oppressed peoples of southern Africa;
4. Reaffirms once again that the States which give
assistance to the colonial and racist regimes in southern
Africa become accomplices in the inhuman practices
of racial discrimination, colonialism and apartheid
perpetrated by those regimes;
5. Requests the Security Council finally to adopt
binding decisions to prohibit all collaboration with
South Africa in the nuclear field, and to take effective
measures to prevent the apartheid regime from acquiring nuclear weapons;
6. Appeals to all States scrupulously to observe the
sanctions imposed by the United Nations on the illegal
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia and the arms
embargo imposed by the Security Council under its
resolution 418 (1977) of 4 November 1977;
1. Appeals to all States, the specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations to extend all possible co-operation to the liberation movements of
southern Africa recognized by the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity;
8. Expresses its appreciation for the updated report
submitted by the Special Rapporteur;
. 9. ~nv_ites t~e C~mmission o~ Human Rights to
give pnonty at its thuty-fifth session to consideration
of the above-mentioned report prepared in pursuance
of resolution 2 (XXXI) of the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to have the
ab_ove-mentioned report of the Special Rapporteur
prmted, to arrange for its widest possible dissemination
and to transmit it to the Special Committee against
Apartheid, the United Nations Council for Namibia
and other bodies concerned within the United Nations
system;

137

11. Decides to consider this item at its thirty-fifth
session as a matter of high priority in the light of any
recommendations which the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
the Commission on Human Rights, the Economic and
Social Council and the Special Committee against
Apartheid may wish to submit to it.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/24.

Importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial t"ountries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX) of
29 November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, 31/34 of 30 November 1976 and 32/14 of
7 November 1977, and Security Council resolutions
418 (1977) of 4 November 1977 and 437 (1978) of
10 October 1978,
Recalling also its resolutions 2465 (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 197 4 on the use and recruitment of mercenaries against national liberation movements and
sovereign States,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,9
of the letter dated 14 June 1978 from the representative of Senegal1° transmitting the text of the resolutions
adopted by the Ninth Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers, and of the letter dated 6 September 1978
from the representative of Yugoslavia11 transmitting
the documents of the Conference of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries,
Recalling the Maputo Declaration in Support of the
Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the Programme
of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the International Conference in
Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, 12
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and the
Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid1 3
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid,
Taking note of the Political Declaration 14 adopted by
the First Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the
League of Arab States, held at Cairo from 7 to 9
March 1977,
Considering that the activities of Israel, in particular
the denial to the Palestinian people of their right
11 A/33/199 and
10 A/33/151.
11 A/33/206.

Add.1-3.

12 A/32/10?/Rev.I-S/ 12344/Rev.l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirtv-.l"ccond
Year, Supplement for July, Au[?ust and September 197·7_
_13 Report of the World Conference for Action ag11i11s1 Ap:trthetd, La{?os, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations puhlic:ition,
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 ,md corrigendum). sect. X.
H A/32/61, annex I.

138

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

to self-determination and independence, constitute a
serious and increasing threat to international peace
and security,
Reaffirming its faith in General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and the importance of
its implementation,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperatives for the full enjoyment of
all human rights,
Affirming that "bantustanization" is incompatible
with genuine independence, unity and national sovereignty and has the effect of perpetuating the power of
the white minority and the racist system of apartheid
in South Africa,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to
comply with the principles of the Charter and the
resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise
of the right to self-determination by peoples under
colonial and alien domination,
Welcoming the independence of Solomon Islands,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Indignant at the continued violations of the human
rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and South Africa's
attempts to dismember its territory, the perpetuation
of the racist minority regimes in Zimbabwe and South
Africa and the denial to the Palestinian people of their
inalienable national rights,
1. Calls upon all States to implement fully and
faithfully the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial and alien domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples for independence, territorial integrity, national
unity and liberation from colonial and foreign domination and foreign occupation by all available means,
particularly armed struggle;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe, of the Palestinian people and
of all peoples under alien and colonial domination to
self-determination, national independence, territorial
integrity, national unity and sovereignty without external interference;
4. Demands the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of France from the Comorian island of
Mayotte, which is an integral part of the Federal and
Islamic Republic of the Comoros;
5. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and
reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South
Africa in their just and legitimate struggle against the
racist minority regime in Pretoria;
6. Condemns the violations of the sanctions ordered by the Security Council against the illegal rebel
regime in Southern Rhodesia and accordingly deplores
the decision of the Government of the United States
of America to allow Ian Smith to enter the United
States;

7. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are criminals, and calls upon the
Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territory and the transit of mercenaries
through their territory to be punishable offences and
prohibiting their nationals from serving as mercenaries,
and to report on such legislation to the SecretaryGeneral;
8. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries whose political, economic, military, nuclear,
strategic, cultural and sporting relations with the racist
regimes in southern Africa and elsewhere encourage
these regimes to persist in their suppression of the
aspirations of peoples for self-determination and independence;
9. Again demands the immediate application of the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed under Security Council resolution 418 (1977),
by all countries and particularly by those countries
that maintain military co-operation with the racist
Pretoria regime;
10. Strongly condemns all Governments which do
not recognize the right to self-determination and independence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, notably the peoples
of Africa and the Palestinian people;
11. Strongly condemns the ever-increasing massacres of innocent and defenceless people, including
women and children, by the racist minority regimes
of southern Africa in their desperate attempt to thwart
the legitimate demands of the people;
12. Further condemns the expansionist activities
of Israel in the Middle East, as well as the continuous
bombing of civilian Arab and, in particular, Palestinian
populations and the destruction of their villages and
encampments, which constitutes a serious obstacle to
the realization of the self-determination and independence of the Palestinian people;
13. Demands the immediate release of all persons
detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle for
self-determination and independence, full respect for
their fundamental individual rights and the observance
of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, under which no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; 1 ~
14. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and
foreign rule continue to receive from Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, and calls for a maximization of this assistance;
15. Takes note of the studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, dealing with the following subjects:
(a) Historical and current development of the right
to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United Nations organs, with particular reference to the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms; 16
1 5 Resolution 217 A (III).
16 E/CN.4/Sub.2/404 (vols.

I to III).

VI,

Reaolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and
foreign domination to self-determination;17
and expresses its thanks to their authors;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
to give the widest possible publicity to the struggle
being waged by oppressed peoples for the realization
of their self-determination and national independence;
17. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtyfourth session on the basis of the reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations have been requested to submit concerning the strengthening of
assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under
foreign domination and control.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978

33/25.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957, in which it provided for the establishment
of an Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
well as its resolutions 1958 (XVIII) of 12 December
1963 and 2294 (XXII) of 11 December 1967, in
which it provided for subsequent increases in the
membership of the Executive Committee,
Bearing in mind the interest in the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the range of refugee problems confronting the Office,
Noting that the Executive Committee has at present
a membership of thirty-one States Members of the
United Nations or members of any of the specialized
agencies,
1. Decides to increase the membership of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme by up to nine additional members;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its first regular session of 1979, to elect, in consultation
with the regional groups, up to nine additional members of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme from those States with a demonstrated interest in and devotion to the solution of
the refugee problem.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/26.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
his Office 18 and having heard his statement,19
11 E/CN.4/Sub.2/405 (vols. I and II).
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/33/12) and Supplement No.
12A (A/33/12/Add.1).

139

Recalling its resolutions 32/67 and 32/70 of 8 December 1977 and noting the gravity of the problems
continuing to face the High Commissioner in his efforts
to assist refugees and displaced persons in many parts
of the world,
Reaffirming that the activities of the High Commissioner are eminently humanitarian in character and
that there is need to assist, on as wide a basis as
possible, his efforts to promote permanent solutions
through voluntary repatriation, local integration or
resettlement in other countries,
Commending Governments for the humanitarian
spirit in which they have received refugees and for
the generous manner in which they have contributed
to alleviating suffering,
Deploring the fact that refugees often face the threat
of refoulement, arbitrary detention and the denial of
asylum and noting that it is necessary to ensure their
basic human rights, protection and safety, inter alia,
through further accessions to and more effective implementation of international instruments, notably the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees20
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees, 21
Noting that the increased needs of the refugees and
displaced persons of concern to the Office require the
widening of financial and other support from Governments and the closest co-operation of United Nations
bodies and non-governmental organizations,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the efficient
manner in which they continue to discharge their many
responsibilities in assisting refugees and displaced persons and takes note with appreciation of the report
of the High Commissioner, including the report of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme on its twenty-ninth session; 18
2. Requests the High Commissioner to intensify his
efforts to assist refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office, especially with a view to providing
urgent humanitarian assistance to the large and increasing numbers in need in Africa, Asia and Latin
America;
3. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue to promote permanent and speedy solutions, in
close co-operation with Governments, United Nations
bodies and non-governmental organizations;
4. Commends Governments that are actively encouraging voluntary repatriation or return as a solution
to the problems in their area and requests the High
Commissioner to render all possible assistance in such
situations in lending help in the rehabilitation of the
returnees;
5. Urges Governments to continue to co-operate
closely with the High Commissioner in efforts to
achieve the self-sufficiency and, where possible, the
integration of refugees in countries of asylum, and to
accept for resettlement, on the widest possible basis,
refugees from countries of first asylum;
6. Further urges Governments to continue to facilitate the work of the High Commissioner in the field
19 Ibid., Thirty-t~i~d Sessi?n, Third Committee, 43rd meeting,
paras. 1-13; and 1b1d., Third Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
20 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545 p. 150.
21 Jbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
'
