S/2015/147

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 February 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 6 November 2014 to 27 February 2015

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my last report of
5 November 2014 (S/2014/784).
2.
A serious breach of the cessation of hostilities between Lebanon and Israel
occurred on 28 January, when Hizbullah launched several anti-tank guided missiles
from the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) towards an Israeli military convoy south of the Blue Line in the vicinity
of the Shab’a Farms area. Two Israeli soldiers were killed and several other soldiers
and civilians injured in the attack. During subsequent fire by the Israel Defense
Forces into Lebanon, a peacekeeper from UNIFIL was also killed, and the Security
Council condemned his death in the strongest ter ms. Rockets were then fired from
the UNIFIL area of operations and further shelling by the Israel Defense Forces
ensued before the firing ceased. Hizbullah claimed responsibility for the attack,
which it said had been in retaliation for an alleged Israeli airstrike on 18 January on
the Golan in the Syrian Arab Republic, which killed six Hizbullah members and a
high-ranking Iranian military officer. The immediate engagement with the parties by
my Special Coordinator and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force C ommander,
including through UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements, prevented further
escalation and helped restore the cessation of hostilities. I addressed the
developments directly with both Prime Minister Tammam Salam and Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu, calling for a return to calm and for all concerned to act
responsibly. My Special Coordinator was also in contact with regional partners for
their support in this regard. In spite of this serious violation, Israel and Lebanon
reaffirmed their commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
the stability of the Blue Line area.
3.
During the reporting period, the Lebanese Armed Forces continued to work
robustly to contain threats emanating from extremist armed groups along the bor der
with the Syrian Arab Republic. There has been continued violence in and around the
town of Arsal, including car bombs and attacks on the Lebanese Armed Forces.

15-03022 (E)

060315

*1503022*

S/2015/147

Lebanese soldiers and security personnel continue to be held hostage near Arsal by
the Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
4.
There was a major terrorist attack targeting the Alawite community in Tripoli
on 10 January, which caused a number of casualties. Cross-border shelling and
shooting from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon continued, causing some
injuries and material damage. There were also a number of airstrikes by Syrian
government aircraft on Lebanese territory. The Lebanese Armed Forces reported
continued smuggling of weapons across the Lebanese-Syrian border.
5.
As a result of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, Syrians continue to
seek shelter in Lebanon. As at 1 February, there were over 1,168,000 Syrian
refugees registered with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon, an increase of approximately 30,000 since my last
report. However, there has been an overall decline in the number of refugees being
registered as a result of new restrictions on entry into Lebanon. On 15 and
16 December, the Deputy Secretary-General visited Lebanon and jointly launched
the Lebanon Response Crisis Plan for refugees and host communities with Prime
Minister Salam.
6.
The Cabinet of Prime Minister Salam has continued to govern within the
constraints caused by the persistent vacuum in the presidency. There have been
19 sessions of Parliament to elect a new president, but owing to the lack of a
quorum resulting from the absence of members of Parliament from the 8 March
bloc, the parliamentary process has been blocked. Talks between representatives of
the Free Patriotic Movement and the Lebanese Forces have not yet moved forward
with respect to an agreement over a candidate. Following a vote by parliamentarians
on 5 November to extend Parliament’s mandate until 20 June 2017, the
Constitutional Court upheld the legality of the vote in a decision on 30 November.
7.
On 23 December, the Future Movement and Hizbullah initiated a dialogue
under Speaker Nabih Berri’s auspices aimed at measures, which, among other
things, would lower tensions between the Sunni and Shia communities, and agreeing
on a mechanism to elect a new president. Five sessions of the dialogue have now
been held, which have led to agreement on steps to calm the situation on the ground,
where necessary, and on the need for the authorities to conduct sensitive security
operations. These include a raid on Roumieh prison and the implementation of a
security plan for the northern Beqaa, which is now under way.
8.
On 31 December, the Secretary-General extended the mandate of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon for a period of three years from 1 March 2015, in accordance
with resolution 1757 (2005).

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
9.
A UNIFIL investigation was launched immediately to determine the facts and
circumstances of the 28 January incidents. At the time of writing, the preliminary
investigation had been completed and an interim investigation report shared with the
parties. Preliminary information indicates that Hizbullah launched six anti -tank

2/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

guided missiles from the vicinity of Maysat village in the UNIFIL area of operations
(Sector East) towards an Israel Defense Forces convoy approximately five
kilometres south of the Blue Line in the vicinity of the Shab’a Farms area. Two
Israeli soldiers were killed and seven Israeli soldiers and four civilians were injured
in the attack, which destroyed three vehicles. The Israel Defense Forces retaliated
with artillery and mortar rounds, which impacted in the areas of Arab el Louaize,
near Ghajar, El Majidiye and Kafr Shuba (Sector East). During the course of
retaliatory fire a UNIFIL peacekeeper in position 4 -28 was killed.
10. Following Israeli retaliation, five rockets were fired from the UNIFIL area of
operations in the vicinity of Kafr Shuba, impacting south of the Blue Line. The
Israel Defense Forces responded anew with tank fire and artillery in the direction of
Kafr Shuba. During the entire period, the Israel Defense Forces fir ed a total of
approximately 90 rounds of 155 mm artillery, 28 rounds of mortar and 5 tank
rounds. The preliminary investigation by UNIFIL also showed that this retaliation
included 20 white phosphorus mortar shells. UNIFIL personnel also reported mortar
fire from the east of United Nations position 4-7C in the UNIFIL area of operations,
but this could not be confirmed. There were no reports of further casualties. The
escalation was contained and fire ceased on both sides shortly thereafter. This
violence constituted violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of the cessation of
hostilities. UNIFIL remained closely engaged with both the Lebanese Armed Forces
and the Israel Defense Forces as events developed, urging both sides to exercise
maximum restraint in order to avoid any further escalation of the situation and
restore the cessation of hostilities.
11. In a statement on 28 January, Hizbullah claimed responsibility for the attack
on the Israeli military convoy that it attributed to its “Quneitra martyrs group ” in
reference to the 18 January alleged Israeli airstrike against Hizbullah elements and a
high-ranking Iranian military officer in the Golan. In a letter dated 28 January
(S/2015/58), the Permanent Representative of Israel urged the Security Council to
condemn Hizbullah, calling for it to be disarmed and for the Government of
Lebanon to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006). In a letter dated 29 January
(A/69/754-S/2015/69), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon stressed that his
Government was committed to the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006) in their
entirety and called on the Security Council to condemn Israel’s “bombardment of
Lebanon” as a flagrant violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
12. The incident of 28 January and Hizbullah’s claim of responsibility
demonstrated that unauthorized weapons are present in the UNIFIL area of
operations in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The Lebanese Armed Forces has
primary responsibility for ensuring at all times that the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River is free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL in accordance with resolution
1701 (2006). In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL does not proactively search
for weapons in the south. UNIFIL, in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces,
takes immediate action within all means and capabilities available in its mandate
and to the full extent provided for in its rules of engagement, when specific
information is received regarding the illegal presence of armed personnel or
weapons inside its area of operations. Under its mandate, UNIFIL cannot enter or
search private property unless there is credible evidence of a violation of resolution
1701 (2006), including an imminent threat of hostile activity from that location.

15-03022

3/17

S/2015/147

13. In addition, UNIFIL observed several instances of persons carrying
unauthorized weapons in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). On 16 January, one
man was carrying a pistol in Deir Mimess (Sector West). On 20 January, UNIFIL
observed two men, each carrying an AK-47 assault rifle, in Tyre (Sector West). On
the same day, in Sarda (Sector East), two men were spotted with two AK -47 rifles,
while apparently providing security for a convoy of vehicles. In all cases, UNIFIL
alerted the Lebanese Armed Forces.
14. Presumed hunting weapons also were seen by UNIFIL, but a decrease in the
number of civilians carrying hunting weapons south of the Litani River was noted
since the last report. In order to curb this activity, the Lebanese Armed Forces
issued a public statement on 25 November reminding the local population of the ban
against carrying hunting weapons south of the Litani River. UNIFIL patrols
continued to inform the Lebanese Armed Forces when hunters were observed.
15. Since my last report, Israel violated Lebanese airspace almost daily, mostly
with unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, in violation of resolution
1701 (2006). UNIFIL protested the violations to the Israel Defense Forces and
called upon the Government of Israel to stop the overflights immediately. The
Government of Lebanon also protested these violations of Lebanese sovereignty.
However, the Government of Israel continued to claim that the overflights were
necessary for the security of the country.
16. Israel also continued to occupy northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of
the Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty.
UNIFIL received no response from Israel to its proposal, submitted to both parties
in 2011, concerning security arrangements aimed at facilitating the withdrawal of
the Israel Defense Forces from the area. The Lebanese Armed Forces conveyed in
July 2011 its approval of the proposal.
17. Most ground violations of the Blue Line were perpetrated by farmers or
shepherds for short periods of time in the vicinity of Shab’a, Kafr Shuba, Bastara,
Blida, El Majidiye (Sector East) and Rumaysh (Sector West). In some c ases, the
shepherds, along with their flocks, stayed south of the Blue Line for several hours.
18. In a few cases, violations of the Blue Line were perpetrated by young men, at
times armed, in civilian attire or indistinguishable military uniforms, climbin g on
top of Blue Line barrels. UNIFIL expressed concern to the Lebanese authorities at
such activities, which also involved moving close to the Blue Line and monitoring
the southern side of the Blue Line with Global Positioning System (GPS) devices,
binoculars and professional cameras.
19. UNIFIL generally enjoyed full freedom of movement throughout its area of
operations. There were two serious incidents during the period in which UNIFIL
patrols were assaulted by men with unauthorized weapons. On 30 Decemb er, in
Ramyah (Sector West), a UNIFIL patrol was assaulted by a group of approximately
15 civilians bearing pistols and a twin-barrel gun, after they had been observed
violating the Blue Line by climbing on a Blue Line barrel. The group removed some
UNIFIL equipment. UNIFIL vehicles arriving to provide reinforcement to the patrol
were blocked about 100 metres away by another group of around 20 civilians,
armed with pistols, knives and sticks. One man who was trying forcefully to enter a
UNIFIL vehicle threatened a peacekeeper by holding a knife to his throat, while

4/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

others threatened the patrol with pistols. UNIFIL fired a warning shot, upon which
the mob dispersed from the scene. To date, the equipment has not been returned.
20. On 23 January in Marwahin (Sector West), two armed men in civilian vehicles
overtook and blocked a UNIFIL military police vehicle and used their pistols to
repeatedly hit the vehicle, demanding a camera that they alleged the UNIFIL
personnel had used. More vehicles, carrying approximately 15 men, most of them
armed, arrived at the scene. As the UNIFIL military police officer attempted to call
UNIFIL headquarters, the group snatched his cell phone, ransacked the vehicle, cut
the radio wire and stole a number of items, including a radar speed gun, a camera
and a cell phone. UNIFIL protested these incidents to the Lebanese authorities and
requested that all incidents be investigated and their perpetrators held accountable.
21. In addition, UNIFIL patrols encountered four instances of aggre ssive
behaviour. On 21 November, a group of seven youths threw stones at the vehicles of
a UNIFIL patrol at Majda Zun (Sector West). On 8 December, the leader of a
UNIFIL patrol was approached in Hallusiyat Al Fawqa (Sector West) by a group of
civilians who took away his GPS device. The device was later returned to UNIFIL.
On 28 December near Ayta ash-Shab (Sector West), a GPS device was snatched
from a UNIFIL patrol by two men passing on an unregistered motorbike. On
20 January, a military laptop used for navigational purposes was stolen from a
UNIFIL patrol during a confrontation with a group of civilians near Yatar (Sector
West). The Lebanese Armed Forces intervened and escorted the UNIFIL patrol out
of the village.
22. The Force’s freedom of movement was obstructed on two additional
occasions. On 28 November, a UNIFIL foot patrol was denied access along a road
close to Majda Zun (Sector West) by three civilians in a vehicle with a satellite
phone. On 29 December, a UNIFIL vehicle patrol was denied access along a road
close to Ash Sh’aytiyah (Sector West) by a group of civilians in cars and on
scooters.
23. The aforementioned incidents notwithstanding, the relations of the Force with
the local population remained largely positive. The Mission, in coordinati on with,
among others, international and Lebanese non-governmental organizations,
undertook regular outreach and liaison activities, including medical and dental
assistance to the population, as well as road safety programmes for schoolchildren
and veterinary services. UNIFIL continued to implement and monitor quick -impact
projects in support of its mandate, including projects undertaken by troop contributing countries.
24. On 30 December, an Israel Defense Forces tank pointed its main gun at and
tracked a foot patrol from Observer Group Lebanon along the banks of the Wazzani
River. On 14 January in Houla (Sector East), three Israel Defense Forces soldiers
threw stones at two Lebanese civilians, who were taking pictures southward of the
Blue Line.
25. The Lebanese Armed Forces protested an incident that reportedly occurred on
18 January in Ayta ash-Shab (Sector West), in which one Israel Defense Forces
soldier allegedly activated smoke or tear gas grenades near the technical fence. The
Lebanese Armed Forces said that the smoke had drifted towards Lebanese personnel
positioned north of the Blue Line and caused respiratory problems among the

15-03022

5/17

S/2015/147

soldiers. UNIFIL did not observe the incident, but conducted an investigation that
was inconclusive.
26. The strength of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River remained at approximately two brigades. The Lebanese Armed
Forces continued their reinforcement in the vicinity of Shab’a village and the
Arkoub area (Sector East).
27. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces continued to carry out their daily
coordinated activities between the Blue Line and the Litani River. UNIFIL
conducted on average 11,600 activities (patrols, checkpoints and observation tasks)
monthly, including operations carried out in close coordination with the Lebanese
Armed Forces.
28. As at 1 January, UNIFIL had carried out 348 joint or coordinated exercises
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, including 160 training activities and 12 sea
exercises conducted by the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force with the Lebanese Navy.
29. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued to carry out its dual mandate of
conducting maritime interdiction operations and training the Lebanese Armed
Forces. Since the last report, the Maritime Task Force hailed 1,285 ships, and the
Lebanese Navy and Customs officials inspected 278 vessels to verify that there were
no unauthorized arms or related materiel on board.
30. There were several incidents at sea that had the potential to raise tensions
between the parties. On 20 January, UNIFIL observed an Israel Defense Forces
patrol boat inside Lebanese territorial waters, 1,500 metres north of the line of
buoys. The maritime border between Israel and Lebanon is disputed and UNIFIL
has no mandate to monitor the line of buoys, which was installed unilaterally by the
Government of Israel and is not recognized by the Government of Lebanon. On
13 January, two divers from a Lebanese Armed Forces patrol boat briefly entered
the water from the north near the line of buoys. Subsequently, Israel Defense Forces
divers visited the same general area, south of the line of buoys. The Israel Defense
Forces protested this activity to UNIFIL, which in turn informed the Lebanese
Armed Forces. On several occasions, Israel Defense Forces patrol boats pointed
searchlights or launched flares at fishing boats in Lebanese waters. On 8 December,
several Israel Defense Forces patrol boats fired automatic weapons when a
Lebanese fishing boat was present 1,000 metres north of the line of buoys.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
31. UNIFIL continued to make extensive use of its liaison and coordination
arrangements with the parties, including during times of crisis. Following the
exchange of fire on 28 January between Hizbullah and the Israel D efense Forces,
UNIFIL, through those arrangements and its deployment on the ground, helped to
defuse the situation. The liaison and coordination arrangements constitute the basis
for safeguarding the cessation of hostilities, ensuring full respect for the Blue Line
and promoting security and stability in southern Lebanon in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The parties continued to engage constructively with UNIFIL
at the tactical, operational and strategic levels, as well as in tripartite and b ilateral
settings. There was no progress towards establishing a UNIFIL liaison office in
Tel Aviv.

6/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

32. The foremost mechanism for addressing all security and military operational
issues related to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) remained the
tripartite forum, chaired by the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander,
with the participation of representatives of the Israel Defense Forces and Lebanese
Armed Forces.
33. Since my last report, tripartite meetings took place on 17 December and
4 February. During tripartite discussions, both parties acknowledged the importance
of keeping the Blue Line stable in the context of broader regional security concerns
and the possibility for localized incidents to spread rapidly. The first meeting was
focused on Israeli allegations of Hizbullah activities near the Blue Line, ground
violations of the Blue Line, particularly in the disputed Shab’a Farms area, and
Israeli air violations. Discussions at the second meeting centred on the
developments surrounding the 28 January incident and ways to strengthen the
cessation of hostilities to avoid future such incidents.
34. UNIFIL completed its investigations into the 5 October shooting incident at
the Blue Line and the 7 October incident, in which an Israel Defense Fo rces vehicle
was hit by an improvised explosive device south of the Blue Line, and shared its
findings with both parties.
35. UNIFIL continued the process of visibly marking the Blue Line. As at
9 February, out of a total of 527 markers assessed for the entire length of the Blue
Line, 313 were agreed by both parties. Of the 313 agreed points, UNIFIL has
cleared access lanes to 312 points from mines and unexploded ordnance, measured
241 points, constructed 229 points and verified 208 points.
36. UNIFIL continued to facilitate the capacity-building of the Lebanese Armed
Forces for tasks mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) in the area of operations,
through its strategic dialogue mechanism with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The
strategic dialogue plan is an integral part of the capabilities development plan of the
Lebanese Armed Forces and complements the efforts of the International Support
Group to bolster the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces.

C.

Disarming armed groups
37. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of
the Lebanese State, in violation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006) continues to restrict the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and
authority over its territory. In the 28 January incident, these arms were used in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and in breach of the cessation of hostilities.
During the reporting period, Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah
reiterated publicly that Hizbullah had substantial and sophi sticated military capacity
separate from that of the Lebanese State, which it claims serves as a deterrent
against potential aggression from Israel. There were no meetings of the National
Dialogue during the reporting period and no other formal discussion of arms outside
the control of the State.
38. The security situation continued to be unstable in the eastern Beqaa, in and
around the town of Arsal. A soldier was killed and two were wounded by a car bomb
on 3 December. Another car bomb exploded, injuring a number of civilians on

15-03022

7/17

S/2015/147

8 December. The Lebanese Armed Forces successfully defused four other car bombs
in Arsal during the reporting period.
39. Elsewhere, arms outside the control of the State continued to proliferate and
undermine stability. For example, on 21 December, the Jaafar clan clashed with
residents of Deir al Ahmar in the eastern Beqaa region. On 10 January, a personal
dispute ended with a fatal shooting attack in Kfardebian. On 19 January, a soldier
was wounded pursuing criminals in Baalbek. As a result of the proliferation of small
arms there have been frequent incidents of “celebratory” gunfire associated with
political speeches and events, which caused injury. There continue to be reports of
political parties supporting the formation and ar ming of self-defence groups in local
communities living in border areas.
40. Within Lebanon, there was a reduction in the number of terrorist attacks
during the reporting period as a result of the efforts of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security personnel to prevent such attacks. In Tripoli, the Lebanese Armed
Forces continued to implement the security plan, leading to relative calm, which
was broken on 10 January by a double-suicide bombing, reflecting the continued
impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon. That attack, claimed by the Nusra Front,
targeted the Alawite community of Jabal Mohsen and killed 9 people and injured
37 others. Efforts by local leaders contributed to the lowering of tensions and
prevention of retaliatory violence on neighbouring communities. Following the
attack, the Internal Security Forces successfully conducted an unprecedented
operation on 12 January to disrupt a terrorist communication network in Roumieh
prison.
41. There has been no progress on the dismantling of military bases maintained by
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada. In 2006, it was decided in the National Dialogue that the bases should
be dismantled. The existence of the bases continues to compromise Lebanese
sovereignty and impede the ability of the State to monitor and control effectively
parts of the Lebanese-Syrian border.
42. The Palestinian camps have been relatively quiet during the reporting period.
On 24 November, a Syrian refugee woman was killed during a clash between armed
gangs in the camp of Burj el Barajneh. The Joint Security Force, which has taken
responsibility for security in Ein el-Helweh, has expanded and intervened on a
number of occasions to keep calm in the camp. On 28 January, a Palestinian was
killed in Ein el-Helweh, and the Joint Security Force deployed quickly to prevent
further violence. During a visit to Lebanon on 20 January, a senior Palestinian
official asserted the need to disassociate the Palestinian camps from regional
developments and to maintain stability and security in them.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
43. In its resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council decided that all States
should prevent the sale or the supply of arms and related materiel to entities or
individuals in Lebanon, by their nationals or from their territories or using their flag
vessels or aircraft. The Council also called upon the Government of Lebanon to
secure its borders and other entry points so as to prevent the entry into Lebanon,
without its consent, of arms and related materiel.

8/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

44. Representatives of the Government of Israel have consistently alleged that
there are significant, ongoing arms transfers to Hizbullah across the Lebanese Syrian border. The United Nations takes these concerns seriously, but is not
currently in a position to verify them independently. Representatives of the
Government of Israel have continued to express concern at the prospect of the
transfer of advanced weapons systems to Hizbullah. In a letter dated 12 December
(S/2014/878), Israel communicated to the Security Council concerns at reports of
Hizbullah’s military capability and supply. Hizbullah leaders have openly stated
their readiness to use their military capabilities against Israel in the event of attack
by Israel, including with reference to the reported Israeli airstrike against Hizbullah
elements in the Golan on 18 January. I expressed concern about the potential
consequences of that incident as a reflection of the impact of the Syrian conflict on
Lebanon, and called on all concerned to act responsibly to prevent any escalation, in
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries in the region
and adherence to relevant Security Council resolutions.
45. The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed in border areas to counter the
movement of armed elements between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic and
successfully repulsed infiltration attempts by armed fighters. On 1 December, six
Lebanese soldiers were killed and one was wounded in a clash with militants near
Ras Baalbek. A further clash on 23 January in the same location left eight soldiers
dead and a number wounded.
46. The Lebanese Armed Forces and security services have detained a number of
Syrians during the reporting period, including members of ISIL, the Nusra Front
and the Free Syrian Army. On 6 December, the detention was confirmed of two
women related to ISIL figures who are believed to be holding some of the abducted
Lebanese soldiers and security personnel. There has been no progress in efforts to
negotiate the release of the 26 hostages held by the Nusra Front and by ISIL, and
the killing of a fourth hostage was announced on 5 December.
47. During the reporting period, there was an overall decline in the number of
incidents of cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon. There
were over 40 incidents of shooting, 7 incidents of cross-border shelling and
16 rockets, causing a number of injuries and material damage. There wer e at least
four airstrikes by Syrian government aircraft.
48. Hizbullah continued to publicly acknowledge its continued involvement in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic. The funerals of Hizbullah fighters continued
to be held during the reporting period. Other Lebanese individuals are reported to
have joined groups fighting the Syrian regime, including the Nusra Front and ISIL.
49. Infiltration attempts and attacks on Lebanese Armed Forces positions in areas
by the border with the Syrian Arab Republic illustrate the need for greater capability
for the Lebanese Armed Forces to defend Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The agreement for $3 billion of assistance provided by Saudi Arabia in
cooperation with France was finalized during the reporting period. The
disbursement of the additional $1 billion pledged by Saudi Arabia in August 2014 is
reportedly on track to deliver urgently needed capability to the Lebanese Armed
Forces and security forces in the course of this year. Other bilateral p artners
continue to provide vital, immediate capability to support the Lebanese Armed
Forces.

15-03022

9/17

S/2015/147

50. As at 12 February, over 1,168,000 Syrian refugees were registered with
UNHCR in Lebanon in 1,170 communities across the country, including 54,846 in
the UNIFIL area of operations. The Government of Lebanon has initiated a series of
measures to restrict the flow of refugees into Lebanon. On 31 December, the
General Security Directorate of the Ministry of Interior issued a new set of
regulations whereby refugees would not be admitted to Lebanon except for
exceptional humanitarian reasons based on criteria that are to be developed by the
Ministry of Social Affairs. Security procedures and curfews imposed on refugees
increased across the country, and there has been an increase in the number of
evictions of Syrian refugees from their dwellings, mostly carried out by the
Lebanese Armed Forces owing to their proximity to military bases. Harsh winter
conditions have caused a number of fatalities from hypothermia among re fugees.
51. The predicament of women and children refugees has worsened as a result of
their prolonged displacement, making them vulnerable to early marriage,
prostitution and sex in exchange for assistance, instances of which reportedly are on
the rise. Only 24 per cent of the 402,000 Syrian children of primary school age in
Lebanon are now enrolled in formal education.
52. On 15 December, the Government of Lebanon and international partners
launched the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan for the period 2015 -2016. This joint
plan aims to ensure humanitarian assistance and protection for refugees and
vulnerable host communities, while maintaining and developing the capacity of
national and local delivery systems to provide equal access to and ensure the quality
of basic public services.
53. There are approximately 44,000 Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab
Republic in Lebanon. Their number has been stable since the restrictions imposed
on their entry by the Government of Lebanon in May 2014. The restrictions
continue to result in the denial of entry to all but a handful of Palestine refugees
fleeing the Syrian Arab Republic and those refugees have faced increasing
restrictions on renewing their legal status in Lebanon since May 2014.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
54. Six manual mine clearance teams, one explosive ordnance disposal team and
one mechanical mine clearance team from UNIFIL, validated by the United Nations
Mine Action Service, were deployed in the UNIFIL area of operations during the
reporting period. UNIFIL cleared more than 216 square metres of hazardous areas to
provide access to Blue Line points and found and destroyed two anti -personnel
landmines. The team conducted 3 training support events, 20 quality assurance
visits of operational sites and 7 explosive ordnance awareness training programmes.
55. The Lebanese Mine Action Centre reported that, from 1 September to
31 December 2014, it had cleared 543,603 square metres of hazardous areas, mainly
battle areas, and destroyed 629 cluster munition items, one anti-personnel mine and
41 unexploded ordnances.

10/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

F.

Delineation of borders
56. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the
Lebanese-Syrian border during the reporting period, including in areas where it is
uncertain or disputed, as called for in Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006). Extending the authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout all
Lebanese territory and enabling the Lebanese security forces and Lebanese Armed
Forces to secure borders to prevent the entry of arms or related materiel necessitates
the delineation and demarcation of the border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic as soon as practicable.
57. There has also been no progress on the issue of the Shab’a Farms. The re has
still been no reaction from either Israel or the Syrian Arab Republic to the
provisional definition of that area contained in my report of 30 October 2007 on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641).

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
58. UNIFIL continuously reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures
and carried out three security awareness exercises for its personnel during the
reporting period. Force protection works to upgrade installations and assets are
ongoing. Cooperation continued between UNIFIL and the Lebanese authorities in
ensuring that all security threats are addressed appropriately. More stringent security
measures were introduced on 15 December within a selected area of Sector East of
the UNIFIL area of operations, whereby all official missions of the United Nations
must be coordinated and escorted by UNIFIL security personnel. In addition, in the
aftermath of recent incidents, UNIFIL reviewed its security procedures, plans and
actions. On 28 January, a general restriction of movement in the UNIFIL area of
operations was implemented for that day for UNIFIL and United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes.
59. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings at the Lebanese Military Court
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
UNIFIL peacekeepers. In the case of a serious attack in 2007 against peacekeepers
serving with the Spanish contingent, one of the suspected perpetrators was arrested
and is currently under investigation. In the case of a serious attack perpetrated in
2008, the next hearing at the Military Court of Appeal is scheduled to take place on
17 March 2015. In three cases of serious attacks perpetrated in 2011, the
investigation is ongoing. In a case of terror intent opened in January 2014, a hearing
at the Permanent Military Court is scheduled to take place on 10 July 2015.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
60. As at 9 February, the total military strength of UNIFIL stood at 10,171,
including 366 women from 37 troop-contributing countries. The civilian component
consisted of 278 international and 607 national staff, including 82 and 156 women,
respectively. A total of 59 military observers of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, including 3 women, are also part of UNIFIL. UNIFIL is

15-03022

11/17

S/2015/147

working to increase the number of civilian and military women deployed, with a
view to reducing the gender imbalance in the mission.
61. There are 57 operational positions in the area of operations. On 18 December,
Belgium withdrew its multi-role engineering company, which consisted of
approximately 100 personnel. On 10 February, 146 Fijian troops, who we re
formerly part of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, joined UNIFIL,
at United Nations position 2-45.

V. Observations
62. I condemn the attack on an Israeli military convoy on 28 January, claimed by
Hizbullah, which killed two Israeli soldiers and injured several others. This attack
constitutes a serious violation of the cessation of hostilities between Lebanon and
Israel, and of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). Hizbullah’s hostile activity
from the UNIFIL area of operations is in direct contravention of resolution 1701
(2006), including the provision that there should be no armed personnel, assets or
weapons in the area other than those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL.
63. Retaliatory fire by Israel into Lebanon is in violation of resolution 1701 (2006)
and of the cessation of hostilities, and does not conform to the United Nations
expectations that the parties will notify UNIFIL of an incident and will refrain from
responding, except where clearly required in immediate self-defence. I condemn the
killing of a United Nations peacekeeper, which resulted from retaliatory fire by the
Israel Defense Forces into Lebanon. This incident took place within a United
Nations position, the coordinates of which are fully known to th e Israel Defense
Forces.
64. Violence will not bring peace to the people of Lebanon or Israel. I wish to
recall the letter dated 12 August 2006 from the Secretary-General to the Prime
Ministers of Israel and Lebanon, which set out the expectations of the U nited
Nations of how all concerned would fulfil their obligations with respect to the
cessation of hostilities, including the appendix to the letters, in which it is stated
that the cessation of hostilities would be understood as no firing into the territo ry of
or at the other side with any type of weapon from the ground, air or sea.
65. I also wish to recall that the identification of the Blue Line in 2000 was solely
the responsibility of the United Nations for the practical purpose of confirming the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanon in compliance with
resolution 425 (1978), without prejudice to future border agreements. Both sides,
despite their respective reservations in 2000, undertook to respect the Blue Line as
identified by the United Nations. I again urge both parties to do their utmost to
prevent violations of the Blue Line. The Blue Line must be respected in its entirety.
66. I welcome the restoration of the cessation of hostilities following the incident.
I take note that both the Government of Lebanon and the Government of Israel acted
quickly to prevent further escalation and to emphasize their commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) and to preserving the stability in the area. Yet the situation
remains fragile. This fragility is compounded by the use of increasingly strident and
bellicose rhetoric, warning of renewed conflict. The lessons learned from the 2006
conflict should serve as a cautionary reminder of the even more dangerous scale of

12/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

any renewed confrontation. All concerned therefore have a responsibility to avoid
rhetoric that raises tensions and contravenes the spirit of resolution 1701 (2006).
67. In the current tense regional environment, and in the light of the multiple
security challenges Lebanon faces as a result of the conflict in Syria, I am
particularly concerned at the risk of miscalculation leading to a new conflict that
neither of the parties nor the region can afford. It is imperative that all concerned
refrain from any further action that could jeopardize the c essation of hostilities or
destabilize the area and work to restore fully the calm across the Blue Line. I
welcome the satisfaction expressed by both parties with the critical security and
liaison role of UNIFIL in implementing resolution 1701 (2006), incl uding to defuse
any escalation from the recent incidents. I call on both parties to continue to use the
established liaison and coordination arrangements to the full extent and work
closely with UNIFIL in order to mitigate the risk of further violence. I f urther urge
the parties to engage actively with my Special Coordinator for Lebanon and UNIFIL
on measures to regain confidence.
68. The recent incidents are a strong reminder of the responsibility of both parties
to fulfil their respective obligations and to make progress towards the full
implementation of the objectives of resolution 1701 (2006). The incident underlines
the necessity, for the safety of both the Lebanese and the Israeli people, for the
parties to take advantage of periods of calm across the Blue Line to strengthen the
cessation of hostilities by working towards a permanent ceasefire and a long -term
solution to the conflict, as envisaged in resolution 1701 (2006). This includes the
extension of the control of the Government of Lebanon over al l Lebanese territory
so that it may exercise its full sovereignty and the disarmament of all armed groups
in Lebanon so that there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other than that
of the Lebanese State. In line with resolution 1701 (2006), I urge the Lebanese
authorities to take all actions to ensure that there are no unauthorized armed
personnel, assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River.
69. The violence on 28 January also underscores the need for progress with reg ard
to the Shab’a Farms area in accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution 1701
(2006). I call, once again, on the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel to submit their
responses to the provisional definition of the Shab’a Farms area that I provided in
October 2007 (S/2007/641). I continue to encourage the parties to work with my
Special Coordinator and UNIFIL to achieve these aims, including through progress
on the Shab’a Farms area issue.
70. The continuing occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of
the Blue Line by the Israel Defense Forces represents an ongoing violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Israel has an obligation to withdraw its armed forces from
the area, in accordance with the resolution, and I urge the Israeli authorities to take
steps to that end accordingly.
71. It is also a matter of serious concern that Israel continues to violate Lebanese
airspace on an almost daily basis. All Israeli overflights of Lebanon are violations of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. At a time of heightened
regional tensions, when the potential for escalation remains high, I call on both
parties to maintain calm and stability along the Blue Line. I reiterate my call upon
the Government of Israel to cease all overflights of Lebanese territory and Lebanese
territorial waters.

15-03022

13/17

S/2015/147

72. I urge both parties to continue to work with UNIFIL to maintain calm,
minimize and halt violations, look for practical localized solutions and build on
what has been achieved by strengthening the liaison and coordination arrangements,
including through the tripartite mechanism. The visible marking of the Blue Line
continues to be an essential confidence-building activity that has helped to calm
tensions in some areas. I encourage the parties to continue to work with UNIFIL in
the ongoing process to mark the Blue Line in its entirety and to find practical
localized solutions for problematic areas.
73. I am concerned that incidents that impede the freedom of movement of
UNIFIL and endanger the safety and security of peacekeepers continue to occur.
Some of the incidents can be explained by the inconvenience caused by the presence
of a large military force operating within a civilian environment. Nevertheless, I am
concerned that several of these incidents have included violent assault on UNIFIL
personnel and some have shown an organized character. This casts doubt on the
motives of those involved. The primary responsibility for ensuring freedom of
movement to UNIFIL personnel in the area of operations lies with the Lebanese
authorities. I call on the Lebanese authorities to take firm, resolute action against
the perpetrators and to find ways to work with UNIFIL to strengthen the response
and investigation into the incidents. Effective measures must be taken to curb and
prevent all incidents that impede the freedom of movement of UNIFIL and endanger
the safety and security of peacekeepers.
74. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of
the State continues to pose a threat to Lebanese sovereignty and stability, and
contradicts the country’s obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). The unforeseen consequences of the use of these arms are extremely serious
for Lebanon should they provoke conflict. It is vital that the National Dialogue meet
again to address issues of national importance, including the arms held by Hizbullah
and other groups. The discussion paper on a national defence strategy developed in
the context of the National Dialogue remains a valuable starting point in this regard.
It remains important that earlier decisions of the National Dialogue be implemented,
specifically those relating to the disarmament of the non-Lebanese groups and the
dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
75. The spread of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic along the Lebanese Syrian border has had a deeply negative impact on the broader security situation.
People living along the eastern Beqaa have been particularly affected. I strongly
support the efforts of the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed there to maintain
security and defend Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and encourage
ongoing bilateral efforts to strengthen that deployment along the length of
Lebanon’s borders. I further call on those holding Lebanese security forces
personnel hostage to release them expeditiously. I deplore the shelling, shooting and
aerial incursions into Lebanese border areas from the Syrian Arab Republic, as well
as the movement of armed fighters and war materiel between the countries. The lack
of progress in delineating and demarcating the border between the two countries is
no justification for violations of Lebanese sovereignty by any party. I call upon the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and all parties fighting there to cease
violations of the border and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon.

14/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

76. I condemn the participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic in breach of the policy of disassociation adopted by the Government
of Lebanon and of the principles of the Baabda Declaration, which had been agreed
by all of Lebanon’s political parties in June 2012 and the importance of which was
reaffirmed by the Security Council. I call on all Lebanese parties to cease any
involvement in the Syrian conflict, consistent with their commitment in the Baabda
Declaration and urge them to recommit to the policy of disassociation.
77. I condemn the terrorist attack in the Jabal Mohsen neighbourhood of Tripoli
and sectarian rhetoric by all parties, which encourages such violence. I commend
the people of the areas neighbouring Jabal Mohsen who rejected the attempt to
restart further rounds of sectarian fighting in that area. That suicide attack and
violence elsewhere around the country reflect the worrying proliferation of weapons
outside the authority of the State, and in this regard I call on Member States to
uphold their obligation under resolution 1701 (2006) to prevent the sale or supply of
arms or related materiel to entities or individuals in Lebanon.
78. Continued broad political support is needed for the security and judicial
authorities to combat impunity in respect of all acts of violence. The extension of
the mandate of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which coincides with the tenth
anniversary of the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, is a
reaffirmation of the commitment of the United Natio ns to the work of the Special
Tribunal with the continued support and cooperation of the Government of Lebanon.
The trial of the five individuals suspected of the attack that killed Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and 21 other people is ongoing. That trial sends the message that
impunity will not be tolerated.
79. I commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for their continued commitment and
strong cooperation with UNIFIL, including through the strategic dialogue. The
Lebanese Armed Forces and security services continue to play a critical role in
preserving Lebanon’s stability in the light of the multiple security challenges that
the country continues to face in fulfilling its obligations under resolution 1701
(2006); enforcing security on the Lebanese-Syrian border; fighting criminality; and
combating terrorism within the country. I regret the loss of life that the security
personnel have sustained as they have undertaken these duties. I welcome the
support of bilateral partners for the Lebanese Armed Forces and securit y services,
both in terms of immediate assistance and the longer-term development of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. In this regard, I welcome the finalization of the agreement
for $3 billion of assistance from Saudi Arabia, in cooperation with France, and
encourage progress in the delivery of this much-needed capability in view of the
scale and scope of the challenges facing the Lebanese Armed Forces. I call on other
international donors to provide assistance as a key element towards the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions.
80. I welcome the consensus that the Security Council has consistently
demonstrated in support of Lebanon’s security and stability and count on the
Council’s continued unity as key to preserving Lebanon from the impact of conflicts
in the region and helping it to address current challenges. I also thank the
participants in the International Support Group for Lebanon for their continued
commitment to the three primary areas of support to Lebanon and their activities in
this regard. I believe that the Group plays an important role in advocating for

15-03022

15/17

S/2015/147

assistance and mobilizing support for Lebanon at this difficult time for the country
and I will ask my Special Coordinator to consult with partners on how the Group
might best achieve these goals going forward, in the light of Lebanon’s outstanding
needs and challenges.
81. The launch of the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan by Prime Minister Salam and
the Deputy Secretary-General marks the first joint plan of the United Nations and
the Government of Lebanon since the start of the war in the Syrian Arab Republic
and serves to align United Nations and national priorities for Lebanon’s stability.
Lebanon received 54 per cent of the appeal for its needs i n 2014. In the light of the
unique scale and nature of the refugee crisis in Lebanon and its implications for the
country’s stability, I call on donors to respond generously, as a matter of urgency, to
the appeal for $2.14 billion required under the Plan for 2015, including at the
Kuwait donor conference to be held on 30 March.
82. I welcome the renewed commitment of the Palestinian leadership to
disassociate the Palestinian camps in Lebanon from the violence in the region. I
welcome Palestinian efforts on the ground to work with the Lebanese authorities to
maintain order in Ein el-Helweh and elsewhere. The need to improve the living
conditions of Palestine refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to the resolution of
the refugee question in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement, is ever
more urgent, as the Palestine refugee camps are increasingly overcrowded as a
result of the growing numbers of Palestine refugees displaced from the Syrian Arab
Republic. I encourage donors to be forthcoming in suppor t of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, including to
enable it to effectively assist displaced Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab
Republic.
83. For both Lebanon and Israel, exploration and development o f their respective
offshore oil and gas resources is a national priority. During the reporting period,
both countries indicated their wish to resolve the dispute over the maritime
exclusive economic zone. I again encourage them to proceed with steps that w ould
allow for resolution of this issue and reiterate that the United Nations stands ready
to assist if both parties so request.
84. I strongly commend Prime Minister Salam for his leadership in working with
the political leaders and Government of Lebanon to uphold national unity and
ensure the continuity of State institutions. It is positive that the Future Movement
and Hizbullah are engaged in dialogue and that tangible results are felt in the
country in security terms and in lowering tensions. Nine month s after the departure
of former President Sleiman, I am increasingly concerned about the prolonged crisis
around the presidential vacancy. The issue of ending the presidential vacuum
remains vital for Lebanon’s national unity and stability and for the coun try’s
standing regionally and internationally. It is therefore in the national interest that all
parties show greater resolve and flexibility to elect a president and uphold the
institutions enshrined in the Taef agreement.
85. Recent developments have again shown that the impact of events in the Syrian
Arab Republic can seriously threaten stability in Lebanon. The perpetuation of the
war in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the Golan, continues to harm Lebanon’s
security, political stability and economy. It therefore remains essential to find a
political solution to end conflicts in the region and progress towards a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East on the basis of Security Council

16/17

15-03022

S/2015/147

resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This and the full integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon remain interdependent.
86. I wish to express my appreciation to all the Member States contributing
military personnel to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I commend the UNIFIL
Head of Mission and Force Commander and the military and civilian personnel of
UNIFIL, as well as my new Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the staff of her
Office, all of whom continue to play a critical role in helping to promote stability
along the Blue Line and in Lebanon.

15-03022

17/17
