A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/226
22 May 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 45
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.72 and Add.1)]
50/226.

United Nations Office of Verification in El
Salvador

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the situation in Central America, in
particular resolution 50/7 of 31 October 1995, in which it, inter alia,
approved the proposal of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the
Mission of the United Nations in El Salvador for a further period of six
months and requested the Secretary-General to report on its implementation,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 23 April 1996
on the Mission of the United Nations in El Salvador, 1/ and the letter from
the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Martí para la
Liberación Nacional to the Secretary-General dated 23 April 1996, 2/
Recognizing with satisfaction the continuing evolution of El Salvador
from a country torn by conflict into a democratic and peaceful nation,
Paying tribute to those Member States which have contributed personnel
and voluntary funding to the Mission,
1.
Welcomes the continuing commitment of the Government and people of
El Salvador to the consolidation of the peace process;

1/

A/50/935.

2/

A/50/948, annex.

96-77233

/...

A/RES/50/226
Page 2

2.
Pays tribute to the accomplishments of the Mission of the United
Nations in El Salvador, under the authority of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative;
3.
Recognizes the political commitment of the Government of
El Salvador and the other parties to the peace accords to continue to comply
with their provisions, and urges them to work together to complete their
implementation without delay;
4.
Decides, in accordance with the recommendation contained in
paragraph 36 of the report of the Secretary-General, to establish a small
United Nations Office of Verification, to be headed by an official at an
appropriate political level, to follow up implementation of pending aspects of
the peace accords in El Salvador through 31 December 1996;
5.
Also decides that the United Nations Office of Verification should
be financed within existing resources, in a manner consistent with the
effective fulfilment of its mandate and taking into account that the
Secretary-General will submit proposals on possible means of absorption in the
programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997 to the General Assembly, through
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, no later
than 15 May 1996;
6.
Notes that regular visits to El Salvador by senior officials from
United Nations Headquarters are making a significant contribution towards the
full implementation of the peace accords;
7.
Emphasizes the importance of a continued and enhanced cooperation
of the United Nations Office of Verification with other bodies of the United
Nations system in the consolidation of the peace accords;
8.
Calls upon Member States and international institutions to
continue to provide assistance to the Government and people of El Salvador and
to lend support to the efforts of the United Nations in El Salvador for the
purposes of peace-building and development;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to it on the
implementation of the present resolution.
118th plenary meeting
10 May 1996
