m RF.sOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIFTH COMMin'EE
11 (1). TERMS OF APPOINTMENT OF THE

12 (1). APPOINTMENT OF TEMPORARY STAFF
Recognizing the ability and faithful service of
the temporary staff under the Executive Secretary
and the need for the staff members to be informed
soon of their status in the Secretariat; and recognizing also the desirability of leaving to the Secretary-General full freedom to select the perm:inent
staff which will assist him to carry out h1s responsibilities:
the General Assembly authorizes the SecretaryGeneral to continue, pursuant to rule M of its
provisional rules of procedure, the employment
of the members of the staff of the Executive
Secretary under the present t ~ and. regulations until 1 April 1946, or until such prior date
as the Secretary-General may enter into employment arrangements with such :nembers in. accordance with the provisional staff regulat10ns
and other conditions of employment in the
Secretariat established by the General Assembly.
Twenty-first plenary meeting, 1 February 1946.

SECRETARY-GENERAL

The General Assembly resolves that, in view of
the heavy responsibilities which rest upon the
Secretary-General in fulfilling his obligations
under the Charter:
1. The terms of the appointment of the
Secretary-General shall be such as to enable a
man of eminence and high attainment to accept
and maintain the position.

2. The Secretary-General shall receive a
salary of an amount sufficient to bring him in a

net sum of $20,000 ( U .S.), together with representation allowance of $20,000 (U.S.), per annum. In addition, he shall be provided with a
fumished residence, the repairs and maintenance
of which, excluding provision of household
staff, shall be borne by the Organization.
3. The first Secretary-General shall be appointed for five years, the appointment being
open at the end of that period for a further fiveyear term.

13(1) º ÜRGANIZATION OF THE SECRETARIAT
l.

ADMINISTRATIVE ÜRGANIZATION OF THE

SECRETARIAT

4. The following observations contained in
paragraphs 18-21 of section 2, chapter VIII of
the Preparatory Commission's Report be noted
and approved:

The administrative organization of the Secretariat should be so designed as to enable the work
of the Secretariat to be conducted with the greatest possible efficiency.
Therefore, the General Assembly resolves that:
l. The Secretary-General shall take immediate
steps to establish an administrative organizatio:1
which will permit of the effective discharge of hIS
administrative and general responsibilities under
the Charter and the efficient performance of those
functions and services required to meet the needs
of the severa! organs of the United Nations.
2. The principal units of the Secretariat should
be:
(a) Department of Security Council Affairs.
(b) Department of Economic Affairs.
(e) Department of Social Affairs.
(d) Department for Trusteeship and Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories.
(e) Department of Public Information.
(f) Legal Department.
(g) Conference and General Services.
( h) Administrative and Financia! Services.
3. The Secretary-General is authorized to appoint Assistant Secretaries-General and such other
officials and employees as are required and to
prescribe their responsibilities and duties .. Assistant
Secretaries-General shall have responsibility for
and supervision of Departments and Services.
There shall always be one Assistant SecretaryGeneral designated by the Secretary-Genrral to
dcputize for him when he is absent or unable to
perform his functions. The Secretary-General shall
take whatever steps may be requircd to ,·n,un· thc
necessary co-ordination between the Departments
of Economic Affairs and of Social Affú,s, and the
maintenance of appropriate administrative relationships between those Departments and the Econom:c and Social Council, "n th" one hand, ;i.7d

(a) There being no stipulation on the subject in the Charter, the General Assembly 'and
the Security Council are free to modify the
term of office of future Secretaries-General in
the light of experience.

( b) Beca use a Secretary-General is a confident of many govemments, it is desirable
that no Member should offer him, at any rate
immediately on retirement, any govemmental
position in which his confidential information
might be a source of embarrassment to other
Members, and on his part a Secretary-General
should refrain from accepting any such
position.

(e) From the provisions of Articles 18 and

27 of the Charter, it is clear that, for the
nomination of the Secretary-General by the
Security Council, an affirmative vote of seven
members, including the concurring votes of
the permanent Members, is required; and that
for his appointment by the General Assembly,
a simple majority of the members of that body
present and voting is sufficient, unless the
General Assembly itself decides that a twothirds majority is called for. The same rules
apply to a renewal of appointment as to an
original appointment; this should be made
clear when the original appointment is made.
( d) I t would be desirable for the Security
Council to proffer one candidate only for thr
consideration of the General Assembly, and
for debate on the nomination in the General
Assembly to be avoided. Both nomination and
appointment should be discussed at private
meetings, and a vote in either the Security
Council or the General Assembly, if taken,
should be by secret ballot.
Seventeenth plenary meeting, 24 JanuarJ' 1946.
14

between those Departments and the specialized
agencies on the other.

mits to the Secretary-General, for his consideration, the draft provisional staff rules, as contained
in section 4 of chapter VIII of the Report of the
Preparatory Commission, together with the paper
submitted by the Canadian delegation ( document
A/C.5/10).
11. Authorizes the Secretary-General to appoint
a small advisory committee, possibly including
representatives of the staff, to draft, for submission
to the second part of the first session of the General Assembly, a statute for an administrative
tribunal.

4. At the outset, the Departments and Serviccs
should, broadly speaking, conform to the description given in paragraphs 22-40 of section 2, chapter VIII of thc Report of the Preparatory Commission, but the Secretary-General shall make such
changes in the initial structure as may be required
to the end that the most effective distribution of
responsibilities and functions among the units of
the Secretariat may be achieved.
Il. INFORMATION
The United Nations cannot achieve its purposes
unless the peoples of the world are fully informed
of its aims and activities.
The recornmendations of the Technical Advisory
Committee on Information submitted by the
Preparatory Commission to the General Assembly
constitute a sound foundation for the public information policy and activities of the United
Nations.

v. TAXATION
Having regard particularly to the administrative
and budgetary arrangements of the Organization,
the General Assembly concurs in the conclusion
reached by thc Administrative and Budgetary
Committee that there is no altemative to the
proposition that exemption from national taxation
for salaries and allowances paid by the Organization is indispensable to the achievement of equity
among its Members and equality among it.s
personnel.

Therefore the General Assembly:
5. Approves the :-ecommendations of the Techmcal Advisory Committee on Information contained in annex I and transmits them to the
Secretary-General for his information and consideration.

111.

Therefore the General Assembly resolves that:
12. Pcnding the necessary action being taken
by Mcmbers to exempt from national taxation
salaries and allowances paid out of the budget
of the Organization, the Secretary-General is
authorized to reimburse staff members who are
required to pay taxation on salaries and wages
received from the Organization.
13. In the case of any Member whose nationals
in the service of the Organization are required to
pay taxation on salaries and allowances received
from the Organization, the Secretary-General
should explore with the Member concemed methods of cnsuring as soon as possible the application
of the principie of cquity amongst ali Members.
14. The records and documents of the Administrative and Budgetary Committee and of the Advisory Group of Experts respecting staff contributions plans be referred to the Secretary-General
for his information, and the Secretary-General be
requcsted to submit recommendations thereon to
the second part of the first session of the General
Assembly.

RECRUITMENT ANO PROMOTION

In accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 101
of the Charter, appropriatc methods of recruitment
should be established in order that a staff may be
assembled which is characterized by the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity,
due regard being also paid to its recruitment on
as wide a geographical basis as possible.
Therefore the General Assembly resolves that:
6. An lnternational Civil Service Commission
shall be established by the Secretary-General, after
consultation with the heads of the specialized
agencies brought into relationship with the United
Nations, to advise on the methods of recruitment
for the Secretariat and on the means bv which
common standards of recruitment in th~ Secretariat and the specialized agencies rnay be ensured.
7. In the selection of staff, the Secretary-General
should follow in general the suggestions outlined
in paragraphs 50-57 of section 2, chapter VIII
of the Report of the Pr-eparafory Comrnission.

VJ. CLASSIFICATION, SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES
Thc conditions of employment in the Secretariat
should be such as will attract qualified candidates
from any part of the world.

8. A balanced age distribution should be
achieved from the outset, in order to maintain
regular infl.ow, promo.tion and outfl.ow of staff.

Therefore the General Assembly resolves that:
15. An Assistant Secretary-General shall receive
a net salary of $13,500 (U.S.) together with an
allowance varying from $7,000 (U.S.) to $11,500
(U.S.) at the Secretary-General's discretion.
16. A top-ranking Director' shall rcceive a net
salary of $11,000 (U.S.) together with an allowance varying from $3,000 (U.S.) to $6,000 (U.S.)
at the Secretary-General's discretion.
17. The allowances for Assistant SecretariesGeneral and top-ranking Directors are deemed to
include ali representation (including hospitality),
housing, education and children's allowances for
these posts but not such reimbursable allowances

9. Every member of the staff shall be eligible
for such promotion within the United Nations
as his or her services and abilities warrant, in
accordance with paragraph 4 7, section 2, chapter
VIII of the Report of the Preparatory Commission.

JV.

RIGHTS ANO OBLIGATIONS OF THE STAFF

The degree in which thc objects of the Charter
can be realized will be largely determined by the
rnanner in which the Secretari;,t performs its task.
The Secretariat cannot successfully perform its
task unless it en joys the confidence of ali the
Members of the United Nations.
Therefore the General Assembly:
10. 4dopts the provisional staff regulations,
embodymg the fundamental rights and obligations
of the staff, as contained in annex 11, and trans-

'The phrase "top-ranking Director" is intended to cover
only the senior grade in the classified service and more
specifically would apply to persons serving as deputy to
an Asistan! Secretary-General or as Director of a major
"staff service," i.e. Director of Personnel, Director of
Budget, Comptroller, et cetera.

15

( b) for the payment of an education grant to
an eligible member of the staff who may wish to
send his child, or children, from the country to
which he is assigned for duty to that country
recognized as his home at the time of his appointment, provided such country be not the
country where is permanently assigned for duty.

as travel, subsistence and removal costs upon
appointment, transfer or tennination of appointment with the Organization; official travel and
home leave travel.
18. Subject to the budgetary provmons voted
by the General Assembly, and except in the case
of the posts of Secretary-General, Assistant Secretary-General and Director, the Secretary-Ge·neral,
after discussion with the Advisory Group of Experts which he is recommended to appoint, is
authorized to make a tentative classification of
posts and to assign salaries to these posts according to the general principies set forth in paragraphs
41 to 45 and 71 of section 2 of chapter VIII of
the Report of the Preparatory Commission. The
Sccretary-General is also authorized to employ
members of the staff on short-tenn contracts pending the establishment of a pennanent classification
plan as outlined in resolution 19 below.

22. The Secretary-General shall submit to the
second part of the first session of the General
Assembly a scheme for children's allowances and
education grants, and the memorandum of the
Advisory Group of Experts on these subjects
(document A/C.5/19/Rev.1) shall be transmitted
to the Secretary-General for his consideration.
23. With regard to the installation of members
of the staff at the interim site of the Organization,
the Secretary-General is authorized to establish
a scheme for installation allowances and the
conditions under which such allowances shall be
granted.

19. Subject to the budgetary provisions voteo
by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General,
after discussion with the Advisory Group of Experts referred to in Resolution 18, shall arrange:

VII.

DuRATION AND TERMINATION OF
APPOINTMENTS

The General Assembly resolves tluJt:
24. Subject to the Secretary-General's full Jatitude, as suggested in resolution 18, to employ
members of the staff on short-tenn contracts pending the establishment of a permanent classification
plan, and subject to appropriate arrangements for
the appointment of temporary staff at all times,
members of the staff who have successfully passed
the period of probation shall be offered sorne
reasonable assur·ance that they will be able to
make their careers in the Secretariat.

( a) for the development of a classification
plan of ali posts required by the Secretariat,
based upon the duties, responsibilities and
authority of each post;

( b) for the grouping of posts by main categories and within categories by grades;
(e) for the assignment of appropriate salaries
to each main category and grades therein according to the salary standards which may be
established by the General Assembly;

25. Members of the staff who have passed the
period of probation shall be given contracts for
an indeterminate period which shall be subject
to review every five years on the basis of reports
by their superior officers.

(d) for the assignment of each post in tht"
Secretariat to its appropriate category and gradt"
on the basis of its duties, responsibilities and
authority.

. 26. Notwithstanding the provisions above, Ass1stant Secretaries-General, Directors and such
other principal higher officers as the SecretaryGeneral may determine, shall be appointed under
contracts not to exceed five years, subject to the
possibility of renewal.

The Secretary-General is authorized to employ
temporary personnel on special limited tenn contracts outside of the pennanent classification plan
when he finds it necessary.

27. Any contract shall be terminable by the
Secretary-General under the conditions set forth
in regulation 22 of the staff regulations if the
necessities of the service require the abolition of
the post or a reduction of the staff, or if the services of the individual concemed proved unsatisfactory.

20. In detennining the salaries for the several
grades and for the various .categories of posts,
account should be taken of the special factors
affecting service in the Secretariat, and, in particular, of the wide range of remuneration for
comparable work prevailing in the government
services of the Members of the United Nations;
the more limited prospect~ of promotion to the
highest posts in the Secretariat compared with the
prospects of promotion in sorne of the national
services; the cost of living at the seat of the United
Nations-a factor which may be affected, in the
early years, by possible housing difficulties; and
the additional expenses which a large proportion
of the staff will incur by living away from their
own country, such expenses varying with the number of dependents and other factors.

VIII.

RETIREMENT AND COMPENSATION

The General Assembly resolves that:
28. The Secretary-General shall establish immediately a provident fund for memben of the
staff, giving consideration to the scheme outlined
in par! I of the suggestions of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the establishment of a
staff retirement scheme and related questions
( document A/C.5/20).
29. The Secretary-General shall submit to the
second part of the first session of the General
Assembly a report on the operation of the provident fund, suggesting such changes in the scheme
as he may consider desirable.

21. The General Assembly approves, in principie, the adoption of schemes to become effective
l January 1947:
(a) for the payment of children's allowances
as a supplement to the salaries of eligible members of the staff of the Organization;

30. The Secretary-General shall submit to the
second part of the first session of the General
16

Assembly proposals for a permanent staff reurement scheme to become operative 1 January 194 7,
taking due account of the suggestions of the Advisory Group of Experts, the various points raised
during the general discussion of these suggestions
in the Administrative and Budgetary Committee
and other relevant considerations.
31-. In establishing a permanent staff retirement scheme the Secretary-General shall give
consideration to the desirability of adopting a
system for the provision of benefits to widows and
orphans of members of the staff, either by a
separate scheme or by the grant of a lump sum
benefit on the death.-of the rnember.

Department should primarily assist and rcly upon the
co-operation of the established govcmmental and nongovernmental agencies of information to provide the
public with information about the United Nations. The
Department of Public Information should not engage
in "propaganda." lt should on its own initiative engage
in positive informational activities that will supplemenl
the services of existing agencies of inforrnation to the
extcnt that these are insufficicnt to realize the purpose
set forth above.
3. The United Nations should establish as a general
policy that the press and other existing agencies of information be given the fullest possible direct access to
the activities and official documentation of the Organization. The rules of proccdure of the various orgaru
of the United Nations should be applied with this end
in view.

32. The Secretary-General appointed at the first
session of the General Assembly shall be provided
with an annual retirernent allowance of one-half
of his net salary ( excluding allowances) on his
retirement, provided that he has completed bis
term of service with the United Nations, as set
out in chapter VIII, section 2, paragraph 18 of
the Report of the Preparatory Cornrnission.

4. Subject to the general authority of the principal
organs of the United Nations, responsibility for the
formulation and execution of information policy should
be vested in the Secretary--General and under him in
the Assistant Secretary-General in charg.- of the Departmcnt of Public Information.
5. When ncgotiating an agrecment with a specialized agency the Economic and Social Council should
be requested to take into consideration the matter of
co-ordinated information services and of a common information policy, and to consult with the SecretaryGeneral concerning each individual agreement.

33. (a) The Secretary-General shall submit to
the second part of the first session of the General
Assembly proposals for permanent schernes for
injury compensation and cornpassionate benefits.

6. In order to ensure that peoplcs in ali parts of the
world receive as ful! information as possible about the
United Nations, the Department of Public lnformation
should consider the establishment of branch offices at
thr earliest practicable date.
7. The functions of the Department of Public Intormation appe_ar to fall naturally into the following categories: press, publications, radio, films, graphics and
exhibitions, public liaison and reference.

( b) Pending the adoption of a perrnanent
scherne, the Secretary-General is authorized to
indernnify a mernber of the staff who is injured
as the result of an accident incurred in the course
of his duties or to pay an indernnity to the staff
mernber's estate should he die in such circurnstances.

8. Thc Department should provide ali the services
for the daily, weekly and periodical press, both at the
headquarters of the United Nations and through its
branch offices, that may be required to ensure that the
press is supplied with ful! information about the activities of the United Nations.

(e) Pending the adoption of a perrnanent
scheme, the Secretary-General is authorized to
indernnify a member of the staff who is cornpelled
to discontinue his employrnent as a result of sickness directly attributable to his work in the service
of the Organization or to pay indernnity to the
staff member's estate should he die in such circumstances.

9. The Department should prepare and publish pamphlets and other publications on the aims and activities
of the United Nations, within the limits of the criteria
set forth in recommendation 2.
! O. Toe Department should actively assist and encourage the use of radio broadcasting for the dissemination of information about the United Nations. To this
end it should, in thc first instance, work in close cooperation wi th radio broadcasting organizations of thc
Members. The United Nations should also have its own
radio broadcasting station or stations with the necessary
wavelengths, both for communication with Members
and with branch offices, and for the origination of
United Nations programmes. Toe station might also be
used as a center for national broadcasting S}'l'tems which
desire to co-operate in the intemational field. The scope
of tht radio broadcasting activitics of the United Nations should be determined after consultation with national radio broadcasting organizations.

IX. TRANSMrITAL OF SECTION 2 OF CHAPTER VIII
OF THE REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY
CoMMISSION

The General Assembly resolues that:
34. Section 2, chapter VIII of the Report of
the Preparatory Cornrnission be transmitted to the
Secretar1-General for his guidance.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

ANNEX I
RECOMMENDAnONS OF THE TECHNICAL ADVISORY
COMMITTEE ON INFORMAnON CONCERNING THE
POUCIES, fuNCTJONS AND ÜRGANIZAnON OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF PuBLIC INFORMAnON

11. In addition to assisting the newsreel and photographic press agencies, the Department of Public lnfonnation should also promote and where necessary
participate in the production and non-commercial distribution of documentary films, film strips, posters and
other graphic exhibits on the work of the United
Nations
12. The Department and its branch offices should
actively assíst and encourage national information services, educational institutions and other governmental and
non-governmental organizations of ali kinds interested
in spreading information about the United Nations. For
this and other purposes it should operate a fully
cquipped reference service, bricf or supply lecturers,
and make availablc its publications, documentary films,
film strips, posters and other exhibits for use by th.-se
agencies and org-anizations.

The United Nations cannot achieve the purposes for
which it has been created unless the peoples of the
world are fully informed of its aims and activities.
Therefore
the Technical Advisory Committee on lnformation
makes the following recommendations:
l. A Department of Public lnformation should be
established under an Assistant Secretary-General.
2. The activities of the Dopartment of Public lnformation should be so organized and directed as to promote to the greatest possible extent an informed understanding of the work and pmpoc{'s of the United Nations among the peorlt•; d 1hr· worlrl. To this end the

17

13. The Department and its branch offices should
also be equipped to analyse trends of opinion throughout the world about the activities of the United Nations
and the extent to which an informed understanding of
the work of the United Nations is being secured.
14. Consideration should be given to the setting up
of an Advisory Committee to meet periodically at the
seat of the United Nations to discuss and forward to
the Secretary-General observations regarding the information policy and programme of the United Nations.
This Advisory Committee would be composed of experts appointed on the basis of broad geographical representation, personal qualifications and experience. They
would be representa ti ve of the-- various media of information of the Members, and would be in a position to
reflect to the Secretary-General the needs and desires
of the general public of the Members in the matter of
public information about the aims and activities of the
United Nations.
15. In order that the Advisory Committee may be
as widely representative as possible and receive the
maximum support from the information organizations
of ali Members, the Secretary-General might, in consultation with the govemments of the Members, communicate with the representative .officers of the leading
organizations of the press, radio, film and other media
and govemment information services of the Members
on the establishment of such an Advisory Committee.
16. If it is found possible to set up an Advisory
Committee, then at a later stage consideration should
be given to establishing similarly composed national or
regional advisory committees working in toui:h with the
branches of the Department of Public Information.

ANNEX 11
PROVISIONAL STAFF REGULATIONS

l.

DUTIES AND ÜBLIGATIONS OF THE SECRETARIAT

Regulation 1

Regulation 4
The immunities and prívileges attaching to the
Urúted Nations by virtue of Article 105 of the Charter
are conferred in the interests of the Organization. These
privileges and ímmunities furnísh no excuse to the staff
members who enjoy them for non-performance of their
private obligations or failure to observe laws and police
regulations. In any case where these privileges and immunities arise, the staff member concemed shall immediately report to the Secretary-General, with whom
alone ít rests to decide whether rhey shall be waived.
Regulation 5
Members of the staff shall exercise the utmost discretion in regard to ali matters of official business. They
shall not communícate to any person any unpublished
information known to them by reason of their official
position except in the course of tbeir dutie; or by authorization of the Secretary-General.

Regulation 6
Members of the staff shall avoid any action, and in
particular any kind of public pronouncement or activity which may adversely reflect on their position as
international civil servants. They are not expected to
give up their natíonal sentiments or their political and
religious convictions; but they shall at ali times bear in
mind the reserve and tact incumbent upon them by
reason of their internatíonal status.

Regulation 7
No member of the staff shall accept, hold, or engage
in any office or occupation which in the opinion of the
Secretary-General is incompatible with the proper discharge of his duties with the United Nations.

Regulation 8
Any member of the staff who becomes a candidate
for a public office of a political character shall resign
from the Secretariat.
Regulation 9
No member of the staff shall accept any honour, decoration, favour, gift or fee frorn any Government or
from any other source externa! to the Organization during the period of his appointment, except for war
services.

The Secretary-General and all members of the staff
of the Organization are intemational civil servants, and
their responsibilities are not national but exclusively
intemational. By accepting appointment, they pledge
themselves to discharge their functions and to regulate
their conduct with the interests of the United Nations
only in view. In the performance of their duties they
shall not seek nor receive instructions from any govemment or from any other authority externa] to the Organization. Ali members of the staff are subject to the
authority of the Secretary-General, and are responsible
to him in the exercise of their functions.

2.

APPOINTMENT, J>ROBATION AND PROMOTION

Regulation JO
Men and women are equally eligible for al! posts in
the Secretariat.
Regulation 1 l
So far as practicable, appoíntments to posts m the
Secr~tariat shall be made on a competitive basis.

Regulation 12
Persons appointed to permanent posts in the Secretaria! sha!I serve such probationary period as may be
prescribed by the Secretary-General.

Regulation 2
Upon accepting their appointment, ali members of
the staff shall subscribe to the following oath or declaration:

Regulation 13
The Secretary-General shall provide facilities to train
members of the staff in subjects relating directly or indirectly to their duties. This training shall apply particularly to members on probation whose earlier educational opportunities have been inadequ,lle or whose
Janguage qualifications are deficient.

"I solemnly swear (undertake, affirm, promise) to
exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the
functions entrusted to me as a member of the international service of the United Nations, to discharge
those functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of the United Nations only in view, and not
to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from any govemment or other
authority externa! to the Organízation."

Regulation 14
With due regard to thc maintenance of the staff on
as wide a geographical basis as possibk and without
prejudice to the inflow of fresh talent at the various
!evels, vacancies shall be filled by prornotion of persons
already in the service of the United Nations in preference to appointments from outside. This consideration
shall also be applied, on a reciproca! basis, to the specialized agencies brought into relationship with the
Organiza tion.

Regulation 3
The oath or declaration shall be made orally by the
Secretary-General and Assistant Secretaríes-General al
a public meeting of the General Assembly, and by the
other higher officers in public before the SecretaryGeneral or his authorized deputy.

18

Regulation 25
Subject to such conditions as may be prcscribed by
the Secretary-General, the United Nations shall pay the
removal costs and the travel expenses and travel allowances of members of the staff, and, in appropriate cases,
their wives and dependent children:

Regulation 15
The Secretary-General shall provide maclúnery
through which members of the staff may participate in
the discussion of qucstions relating to appointment and
promotion.

3.

SALARIES

(a) upon appointment to the Secretariat and on
subsequent change of official station;

Regulation 16
Pending the adoption of a permanent classification
plan, thc salaries of the members of the staff other than
Assistant Secretarics-General and Directors shall be determined by the Secretary-General within a range between the salary adopted by the General Assembly for
the post of Director and the best salaries and wages
paid for stenographic, clerical, and manual work at the
seat of the United Nations.

4.

( b) at appropriate intervals for a joumey to and
from the place recognized as the staff member's home
al the time of the initial appointment; and
(e) u pon termination of appoinlment.

9.

Regulation 26
Pending the establishment of a permanent staff retirement scheme, a deduction shall be madc from thc
salaries of members of the staff and paid into a staff
provident fund to which thr United Nations shall makc
an additional rnntribution.

HouRs OF WoRK

Regulation 17
The whole time of mcmbers of the staff shall be at
the disposal of the Secretary-General. The SecretaryGeneral shall estabfüh a normal working week.

5.

1O.

Regulation 27
A member of the staff who is injured as thc result of
an accident incurred in the course of Jús duty or who
is compelled to discontinue his cmployment as a result
of sickness directly attributable to lús work in the service of the United Nations shall receive reasonablc compensation. Should the staff member die in such circumstances, reasonable com pensation shall be paid to his
widow or such dependrnts as the Secretary-General
may determine.

DISCIPLINARY MEASURES

Regulation 19
The Secretary-General may impose disciplinary
measures on members of the staff whose conduct or
work is unsatisfactory. He may <lischarge a member of
the staff who persistently fails to give satisfactory service. He may summarily dismiss a member of the staff
for serious misconduct.

7.

J l.

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Regulation 28
These regulations may be supplemented or amended
by the General Assembly withoat prejudicc to the acquired rights of members of the staff.

TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENTS

Regulation 20
The normal age of retirement for members of the
staff shall be 60 years. In exceptional circumstances the
Secretary-General may, in the interest of thc Organization, extend this agc limit to 65 years if it would be
in the interest of the United Nations to do so.

Regulation 29
The Secretary-General shall report annually to the
General Assembly such staff rules and amendments
thereto as he may make to implement these regulations.

14 (1) • BUDGETARY AND FIN ANCIAL

Regulation 21
The Secretary-General may termínate the appointment of a member of the staff if the necessities of the
service require the abolition of the post or a reduction
of the staff, or if the services of the individual concerned prove unsatisfactory.

ARRANGEMENTS

A.
The pcrmanent budgetary and financia! arrangements uf the United Nations should be so designed
as to promote efficient and economical administration and command the confidence of Members.

Regulation 22
If the Secrctary-General terminates an appointment

Therefore the General Assembly resolves that:

under regulation 21 he shall give at least three months'
notice and pay an indemnity equivalen! to at least
thrce months' salary. The amount of the indemnity
shall be increased with length of service up to a maximum of nine months' salary. These provisions of notice
and indemnity shall not apply to probationers, to persons holding short-term contracts, or to persons summarily dismissed.

1. Arrangements be made on the basis of the
general principies set out in section 2 of chapter
IX of the Report of the Preparatory Commission
and of the provisional financia! regulations, for
budgetary procedures, the collection and custocly
of funds, the control of disbursements and the.auditing of accounts.

Regulation 23
Thc Secretary-General shall establish administrative
machinery for inquiry and appeal in disciplinary and
termination cases. This machinery shall provide for
staff participation.

8.

SPECIAL INDEMNITIES

LEAVE

Regulation 18
Members of the staff shall be allowed sick leave,
maternity leave, special leave, annual local !cave and
home leave, as prescribed by the Secretary-General.

6.

STAFF PRovIDENT FuND

2. To facilitate the consideration of administrative and budgetary questions by the General Assembly and its Administrative and Budgetary Committee, therc be appointed at the beginning of the
second part of the first session of the General Assembly, an Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions of nine members ( instead
of seven as laid down in rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure) with the following functions:
(a) to examine and report on the budget submitted by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly;

TRAVELLING EXPENSES AND ALLO\VANCES

Regulation 24
The travel expenses and travel allowances of members of the staff in rcspect of authorized joumeys on
the business of the U nited N ations shall be paid by the
Organization subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Secretary-General.

19
