VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
/Olst plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/105. Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/91 of 5 December 1980, 36/
161 of 16 December 1981, 37/175 of 17 December 1982
and 38/91 of 16 December 1983 and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 1980/54 of 24 July 1980 and 1982/2
of 27 April 1982,
Recalling also the report of the Secretary-General, prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/8 of 28 April 1980, 79
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 80
Having heard the statement made on 12 November
1984 by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, 81
Recognizing the increasing number of voluntary returnees and refugees in Ethiopia,
Deeply concerned at the plight of displaced persons and
voluntary returnees in the country, which has been aggravated by the devastating effect of the prolonged drought,
Aware of the heavy burden placed on the Government
of Ethiopia in caring for displaced persons and victims of
natural disasters, as well as for returnees and refugees,
1. Commends the efforts made so far by various organs
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies in
mobilizing humanitarian assistance to assist the efforts of
the Government of Ethiopia;
2. Appeals to Member States and to international
organizations and voluntary agencies to render maximum
material, financial and technical assistance to the Government of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide reliefand rehabilitation to displaced persons, voluntary returnees and refugees in Ethiopia;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to intensify his efforts in mobilizing humanitarian assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of voluntary returnees, refugees and displaced persons in Ethiopia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
JO I st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/106. Emergency assistance to returnees and displaced persons in Chad
The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned by the unprecedented drought which
is wreaking havoc in Chad at the present time, compounding the already precarious food and health situation
in that country,
79 A/35/360 and Corr.1-3.
80 A/39/446.
81 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session,
Third Committee, 36th meeting, paras. 1- I 2.
82 Jbid., Plenary Meetings, 27th meeting, paras. 211--270.

203

Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons as a result of the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
'
Considering that, in addition to being a land-locked
country and one of the least developed countries, Chad is
placed in a particularly difficult situation by reason of the
war and the drought,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad, in particular that made on 9 October 1984
to the General Assembly, 82 and by humanitarian organizations regarding the gravity of the food and health situation
in Chad.
Recalling the urgent appeal of the Secretary-General
dated I November 1984 83 for international emergency
assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad afflicted by natural disasters.
I. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad and the Secretary-General concerning emergency
assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;
2. Invites all States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to· support by generous contributions the efforts being made by the Government of Chad
to assist and resettle the voluntary returnees and displaced
persons;
3. Takes note with approval of the action undertaken
by the various bodies of the United Nations system and
the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator to mobilize, in accordance with their respective
mandates, emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
/Olst plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/107. Humanitarian assistance to refugees in
Djibouti
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 35/182 of 15 December 1980,
36/156 of 16 December 1981, 37/176 of 17 December
1982 and 38/89 of 16 December 1983 on humanitarian
assistance to refugees in Djibouti,
Having heard the statement made on 12 November
1984 by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, 81
Having considered with satisfaction the reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti, 84
Appreciating the determined and sustained efforts made
by the Government of Djibouti, despite its modest economic resources and limited means, to cope with the pressing
needs of the refugees,
83 A/39/627; see also Official Records of th,• General Assemblv. Thirtymnth Sessum, Plenary Meetings. 47th meeting, para. I.
84 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-mnth Session, Supplement Vo /2 (A/39/12); and A/39/444.

204

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

A ware of the social and economic burden placed on the
Government and people of Djibouti as a result of the presence of refugees and of the consequent impact on the
development and infrastructure of the country,
Deeply concerned about the continuing plight of the refugees and displaced persons in the country, which has
been aggravated by the devastating effects of the prolonged
drought,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Government of Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High
Commissioner, to implement adequate, appropriate and
lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti,
Also noting with appreciation the concern and unremitting efforts of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and the voluntary agencies which have
worked closely with the Government of Djibouti in the
relief and rehabilitation programme for the refugees in that
country,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti and appreciates his efforts to keep their situation under constant
review;
2. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of
Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner, to implement adequate, appropriate and lasting
solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to mobilize the
necessary resources to implement lasting solutions in
respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
4. Urges the High Commissioner to continue to take
the necessary measures to ensure that adequate, appropriate and lasting solutions are implemented to assist the refugees in Djibouti, in co-operation with Member States,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and the voluntary agencies concerned, with a view to
mobilizing the necessary assistance to enable the Government of Djibouti to cope effectively with the refugee problem, which has been particularly aggravated by the
debilitating effects of the prolonged drought;
5. Appreciates the assistance provided thus far by
Member States, the specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and voluntary agencies to the relief and rehabilitation programmes
for the refugees and displaced persons in Djibouti;
6. Calls upon all Member States, the organizations of
the United Nations system, the specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
voluntary agencies to continue to support the efforts constantly being made by the Government of Djibouti to cope
with the current needs of the refugees and the other victims of drought in that country;
7. Requests the High Commissioner, in close co-operation with the Secretary-General, to report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of
the present resolution.
IOI st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
85 !hid .. Supplement ,v,, 12 (A "39/12): and A/39/445.
80 A _1'1 445

39/108. Situation of refugees in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/ l 8 l of 15 December 1980,
36/158 of 16 December 1981, 37/173 of 17 December
1982 and 38/90 of 16 December 1983 on the situation of
refugees in the Sudan,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the situation of refugees in the Sudan, 85
Taking note of the ever-increasing number of refugees
arriving in the Sudan,
Appreciating the measures which the Government of the
Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter, food, education, and health and other humanitarian services to the
growing number of refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the Government of the Sudan and the sacrifices it is making in caring
for the refugees and the need for more international assistance to enable it to continue its efforts to provide assistance to the refugees,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered to
the Sudan by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in support of the refugee
programme,
I. Takes note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations of the interagency technical follow-up missions, as well as in the
implementation of resolution 38/90; 86
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
the Sudan is taking to provide shelter, food, education,
and health and other humanitarian services to the refugees, in spite of the drought and the serious economic situation it faces;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner, donor countries and voluntary
agencies for their efforts to assist the refugees in the Sudan;
4. Recognizes the need for development-oriented projects that would generate work opportunities and long-term
livelihood for refugees and local people in affected areas.
and, in this context, commends the efforts of the High
Commissioner and the International Labour Office to create income-generating activities for refugees in the
Sudan; 87
5. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the necessary financial and material assistance for the full implementation of the recommendations of the various interagency missions and of the projects submitted by the Government of the Sudan to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 88 held at
Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984;
6. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and programmes of the United Nations,
other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the international financial institutions to provide
the Government of the Sudan with the necessary resources
for the implementation of development assistance projects
in regions affected by the presence ofrefugees, as envisaged
in the reports of the various inter-agency missions, and to
strengthen its social and economic infrastructure so that
essential services and facilities for refugees can be
strengthened and expanded;
87 See A/38/427 and Corr. I, sect. Ill.
88 See A1CONF. 125 I, para. 33
