274

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,93
1. Concurs with the recommendations and observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in its report;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a further report
setting out his proposals to give effect to those
recommendations.
105th plenary meeting
I 8 December I 984

39/243. Staff and administrative questions of the
Economic Commission for Western Asia
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
81 of 27 July 1984,
Deeply concerned about the high vacancy rate and difficulties in recruitment which have prevailed for a number
of years in the regional commissions, particularly in the
Economic Commission for Western Asia,
Convinced that the high vacancy rate has had a serious
impact on the work programme of the Economic Commission for Western Asia,
Recognizing that repeated efforts have been made by the
secretariat of the Economic Commission for Western Asia
to find qualified staff from unrepresented or underrepresented States in the region covered by the Commission, but that the difficulties still persist in the recruitment
of such staff,
Recognizing also the importance of knowledge of the
Arabic language by the staff of the Economic Commission
for Western Asia for the effective performance of their
work,
l. Urges unrepresented and underrepresented States to
endeavour to encourage competent personnel to work in
the secretariat of the Economic Commission for Western
Asia as staff members on a regular or fixed-term basis;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to enable the Economic Commission for
Western Asia to recruit staff from any State member of the
Commission to meet its personnel requirements;
3. Decides that all members of the Economic Commission for Western Asia should be treated in a manner consistent with their full membership in the Commission in
regard to employment in the secretariat of the
Commission.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/244. Respect for the privileges and immunities of
officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/212 of 17 December 1980,
36/232 of 18 December 1981, 37/236 of 21 December
1982 and 38/230 of 20 December 1983,
Recalling that, under Article 105 of the Charter of the
United Nations, officials of the Organization shall enjoy in
the territory of each of its Member States such privileges
and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization,
93 A/39/733.

which is indispensable for the proper discharge of their
duties,
Recalling the obligation of the staff in the conduct of
their duty to observe fully the laws and regulations of
Member States,
I. Takes note with concern of the report submitted to
the General Assembly by the Secretary-General on behalf
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, 94 which shows a continuing neglect of the observance
of the principles related to respect for the privileges and
immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations;
2. Reaffirms the above-mentioned resolutions;
3. Welcomes the measures already taken by the Secretary-General in furtherance of the safety and security of
international civil servants, as outlined in paragraph 7 of
his report; 94
4. Calls upon the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the Organization, to continue personally
to act as the focal point in promoting and ensuring the
observance of the privileges and immunities of officials of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies and
related organizations by using all such means as are available to him;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to give priority,
through the United Nations Security Co-ordinator and the
other special representatives, to the reporting and prompt
follow-up of cases of arrest, detention and other possible
matters relating to the security of officials of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies and related
organizations;
6. Calls upon the staff of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies and related organizations to comply
with the obligations arising from the Staff Regulations of
the United Nations, in particular regulation 1.8, and from
the equivalent provisions governing the staff of the other
agencies;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to review
and appraise the measures already taken to enhance the
safety and protection of international civil servants and to
modify them where necessary;
8. Invites the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to suggest in
his next annual report to the General Assembly further
steps designed to alleviate the present situation.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/245. Composition of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on personnel policy
and in particular resolutions 33/ l 43 of 20 December 1978,
35/210 of 17 December 1980, 37/235 of 21 December
1982 and 38/231 of 20 December 1983,
Bearing in mind Article IOI, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations which states that "The paramount
consideration in the employment of the staff and in the
determination of the conditions of service shall be the
necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the
94 A/C.Si.W, 17.

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
27_5

importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical
basis as possible",
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the composition of the Secretariat, 95 on personnel policies 96 and on the status of the linguistic skills of United
Nations staff, 97
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on competitive examinations in the United Nations98
and the related comments of the Secretary-General, 99
Concerned by the lack of progress towards meeting the
goals and objectives established with respect to:
(a) The situation of unrepresented and underrepresented Member States,
(b) The recruitment, career development and promotion of women,
(c) The achievement of a balanced and equitable geographical distribution of staff throughout the Secretariat,
l. Reaffirms the principles embodied in its resolutions
33/143, 35/210, 37/235 and 38/231;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make special
efforts to pursue an active recruitment policy in order to
accelerate recruitment from unrepresented Member States
and to increase the number of staff recruited from underrepresented Member States and from Member States
below the mid-point of their desirable ranges, to the extent
possible towards their mid-point, and further to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the results
of these efforts to achieve a balanced and equitable geographical distribution of staff throughout the Secretariat;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
measures in order to ensure that the recruitment procedures are completed with all due speed within a reasonable
time frame, bearing in mind the need for the co-operation
of the substantive departments and offices with the Office
of Personnel Services of the Secretariat, and that all candidates are duly notified of the result of their applications;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue
to increase the representation of developing countries in
senior and policy-formulating posts, while safeguarding
the principle of equitable geographical distribution in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
5. Takes note of the decision of the Secretary-General
to designate, on a temporary basis, a senior official with
the title of Co-ordinator for the Improvement of the Status
of Women in the Secretariat of the United Nations, to
review the situation of women in the Secretariat and to
make proposals for its improvement, in the framework of
the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session, requests that the
Co-ordinator function within the Office of Personnel Services, requests further that the Office of Personnel Services
ensure that the Co-ordinator is provided with all necessary
assistance for the effective carrying out of all tasks assigned
to the Co-ordinator and notes that the Office of Personnel
Services will continue to be responsible for the implementation of General Assembly directives and the SecretaryGeneral's policies in personnel matters, for the formulation and application of personnel policy and for the
recruitment and administration of all staff;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To implement recommendations 1, 2 and 3 of the
report of the Joint Inspection Unit 98 to the extent possible
95 A/39/453.

96 A/C.5/39/9.
97 A/C.5/39/6 and Corr. I.

and in such a manner that implementation will not
adversely affect the flexibility of personnel policy;
(b) To ensure to the extent possible that the creation of
new posts in budgets include a reasonable proportion of PI and P-2 posts;
(c) To conduct an overall review of the system of competitive examinations in the United Nations, including the
consequences of the proposed expansion of the competitive examinations to the P-3 level and. taking into account
the recommendations of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the subject, 98 to submit his views in this regard to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
(d) To pursue his work programme on the design and
implementation of a career development system, taking
into account staff serving on different types of contracts
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
(e) To strengthen the various appeals machinery, with
a view to eliminating the backlog of cases;
(I) To report to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session on the feasibility of establishing an office of
Ombudsman;
(g) To implement recommendation 7 of the Joint
Inspection Unit 98 with a view to facilitating an in-depth
consideration of the matter of appointment of staff in the
General Service catego1y by the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
(h) To study ways and means of applying the population factor and to report to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session, taking into account the views expressed by
Member States at its thirty-ninth session;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
strengthen the role and emphasize the authority of the
Office of Personnel Services in recruitment and other personnel matters throughout the Secretariat and to report to
the General Assembly al its fortieth session on measures
taken to this effect;
8. Invites legislative bodies of all organizations of the
United Nations system to examine as soon as possible the
situation with regard to the implementation of the principle of equitable geographical distribution in their respective secretariats and to take measures, where appropriate,
with the aim of securing its implementation throughout
the system, within the framework of Article IOI, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant provisions of the rnnstitutional instruments of the
other organizations;

II
Recalling its decision with respect to the education grant
referred to in section III. paragraph 3 (a). of its resolution
38/232 of 20 December 1983.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
amendments to the S1aff Regulations of the United
Nations. 100
Approves the amendments to the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations with effect from I January 1984, as set
forth in the annex to the present resolution, to give effect
to its decision with respect to the education grant.
105th plenary meeting
18 December /984
98 See A..\9/483
9 9 A 39. 483/ Add. I and Corr ·, annex
100 A ( ' 39 ~

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

276
ANNEX

Amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations
Regulation 3.2

In the first paragraph, replace the third sentence by the following text:
"The amount of the grant per scholastic year for each child shall be
75 per cent of the first $6,000 of admissible educational expenses, up
to a maximum grant of $4,500."
In the third paragraph, replace the second sentence by the following text:
"The amount of this grant per year for each disabled child shall be
equal to 100 per cent of the educational expenses actually incurred, up
to a maximum of $6,000."

39/246. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/233 of 20 December 1983,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board for 1984 to the General Assembly and to the member organizations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 101 chapter II of the
report of the International Civil Service Commission 102
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 103
I
ACTUARIAL SITUATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
JOINT STAFF PENSION FUND

Recalling that in resolution 38/233 it indicated that a
co-operative effort by member organizations, participants
and beneficiaries is required if the actuarial imbalance is to
be reduced or eliminated, thereby securing an adequate
level of benefits under the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,
Noting the proposals made by the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board in response to the request addressed to
it in section II of General Assembly resolution 38/233,
l. Approves the following measures which will result in
an improvement of the actuarial balance of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund:
(a) For participants taking early retirement between
the ages of 55 and 60 after 25 years or more but less than
30 years of contributory service, the reduction factor shall
be increased from 2 per cent for every year below age 60 to
3 per cent for service performed as from I January 1985;
(b) The periodicity of adjustment of benefits in payment for changes in the cost of Jiving shall be reduced
from twice a year to once a year, subject to the modalities
set out in annex X to the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board;
(c) On the first occasion after I January I 985 when a
benefit in payment is to be adjusted for a change in the
cost ofliving, the adjustment shall be reduced by 1.5 percentage points, except as specified in paragraph 4 of the
present section;
(d) In the case of participants to whom the two-track
adjustment system is applicable, the adjusted amount of
the United States dollar benefit, when converted into local
currency, shall be limited to 120 per cent of the adjusted
local currency benefit, subject to the transitional measures
described in annex X to the report of the Pension Board;
(e) The periodic benefits of participants who separate
from service on or after 31 December 1984 shall be paid at
the end of the month to which they relate;
IOI Official Records of the General Assemhly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/39/9 and Corr. I).

(f) Organizations' monthly contributions to the Fund
should be remitted during the first two working days of the
month following the month to which they relate;
(g) The interest rate used for the purpose of Jump-sum
commutation shall be raised from 4.5 to 6.5 per cent as
stated in paragraph 20 of the report of the Pension Board;
2. Defers action on the question of changing the statutory age of separation;
3. Amends, with effect from I January 1985 and without retroactive effect, article 29 (b) (ii) of the Regulations
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, as set out
in the annex to the present resolution;
4. Approves, with effect from I January 1985 and without retroactive effect, the changes in the system of adjusting benefits in payment, set out in annex X to the report of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, except that
the one-time reduction of the cost-of-living adjustment by
I. 5 percentage points shall not apply to the minimum benefits under the Regulations of the Fund and the benefits
under sections E and F of the pension adjustment system;
5. Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board, with the assistance of the Committee of Actuaries,
to review the method of calculating the lump-sum commutation of benefits using a uniform discount rate and to
make recommendations thereon to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session;
6. Requests the Pension Board to keep under review
the question of the determination of the lump sum in net
equivalent terms;
7. Further requests the Pension Board to re-examine
the question of the imposition of a ceiling on the highest
levels of pensions and to make recommendations thereon,
and also on the imposition of a ceiling on the amount that
may be paid to a participant by way of lump-sum commutation of part of his periodic benefit, to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
8. Requests the Pension Board to re-examine the operation of the two-track pension adjustment system in
countries where the adjusted United States dollar amount,
when converted into local currency, yields a larger benefit
in local currency units than the adjusted local currency
amount and to report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on further limiting the resultant excess benefits;
9. Requests the Pension Board, in the light of the
results of the actuarial valuation of the Fund as at 31
December 1984, to consider additional measures, with a
view to avoiding, if possible, further increases in the rate
of contribution of member organizations and participants
to the Fund, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
l 0. Requests the Pension Board to consider measures
for the fair and equitable treatment of all participants,
whatever their dates of entry into contributory service or
of separation, and to submit such consequential amendments to the Regulations of the Fund and to the pension
adjustment system as may be required;

II
PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR THE
PROFESSIONAL AND HIGHER CATEGORIES

Recalling section III of its resolution 38/233,
Having considered chapter II, section B, of the report of
the International Civil Service Commission 102 and section
l02 Ibid., Supp/emem No ..iO (A/39130 and Corr. I and 2).
103 A/39/608.
