A/RES/55/81

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/600)]

55/81.

International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and its resolutions on the status of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1
most recently resolution 53/131 of 9 December 1998,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2 in particular section II.B
of the Declaration, relating to equality, dignity and tolerance,
Reiterating the need to intensify the struggle to eliminate all forms of racial
discrimination throughout the world, especially its most brutal forms,
Recalling its resolution 52/111 of 12 December 1997, in which it decided to
convene the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance no later than 2001,
Recalling also its resolution 53/132 of 9 December 1998, in which it decided
to observe 2001 as the International Year of Mobilization against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/14 of 17 April
2000 on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, 3
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is one of the most widely
accepted human rights instruments adopted under the auspices of the United
Nations,
Stressing the importance of achieving universal ratification of the Convention,
which will contribute to the fight against racism and racial discrimination,

1

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2

00 56425

A/RES/55/81

Mindful of the importance of the contributions of the Committee to the
effective implementation of the Convention and to the efforts of the United Nations
to combat racism and all other forms of discrimination based on race, colour,
descent or national or ethnic origin,
Noting that the reports submitted by States parties under the Convention
contain, inter alia, information about the causes of, as well as measures to combat,
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance,
Emphasizing the obligation of all States parties to the Convention to take
legislative, judicial and other measures in order to secure full implementation of the
provisions of the Convention,
Recalling its resolution 47/111 of 16 December 1992, in which it welcomed the
decision, taken on 15 January 1992 by the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to
the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 4 to amend paragraph 6 of article 8 of the Convention and to add a
new paragraph, as paragraph 7 of article 8, with a view to providing for the
financing of the Committee from the regular budget of the United Nations, and
reiterating its deep concern that the amendment to the Convention has not yet
entered into force,
Stressing the importance of enabling the Committee to function smoothly and
to have all necessary facilities for the effective performance of its functions under
the Convention,
I
Reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination on its fifty-fourth and fifty-fifth 5 and its fifty-sixth and fifty-seventh
sessions; 6
2.
Commends the Committee for its continuing efforts to contribute to the
effective implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,1 especially the examination of reports under
article 9 and action on communications under article 14 of the Convention, which
contribute to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
3.
Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligation, under paragraph 1 of
article 9 of the Convention, to submit their periodic reports on measures taken to
implement the Convention in due time;
4.
Expresses its concern at the fact that a great number of reports are
overdue and continue to be overdue, in particular initial reports, which constitutes
an obstacle to the full implementation of the Convention;
5.
Encourages States parties to the Convention whose reports are seriously
overdue to avail themselves of the advisory services and technical assistance that the
4

See CERD/SP/45, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 18 and addendum
(A/54/18 and Add.1).
6
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 18 and addendum (A/55/18 and Add.1).
5

2

A/RES/55/81

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights can provide,
upon their request, for the preparation of the reports;
6.
Commends the Committee for its continuing contribution to the
prevention of racial discrimination, and welcomes its relevant action thereon;
7.
Encourages the Committee to continue to contribute fully to the
implementation of the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
and its revised Programme of Action, 7 including by continuing to cooperate and
exchange information with United Nations bodies and mechanisms and
intergovernmental organizations, in particular with the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and with the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well as with nongovernmental organizations;
8.
Encourages States parties to continue to include a gender perspective in
their reports to the Committee, and invites the Committee to take into account a
gender perspective in the implementation of its mandate;
9.
Takes note with interest of the contributions by the Committee to the
preparatory process for the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, including undertaking a series
of studies, making suggestions for the agenda and draft programme of action of the
World Conference, and preparing an assessment of the best practices of States
parties in combating racial discrimination;
10. Invites the Committee to continue to participate actively in the
preparatory process for the World Conference and at the Conference itself;
11. Encourages all States, relevant United Nations bodies, international and
regional organizations and non-governmental organizations to draw attention to the
Convention and to the work of the Committee during the information and
awareness-raising campaign for the World Conference and the International Year of
Mobilization against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance;
II
Financial situation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial
situation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;8
2.
Expresses its profound concern about the fact that a number of States
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination 1 have still not fulfilled their financial obligations, as shown in the
report of the Secretary-General, and strongly appeals to all States parties that are in
arrears to fulfil their outstanding financial obligations under article 8, paragraph 6,
of the Convention;
3.
Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to accelerate their
domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment to the Convention
7
8

Resolution 49/146, annex.
A/55/266.

3

A/RES/55/81

concerning the financing of the Committee and to notify the Secretary-General
expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment, as decided upon at the
Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on 15 January 1992,4 endorsed by
the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111 and further reiterated at the Sixteenth
Meeting of States Parties on 16 January 1996;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure adequate financial
arrangements and to provide the necessary support, including an adequate level of
Secretariat assistance, in order to ensure the functioning of the Committee and to
enable it to cope with its increasing amount of work;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to invite those States parties to the
Convention that are in arrears to pay the amounts in arrears, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
III
Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 9 on the status of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;1
2.
Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that have ratified the
Convention or acceded thereto, which now stands at one hundred and fifty-six;
3.
Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its provisions are
necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Third Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination and for action beyond the Decade;
4.
Urges all States that have not yet become parties to the Convention to
ratify it or accede thereto as soon as possible, bearing in mind the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to be
held in South Africa, from 31 August to 7 September 2001;
5.
Urges States to limit the extent of any reservation they lodge to the
Convention and to formulate any reservation as precisely and as narrowly as
possible in order to ensure that no reservation is incompatible with the object and
purpose of the Convention or otherwise contrary to international treaty law, to
review their reservations on a regular basis with a view to withdrawing them, and to
withdraw reservations that are contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention
or that are otherwise incompatible with international treaty law;
6.
Requests the States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to
consider the possibility of making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the
Convention;
7.
Decides to consider, at its fifty-seventh session, under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism and racial discrimination”, the reports of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its fifty-eighth and fifty-ninth and its
sixtieth and sixty-first sessions, the report of the Secretary-General on the financial

9

4

A/55/203.

A/RES/55/81

situation of the Committee and the report of the Secretary-General on the status of
the Convention.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

5
