United Nations

S/PV.5884

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5884th meeting
Wednesday, 30 April 2008, 10.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kumalo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2008/251)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-32472 (E)

*0832472*

S/PV.5884

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General concerning
Western Sahara (S/2008/251)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Spain, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Palacio
España (Spain) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/284, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the Russian
Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2008/251, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western
Sahara.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.

2

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
you yourself have said, Sir, what we had in the
consultation room was a preview. My delegation is
eager that our discussion here today be set down in the
official record. I would therefore beg the indulgence of
delegations present to repeat and summarize what was
said earlier.
I said at the outset that when Costa Rica
presented its candidacy for Security Council
membership to the Members of the Organization, we
did so on the basis of a platform of clear and specific
principles that we have always upheld. We presented
ourselves as a country that was devoted to and
concerned about respect for international law without
restriction; it could not be otherwise for a country that
has staked its security on multilateralism and
international law for the past 60 years. We also
presented ourselves as a country that defends and
promotes respect for the human rights of all human
beings without exception, double standards or
politicization of the cause. That is our history as a State
and those are the fundamental values that we wish to
see strengthened in the Organization.
In our campaign, we also stressed our brief but
notable record of promoting the need to reform the
working methods of the Security Council. As early as
1997, a note from Ambassador Berrocal referred to the
Council’s working methods. Alongside other Members
of the Organization, we formed the so-called small five
group, in which we made proposals with a view to
making the Council more efficient and to ensuring that
its actions enjoyed greater legitimacy. We called for a
more transparent and inclusive Council, and we
continue to do so, repeatedly and vehemently.
No one will be surprised, therefore, that Costa
Rica should feel obliged to express its concern at the
manner in which the draft resolution on which we are
about to vote was negotiated, or to convey our
difficulty in understanding the absolute refusal to
include elements that, in our view, should be an
integral part of the draft resolution.
It is especially difficult for Costa Rica to
understand the opposition to including a reference to
the human rights component in the text of the draft
resolution. During the negotiation process, we
proposed two options for incorporating such a
reference. Today, to our surprise, the representative of
the Russian Federation threatened to exercise a

08-32472

S/PV.5884

technical veto of any reference to human rights, despite
the fact that the issue of human rights is the object of
mutual accusations made by both parties, that it has
been raised in consultations by various delegations,
and that several references are made to it in the reports
of the Secretary-General. In his most recent report,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon himself refers to the
United Nations duty to uphold human rights standards
in all its operations, including in Western Sahara, and
to the need to coordinate action in that sphere.
Costa Rica cannot understand the reasons that
have been put forward for rejecting a specific reference
to the framework of international law when we are
calling on the parties to assume a realistic position in
the negotiations, nor do we understand the fact that the
Group of Friends should sideline the members of the
Security Council in the preparation of the texts of draft
resolutions and in the building of consensus. In this
case, just a week ago the Group of Friends provided us
with the text on which we are about to vote and in
which my delegation continued to insist that some of
its amendments be included.
Costa Rica believes that the Council should
facilitate solutions to the international issues on its
agenda. As we said in the debate on the Middle East,
the Council should be part of the solution and not part
of the problem. We should not come here to defend the
interests of certain parties to a conflict or the particular
interests of any delegation. Instead, we should promote
just, equitable and lasting solutions to problems that
touch on international peace and security.
If the Council is to be part of the solution in
Western Sahara, it must be united. That is what we
have worked to ensure and why we withdrew our
proposed amendments to the text. We will continue
clearly and decisively to advocate a political, just and
lasting solution acceptable to all parties, as requested
by resolutions 1754 (2007) and 1783 (2007). The
solution to the issue of the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara should be sought in the
framework of the ongoing negotiations between the
parties, which should be based on the principles and
provisions of international law, especially those that
have governed the Organization’s decolonization work,
in particular General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 1541 (XV), which provide for voluntary
annexation to a State or the proclamation of
independence as the logical outcome of the process of
self-determination.

08-32472

Costa Rica has worked constructively and
demonstrated flexibility, creativity and, today,
humility, despite the particular negotiating dynamic
with which we were faced. Our proposals to improve
the paragraphs on human rights and respect for
international law were never reflected in the text or
negotiated in consultations. The implications of such a
negotiating process are many and do nothing to
strengthen the Council’s legitimacy and transparency.
Progress may be slow, as they say, but we have
expressed our concern, maintained our position in the
negotiations and defended the ideas and principles that
underpinned our campaign to obtain the seat we now
occupy on the Council.
In our first proposed amendment, we suggested
adding the expression “within the framework of
international law” to paragraph 2, which would then
read as follows:
“Endorses the report’s recommendation that
realism, within the framework of international
law, and a spirit of compromise by the parties are
essential to maintain the momentum of the
process of negotiations”.
We also proposed an amendment to add a new
operative paragraph that would have read:
“Calls upon the parties to commit
themselves to a continuous and constructive
dialogue with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and
MINURSO with a view to ensuring respect for
the human rights of the people of Western
Sahara;”.
We withdrew both of our proposed amendments
with a view to strengthening consensus and as a
demonstration of respect for those who listened when
we wanted to present our points of view.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to express our surprise at the
fact that in his statement the representative of Costa
Rica — which normally has friendly relations with the
Russian Federation — distorted the thrust of the
discussion held in the framework of the consultations
in the Security Council. Our Ambassador put forward
arguments of a totally different nature with regard to
the technical veto. They dealt with the situation of
putting to the vote a draft resolution on which there
was no agreement from our capital. I wish to add that

3

S/PV.5884

other delegations spoke against the inclusion of these
amendments to the text of the resolution for the same
reasons.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity before the vote.
The negotiating process on the draft resolution
before us illustrates once again that the Group of
Friends are not interested in genuinely negotiating with
the Security Council on the text that they produced.
Once the Group of Friends reach an agreement, they
are adamant that “it is cast in stone” and would not
change substantially. As has been our experience in this
matter in the Council, the Group of Friends have once
again failed to be receptive to any substantial changes
to the text that was initially agreed to by the Friends.
Unlike other Council outcomes, there was once again
no real attempt to reach a compromise on the
contentious paragraphs so that we could be assured of a
balanced text. Through this process the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the terms of the United Nations Charter, is undermined
by a group of like-minded countries and individuals
who chose to determine the fate of the people of
Western Sahara.
On the text of the resolution, my delegation
would like to point out the following points.
The word “realism” would be interpreted as
implying that the Council endorses the view of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on political
reality and international legality. No State or individual
can bestow upon itself the right to deny the right of
self-determination to the people of Western Sahara.
That interpretation could set a precedent that could be
used in many other cases. Are we going to say to the
people of Palestine that they should be realistic in that
they cannot get their freedom because of the powerful
State of Israel? Indeed, are we going to say to the
people of Serbia that they must accept Kosovo as a
reality because of what has happened? This attempt
would set aside international law in favour of the
principle that “might is right”.
We maintain that “realism” in the text of the
resolution is related to the negotiations and not to any
outcome. Following the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the resolution calls on both parties — the
Frente POLISARIO and Morocco — to show realism
and a spirit of compromise, as these are essential to

4

maintain the momentum of the process of the
negotiations.
The resolution welcomes Morocco’s “serious and
credible … efforts to move the process towards
resolution”. The context and the relevance of retaining
this phrase have changed. This phrase has,
unfortunately, led to destructive ambiguity and has
resulted in some unfortunately interpreting the
Council’s intention as favouring one proposal over the
other.
My delegation reiterates our understanding, as a
Council member that was part of the negotiations on
the text of resolution 1754 (2007), that the text of the
resolution is clear, that the Council takes note of both
proposals and that the Council called on the parties to
enter into negotiations based on both of these
proposals. Any attempt to place one proposal above the
other would undermine the negotiations process and
would be counterproductive to the spirit of future
negotiations based on these two proposals. The Council
and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
should remain objective without pre-empting any final
status of the negotiations.
The sponsors have once again refused to include
any mention of human rights in the draft resolution,
despite the fact that the Secretary-General has
continued to report on the human rights situation in
Western Sahara. Additionally, both parties — Frente
POLISARIO and Morocco — have raised human rights
concerns in their recent letters to the SecretaryGeneral.
My delegation finds it extremely curious that
some Council members selectively are quick to
pronounce on the human rights situations in countries
that are not even on the agenda of the Security Council,
such as Myanmar and Zimbabwe, but refuse to deal
with human rights abuses in Western Sahara, which
this Council has been faced with for decades. This
double standard creates a clear impression to the
international community that the Council simply does
not care about the human rights of the people of
Western Sahara.
The resolution does, however, call on the
parties — Frente POLISARIO and Morocco — to
continue where the negotiations began after the
adoption of resolution 1754 (2007), on the basis of the
two proposals. It is for that reason that, despite the
serious concerns with the draft, my delegation will vote

08-32472

S/PV.5884

in favour of the resolution in the hope that through the
negotiating process and with the support of MINURSO
the people of Western Sahara can one day achieve their
right to self-determination.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1813 (2008).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I had
intended to focus my remarks on the issue before us,
and will do so. But that does not mean we agree with
either the interpretation of the process that led to this
resolution or the representation of the arguments
presented by Council members on the specific issues
raised by both Ambassador Urbina and Ambassador
Kumalo reflecting the substance of the issue. But let
me focus on the issue as we see it before us.
The Western Sahara conflict has gone on too
long, provoking tensions, causing human suffering and
preventing progress towards regional integration in
North Africa. I am sure that all of us around this table
yearn for a mutually agreed political solution to this
conflict. Four rounds of discussions in the framework
of the latest settlement initiative have, however,
confirmed the difficulty of arriving at such a solution,
despite the seriousness, dedication and sincerity of the
Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy, Peter van
Walsum.
In the absence of a settlement, my Government
judges the mission of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara to be vital and is
pleased that the Council has renewed its mandate for a
full year; we appreciate the fact that it was done
consensually.

08-32472

It is our hope that this will permit the parties to
engage in the search for a solution in a sustained,
intensive and creative manner. To encourage them to
do so, we intend to broaden our own engagement with
them over the coming weeks and months. For our part,
we agree with Mr. van Walsum’s assessment that an
independent Sahrawi State is not a realistic option for
resolving the conflict and that genuine autonomy under
Moroccan sovereignty is the only feasible solution. In
our view, the focus of future negotiation rounds should
therefore be on designing a mutually acceptable
autonomy regime that is consistent with the aspirations
of the people of the Western Sahara.
In that regard, Morocco has already produced a
proposal that the Security Council has qualified as
serious and credible, and we urge the POLISARIO to
engage Morocco in negotiation of its details — or to
submit a comprehensive autonomy proposal of its own.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): With the
adoption of resolutions 1754 (2007) and 1783 (2007),
the international community unanimously welcomed
the end of the stalemate on Western Sahara, with the
commencement of negotiations without preconditions
and in good faith. The lack of progress in the
Manhasset negotiations undermines the search for a
mutually acceptable, just and lasting political solution
negotiated under United Nations auspices, allowing for
the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara.
The continuation of the status quo in Western Sahara is
an obstacle to building an integrated, prosperous
Maghreb and poses a threat to the stability of the entire
region.
By resolutions 1754 (2007) and 1783 (2007), the
Security Council unanimously welcomed the serious
and credible Moroccan efforts to produce an autonomy
plan for Western Sahara. That, of course, is not a sine
qua non: the autonomy plan proposed by Morocco
forms the basis for serious and constructive negotiation
aimed at a negotiated settlement between the parties,
with respect for the principle of self-determination, to
which we are committed.
We have taken note with interest of the
assessment of the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, which supplements the information set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/251). We
pay tribute once again to Secretary-General and his
Personal Envoy for their efforts to resolve the question
of Western Sahara.

5

S/PV.5884

In adopting the present resolution, the Security
Council calls upon the parties to display realism and a
spirit of compromise so that the negotiations can move
to a stage of greater intensity and substance. We hope
that the Security Council and all Member States — in
particular, neighbouring countries in the region — will
remain ready to support the ongoing negotiations, as
called for in resolutions 1754 (2007) and 1783 (2007)
and in the present resolution.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
As members know, the conflict in Western Sahara is of
the greatest concern to my country — not solely
because it is an African problem, but also because of
the potential danger it poses every day, after more than
30 years of attempts to reach a compromise. In that
regard, Burkina Faso has maintained a consistent
position: to encourage the parties to persevere on the
path of negotiations, because, in our view, only the
parties concerned can resolve their differences — of
course, with the support of the international
community. We consider that the present resolution
encourages the parties to pursue negotiations, which is
why Burkina Faso has supported it: that consideration
is of great importance to my country. In our view, it is

6

of the utmost importance to send a signal of
encouragement to the parties so that they will
persevere in the negotiations in a spirit of good faith
and dynamic compromise.
We respect the views of delegations that have
expressed differing opinions, and we thank them for
their understanding, which has enabled us to adopt the
resolution unanimously. It is our hope that this new
resolution, which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara, will contribute to progress in the negotiations
that the parties have already begun, in particular with
respect to the consideration of substantive issues.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. Before adjourning the meeting, I should like,
in my national capacity, to thank the Secretariat, the
interpreters and the members of the Council, who have
made this a very interesting month for the presidency. I
thank them for their support.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11 p.m.

08-32472
