S/PV.8272

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8272nd meeting

Wednesday, 30 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-16341 (E)
*1816341*

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

30/05/2018

Shalom crossing. No casualties or serious injuries were
reported in Gaza as a result of the strikes.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

On 29 May, the Hamas Al-Qassam Brigades
and the Islamic Jihad’s Sarai Al-Quds claimed joint
responsibility for the rockets and mortars fired at Israel.
Their joint statement blamed Israel for targeting their
fighters and military positions during the preceding
48 hours, cautioned against attempts to dictate new
equations on the status quo and warned that they would
reciprocate “shelling with shelling and blood with
blood”. In the meanwhile, Prime Minister Netanyahu
vowed that Israel would respond with great force to
the rocket attacks, as for more than 24 hours Israeli
communities around Gaza lived with the fear of having
mere seconds to seek shelter from incoming rockets.

Mr. Mladenov: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
unfolding events in and around Gaza.

Such attacks are completely unacceptable. The
firing of rockets and mortars against civilians cannot
be justified under any circumstances. I take this
opportunity to call on the international community
to join me in unequivocally condemning the
indiscriminate targeting of civilians and the dangerous
escalation in Gaza. This dangerous escalation comes
after a series of warnings by the United Nations and
in the context of recent developments on the ground. It
cannot be divorced from the context of the two months
of protests at the Gaza fence, in which approximately
110 Palestinians were killed and a large number were
injured. Throughout this period, militants have also
placed improvised explosive devices (IEDs) at the
perimeter fence and attempted, sometimes successfully,
to breach it, with the intention of damaging military
infrastructure and perpetuating attacks against Israelis.

I am afraid that the past two days have seen the
most serious escalation since the 2014 conflict between
Hamas and Israel, and they have shown all of us how
close we are to the brink of war every day. Between
28 and 30 May, according to the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF), 216 projectiles, rockets and mortar shells were
fired from Gaza towards Israel, approximately 77
of which hit areas in the Eshkol, Sha’ar Hanegev and
Sdot Negev regions. Although most of the projectiles
were intercepted by the Iron Dome system, one hit a
kindergarten yard at a kibbutz near the Gaza border, and
at least one other damaged a house. Thankfully, there
were no casualties or serious injuries. In response to the
attacks and mortars, the Israeli Air Force carried out
strikes on 65 Hamas and Islamic Jihad targets in Gaza
and destroyed a two-kilometre tunnel near the Kerem

Particularly in the days following 14 May, several
such incidents were filmed and posted on social media,
prompting a response by Israel on targets inside Gaza.
On 27 May, in response to an IED found by the IDF
adjacent to the fence, the IDF targeted a Palestinian
Islamic Jihad observation post and killed three
members of the group. Islamic Jihad issued a statement
vowing to retaliate for what it described as a dangerous
escalation. Subsequently, on 28 May, the IDF announced
it had fired a tank shell at another observation post,
killing a member of the military wing of Hamas. The
shelling took place after Israeli troops came under fire,
reportedly by Hamas militants, while arresting two
Palestinians who had crossed the perimeter fence into
Israel. During the night of 28 May, machine-gun fire
from Gaza also hit the Israeli city of Sderot, causing

There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Maldenov is joining this meeting via video
tele-conference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.

2/19

18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

damage to several buildings and a vehicle. The next
day, the situation escalated.
Since the early hours of this morning, the situation
has quietened down and, since 5 a.m. there have been
no projectiles launched from Gaza or any IDF strikes
on locations inside the Gaza Strip. In that respect, I
welcome the efforts of Egypt aimed at ensuring that
calm prevails, and I reiterate my call on all sides to
uphold all understandings and prevent the recurrence
of any incident that jeopardizes the lives of Israelis and
Palestinians alike.
It is imperative that this period of calm be preserved
at all costs. No one in Gaza can afford another war.
No one has the right to play with the lives of 2 million
people who have lived through hell in the past decade.
No one should live in fear of an indiscriminate rocket
attack. All parties have a responsibility to do their part
to de-escalate and to step back from the brink, in the
interests of their own people and the future of their
own children. As demonstrations and protests in Gaza
continue into the month of June, I am concerned that we
may experience further violence and additional risks
of escalation.
Despite the dangerous escalation, Gaza’s civilian
infrastructure did not sustain any significant damage as
a result of Israeli retaliatory fire yesterday. Moreover,
the crossing points for people and goods remained
open and functioned normally. The Rafah crossing
into Egypt continued operations for the nineteenth
consecutive day, and both the Kerem Shalom and the
Erez crossings into Israel functioned with only minor
delays. Nevertheless, fire from Gaza has caused
damage to electricity installations on the Israeli side,
resulting in a reduction of more than 30 per cent of the
only electricity supply there is to Gaza, and it will take
a few days at least to repair that.
As I recently briefed the Council, Gaza’s electricity,
water and health systems continue to experience
unprecedented strain (see S/PV.8265). Egyptian
electricity lines have been effectively down since
February, and the Gaza power plant has not functioned
since April. Today the total supply for Gaza is barely
enough to provide three hours of sustained electricity.
Finally, during my briefing to the Council last
week, I was greatly encouraged by the willingness of
Council members to consider ideas to change the reality
in Gaza. Under the current circumstances, failure to act
immediately with a set of relatively modest, achievable

S/PV. 8272

interventions will only amplify the humanitarian crisis
and drastically increase the risk of confrontation. The
goals that I outlined last week remain as valid as ever:
to prevent a war with potential regional implications,
address the urgent humanitarian needs of the population
and support Egyptian reconciliation efforts. That means
that we need to urgently implement already approved
projects, revive efforts to empower the Government to
take up its responsibilities and, very important, sustain
the 2014 ceasefire understandings on the ground and
halt the militant build-up.
The United Nations will move forward on
immediately enhancing our capacity and presence to
facilitate project implementation in Gaza and improve
coordination with Israel, Egypt and the Palestinian
Authority in order to overcome political, administrative
and logistical blockages. It is important that all sides
agree to improve movement and access restrictions
and ensure uninterrupted and upgraded water and
electricity supply to the population.
This plan is the only sustainable way to ensure
that we do not again slide into another devastating
conflict, that we do not allow Gaza to become a pawn in
somebody else’s plans, another tragedy on the already
crowded map of regional Middle East conflicts. But I
would also like to use this opportunity to send a very
clear message to Palestinians in Gaza. We hear their
plight, we see their suffering and we will do all that
we can to ensure that they have a future beyond mere
survival, a future of freedom and development, a future
focused on peace and prosperity, where they are the
masters of their own fate, a future for all Palestinians,
under a single democratic Government, living in a State
of Palestine, side by side in peace and security with the
State of Israel.
That is why we need to make sure that calm
continues, that the militant build-up ends and that we
deny those who want to disrupt peace any opportunity
to do so. Without those conditions in place, it will be
impossible to move forward on achieving our longterm political and developmental goals. It is high time
that we intensify our calls on Israelis and Palestinians
to undertake concrete steps that will advance the goal
of a just and sustainable peace. Such actions must
encompass the overarching political objectives, the
unification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single
democratic and legitimate Palestinian Authority, an
end to the occupation and a resolution to the wider
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State

18-163413/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

solution and in line with previous agreements and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
This latest round of attacks is a warning. It is a
warning to all of us how close to the brink of war we
are every single day.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
The United States called this meeting today to
talk about the dangerous and destructive activities of
the Hamas terrorist organization in the Gaza Strip.
One might think that the rest of the Security Council
would join us in condemning a terrorist organization
like Hamas. There should not be any debate about this.
But of course, because this attack involves Israel the
standard is different.
The United States drafted a Security Council
statement that would have condemned Hamas for
launching rockets and endangering civilians. This should
have been a no-brainer. One would think no one would
want to side with Hamas when it comes to condemning
rocket launches, but the statement was blocked. We
called for this meeting under the agenda item “Threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts”, but we were blocked again. Apparently, some
Council members did not think that Hamas launching
rockets qualified as terrorism. The United States
begs to differ. We all know that certain actions in and
around Gaza receive an enormous amount of attention,
both here in the Security Council and throughout the
international media. Strangely, other actions do not
receive nearly the attention that they deserve.
What happened yesterday is one such action that
calls out for attention and condemnation. The facts are
clear. On 29 May, Hamas and an allied militant group
fired at least 70 rockets and mortars from Gaza into
Israel. That rocket attack was indiscriminate, aiming to
cause as much civilian death and destruction as possible.
There were several injuries but, thank goodness, there
were no deaths. But the mere fact that one of the rockets
landed on a kindergarten playground is all the proof we
need of the intentions of the terrorists. The horrifying
damage that could have been done is unthinkable.
4/19

30/05/2018

Unlike some situations we deal with here in the
Security Council, where guilty parties claim mistaken
identity or lack of evidence of responsibility, this is
clearly not the case. Hamas openly claims responsibility
for that attack. They do so proudly. Their only regret is
that the attack did not kill anyone. The Security Council
has always been quick to pounce on Israel, regardless
of the facts or the circumstances. I am very interested
in how my colleagues respond when the attacks are
directly against Israel. These attacks are a clear
escalation of violence and take no steps whatsoever to
protect against civilian casualties. In fact, the entire
desired outcome of the attacks is to maximize civilian
casualties. There are a couple of major conclusions to
be drawn from that disconnect.
First, this outrageous terrorist attack proves what
we have consistently maintained, namely, that the stated
purpose of Hamas is the destruction of Israel. That is
its purpose when it fires rockets into Israel. That is its
purpose when it builds terror tunnels underneath Israeli
territory. And that is its purpose when it orchestrates
violent protests and riots at the boundary fence, calling
for a march for return. All of those acts are indivisible
parts of a single strategy. That strategy is to do as
much damage as possible to Israel and to provoke a
response in self-defence that will create international
condemnation of Israeli actions.
Secondly, the actions of Hamas prove the falsehood
of the idea that the people of Gaza require international
protection. The people of Gaza do not need protection
from an external source. The people of Gaza need
protection from Hamas. It is the actions of Hamas that
are putting Gazans in grave danger. The indiscriminate
attacks by Hamas against Israel inevitably bring about
a response. As I have asked my colleagues before, I will
ask them again today: Who among us would accept 70
rockets launched into their country? We all know the
answer to that question: no one would.
The Palestinian people of Gaza are facing desperate
humanitarian hardships. We want to help address their
needs. We support Special Coordinator Mladenov’s
engagement to restart initiatives that could improve
conditions in Gaza. But here again, we must look at
the destructive actions of Hamas. In recent weeks,
Hamas militants have repeatedly assaulted the Kerem
Shalom border crossing — the biggest lifeline for basic
humanitarian goods into Gaza. In its attacks yesterday,
Hamas rockets damaged three power lines, knocking
out electric power to tens of thousands of Palestinians.
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

Those monstrous actions demonstrate complete
disregard for the people of Gaza. Apparently, it is not
enough for Hamas to incite military responses to its acts
of terrorism. Hamas also feels compelled to increase the
suffering of the people in Gaza. We note reports today
that Hamas has unilaterally declared a ceasefire. We
hope that the ceasefire holds and that there are no more
rocket attacks. But the fact that Hamas can even declare
a ceasefire is further confirmation of its responsibility
for those attacks in the first place.
When we consider the situation in Gaza, this
is what the Security Council should address. It is
outrageous for the Security Council to fail to condemn
Hamas rocket attacks against Israeli civilians while
the Human Rights Council approves sending a team to
investigate Israeli actions taken in self-defence. I urge
the members of the Security Council to exercise at least
as much scrutiny when it comes to the actions of the
Hamas terrorist group as it does to Israel’s legitimate
right of self-defence. To allow Hamas to continue to
get away with its terrorist acts and to somehow expect
Israel to sit on its hands when it is attacked is the height
of hypocrisy. To continue to condemn Israel without
even acknowledging what is actually coming from the
leaders of Gaza makes me question who actually cares
about the welfare of the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian people deserve a better life. That
can happen only if we acknowledge and reject the
terrorist actions of Hamas and if we encourage more
responsible Palestinian leadership. All responsible
parties should be encouraging both sides to come to the
negotiating table for the well-being of the Israelis and
the Palestinians.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator for his very sobering briefing.
Echoing Ambassador Haley’s concern, I
condemn — without qualification and in the strongest
terms — yesterday’s mortar and rocket attacks from
Gaza into Israel. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians are unacceptable and they are unjustifiable.
Those who risk killing or injuring children are heinous.
The attacks cannot be ignored by the Security Council.
The United Kingdom fully supports Israel’s right to
self-defence and the right to defend its citizens from
such acts of terror.
The recent spike in rocket attacks from Gaza is a
stark reminder that the risk of a renewed conflict is
very much present, and I think the Special Coordinator

S/PV. 8272

brought that out very clearly in his briefing today.
The latest attacks follow the deaths of more than 100
Palestinian in recent weeks of protests, and the Council
has addressed that previously. Civilians live in fear
and in despair. Further escalation of violence risks
a devastating effect on efforts to restore the peace
process and can bring about only renewed suffering
to the region. As Council members, we should act to
ensure that does not come to fruition.
The situation in Gaza in undeniably dangerous.
It is sad and it is complex. The perpetual cycle of
violence needs to end and serves no one’s interests.
The actions of Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad represent a real and concerning threat to Israeli
security. Ultimately, the ongoing decisions of Hamas
and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad to embrace violence
and reject the Quartet principles lie at the heart of the
Gaza situation.
We should use this Council meeting today to
demand that Hamas and other terrorist groups cease
all violent and provocative actions, and cease any and
all actions that put civilian lives at risk. At the same
time, we do not ignore the significant contribution that
restrictions on movement and access imposed on Gaza
have on the dire humanitarian situation that we witness.
The United Kingdom continues its support for the
full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza, and we
encourage further progress on reconciliation. An end
to this violence requires a tangible path for changing
Gaza, and what the Special Coordinator had to say about
the plan was very interesting. We believe that it is the
responsibility of the international community to work
together to find a way to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering in Gaza. We welcome the proposals that
Mr. Mladenov made, which include commitments
to advance urgent infrastructure and economic
development projects, improve access and movement
and support the Egyptian-led reconciliation process.
We stand ready as the United Kingdom to do
everything that we can to support those efforts. The
people of Gaza are in urgent and desperate need.
Yesterday, my Government committed to providing a
new package of over $2 million of life-saving support.
The funding will support work by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent
Society in keeping hospitals open and functioning at
a time when the health-care system in Gaza is under
huge strain.

18-163415/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

Ultimately, peace will come only through fresh
negotiations between the parties, supported by the
international community. Every day makes it more
critical that both Israelis and Palestinians return to direct
negotiations and urgently prioritize steps to resolve the
situation in Gaza. That is the only way that we will be
able to achieve the two-State solution and a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State. Those who seek to undermine that,
including through unjustified acts of violence, deserve
the rightful condemnation of the Council, as well as of
the whole world.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his precise briefing and commitment, which is more
necessary than ever. I will be brief. We have had an
opportunity to speak several times on the situation
in Gaza and the Israeli-Palestinian question over the
past few weeks. I will keep to three points, namely,
the escalation of the situation over the past few days
in Gaza, the ongoing protests in the Gaza Strip during
recent weeks, which are part of a structural crisis, and
the responsibility of the Security Council in the face of
that situation.
First, for several weeks now, we have alerted the
Council to the risk of an escalation in the situation in
the Gaza Strip, which is not tenable in the long-term.
As yesterday showed once again, there is a real risk of a
cycle of violence, of which the players in question could
quickly lose control. After three conflicts in the past
decade, the situation is sadly predictable, and the same
causes are still producing the same tragic effects in the
Gaza Strip. On 29 May alone, almost 30 rockets were
fired into Israeli territory from the Gaza Strip — an
unprecedented number since the conflict of 2014. Those
rocket launches deliberately targeted civilians. They are
unacceptable. Regardless of the perpetrators, France
condemns them without any ambiguity whatsoever. I
would like to recall France’s tireless commitment to
Israel’s security. Beyond that, the context is very tense,
and we therefore call for restraint. The issue here is to
try to avoid a new fatal conflict in Gaza, where once
again it would be the civilians paying the price.
Secondly, I would like to underline that the armed
escalation comes at the end of two months of violence
and repression carried out by the Israeli armed forces
against Palestinian protesters in Gaza, and 14 May
marked its highpoint. With more than 116 dead thus
far, 60 on that day alone, and more than 12,000 people
6/19

30/05/2018

injured, including 4,000 by live ammunition, the
figures of the past few weeks are all the more tragic
because they could have largely been avoided.
We have said it before, that result is directly linked
to an indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
by the Israeli army, facilitated by extremely permissive
rules of engagement, which we have condemned. Israel
is a democracy and should respect the right to peaceably
protest. As an occupying Power, it should furthermore
respect the obligations for protection that are incumbent
upon it. Similarly, we have called for those protests to
remain peaceful, and we have warned those, first and
foremost Hamas, who have tried to instrumentalize
those protests for political or military ends.
An acute crisis exists in Gaza, which we can all see
and which serves to highlight the vulnerability of the
civilian population against the backdrop of a structural
humanitarian and political crisis, anchored in a decade
of the Israeli blockade and exacerbated by the impasse
in the reconciliation process. The protests over recent
weeks cannot be dissociated from the despair of the
inhabitants of Gaza. We will not be able to address
that crisis without restoring the dignity and renewing a
sense of hope for the future of that population, of which
more than half is under 18-years-old.
In that regard, we commend the essential work
done by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in
the Gaza Strip. The Agency is one of the last safety
nets to avert the collapse of Gaza’s, two thirds of which
is made up of Palestinian refugees. UNRWA requires
increased financial support from the international
community, given the frozen American contribution.
With iin mind, the donor conference to be held on
25 June will be crucial. Any good will that is expressed
will be important and appreciated. We once again call
on our American friends to not turn their backs on their
historic role of supporting UNRWA, which is more
than ever key to regional stability.
Finally, beyond the immediate de-escalation that
is required and the urgent humanitarian response, we
need a long-term response to the issues in Gaza. Such
response is essential for the population of Gaza and for
regional stability, both of which are being addressed
by the plan undertaken by Nickolay Mladenov. The
Special Coordinator has all of our support in defining
priority projects, in particular for infrastructure.
Furthermore, we support his proposals to strengthen
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

project management within the United Nations in Gaza
and dialogue with Israel, Egypt and the Palestinian
Authority. As we have said, those proposals should
include immediate measures to ease restrictions on
the movement of goods and persons. Ultimately, our
objective should be to lift the blockade, while respecting
Israel’s security concerns. Furthermore, Mr. Mladenov’s
proposals should be supported by specific approaches to
resuming the reconciliation process. In political terms,
our horizon should be the re-establishment of all of the
prerogatives of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza.
Thirdly, I will conclude by underlining once
again the responsibility that is incumbent upon the
Council — it bears the principal role of upholding
peace and security, which is set forth by the Charter
of the United Nations, but it also has a particular role
to play in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, of which it
has defined the main parameters over several decades
to resolve the conflict, although unilateral action has
recently rendered them fragile.
Gaza has been approaching collapse in the past
few months, while it has been in the grip of violence
for several weeks. It is on the verge of a new conflict,
and yet the Council remains silent. With gravity, I say
to those present that such silence weighs more and
more heavily, it is increasingly deafening and it is not
acceptable. It is unacceptable for the populations of both
Palestine and Israel, who were the first ones affected by
the conflict. It is unacceptable for the world, which is
watching us and sees in that silence not only a sign of
impotence but, worse, also a reason for mistrust. That is
unacceptable for the credibility of the Council and for
our collective action, which is at stake.
The Security Council cannot abdicate its
responsibilities on this matter. France has been ready
to engage in a constructive discussion on all draft texts
that have been presented to Council members over the
past few months and up to today, without exception.
We have been given a new opportunity to overcome
our silence by engaging in an open, but demanding,
way in the discussion on the draft resolution submitted
by Kuwait. The text has already been extensively
improved. A number of aspects still require clarification
and nuance, and we intend to continue to play our part
in arriving at a text that is capable of garnering broad
support within the Council. I invite everyone to commit
to the same approach. Once again, it is a question of our
collective responsibility.

S/PV. 8272

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his valuable briefing on the recent developments
in the Gaza Strip and the most recent developments in
the occupied territories. We commend his endeavours
and underscore our full support for his efforts. We also
thank the delegation of the United States for calling
this meeting to discuss the situation in the occupied
territories — a situation that continues to deteriorate
in the light of the ongoing oppressive practices of
the Israeli occupying power. We reiterate our firm
and principled position related to the condemnation
of targeting civilians by any party anywhere and at
any time.
The Israeli occupying power bears full
responsibility for the most recent escalation in the
occupied territories. For as long that occupation
continues, the Palestinian people have the legitimate
right to fight it and defend their aspirations and dreams
of independence and a life of freedom and dignity. We
support their fight and commend their steadfastness in
the face of the destructive Israeli machine.
The Israeli policies and practices in the occupied
territories cannot be justified. The occupation in itself
is a blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It must end, as it is the root
cause of the problem and the conflict in the region.
It is unacceptable that the international community
remains silent and inactive in the face of recurrent
Israeli violations in the occupied territories, contrary
to international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The occupation continues, even though the
international community has condemned it and the
Security Council called for it to cease in resolution
2334 (2016). Arrests continue to be carried out, along
with the seizure of land and the destruction of houses.
The occupation proceeds systematically, even though it
has been condemned by the world as inhumane.
Moreover, illegal unilateral measures that seek the
Judaization of Jerusalem and changing its demographic
composition, character and religious sanctity continue.
Recurrent incursions by settlers and occupying forces
into Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem every now and then
continue to provoke Muslims. The blockade on Gaza
has gone on for over 10 years. It is a repressive blockade

18-163417/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

of nearly 2 million people. The occupying power did not
respect its obligations in accordance with international
law and did not heed the call to lift restrictions on
the freedom of movement of people and goods and to
open border crossings in Gaza amid deterioration in
the economic and living conditions. That has led to
more suffering for the Palestinian people, which has
generated widespread despair.
In the past few weeks, Israel, the occupying power,
has used live ammunition and shot at civilian protesters
who came out to peacefully revive the Great March of
Return. As a result of that, more than 120 martyrs fell,
including some children. Thousands were wounded and
some were permanently disabled. We have submittted
three draft statements to the press expressing our
concern, given the death of those victims, and
affirming their right to protest peacefully. We also
called for a transparent and independent investigation
into that massacre. However, all those press statements
were rejected.
Therefore, the State of Kuwait has submitted a
draft resolution to provide international protection to
the Palestinian people, because they are the ones who
deserve protection and not the occupying Power, which
claims that it is defending itself while it possesses a
huge and sophisticated arsenal that it uses excessively
against defenceless people under occupation. The State
of Kuwait has ensured transparency and inclusiveness
in the negotiations on the draft resolution and has taken
into account many of the proposed amendments. We
hope that the draft resolution will be adopted by the
Security Council so that a message can be sent to the
Palestinian people that the international community,
represented by the Security Council, will do them
justice and stand by their side in their plight, and that
it will do its utmost and shoulder its responsibility to
help them recover their legitimate rights, and that longawaited justice will finally be served.
In that regard, we welcome the resolution of the
Human Rights Council adopted on 18 May in relation
to urgently deploying an investigative team to the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially Gaza, to
investigate all Israeli violations.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait supports the
choice of peace because it is the strategic option, as
underscored in resolutions of the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and many conferences.
8/19

30/05/2018

Our objective is to establish comprehensive, just and
sustainable peace, based on internationally legitimate
resolutions and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
principle of land for peace, the Quarted road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative. That objective should lead
to Israel’s withdrawal from all the territories occupied
since 4 June 1967, so as to ensure that the Palestinian
people achieve all their legitimate political rights,
including their right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent State on their territory
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.
We note with regret that in addition to the tragic
events of recent days in the occupied Palestinian
territories, on 29 May there was once again a sharp
escalation in armed activity on the border between
Israel and the Gaza Strip. Fighters fired on settlements
in Israeli territory. The Israeli air force retaliated with
missile strikes. It is worrisome that the parties are
increasingly resorting to violence, constantly deepening
their distrust and making the possibility of relaunching
the peace process an ever more distant prospect. The
civilians of Israel and Palestine are becoming hostages
to this developing situation.
We believe that relying on force and rejecting
direct dialogue represent a road to nowhere. That
relates not only to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but
to any other crisis situation. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint. We have repeatedly said that the
trend to increasing destabilization in the occupied
Palestinian territories is directly connected to the
impasse in the political process. The Middle East
settlement, unresolved for so long, is in a stalemate,
and instead of tackling its fundamental issues, the
Security Council has been compelled to address
the undesirable consequences of the impasse. That
approach is not productive, to put it mildly, and will
not enable us to overcome the massive deterioration in
the situation, which is certainly in nobody’s interest.
Nor will it help us to address the chronic problems of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, such as provocative
rhetoric, unilateral actions, outbreaks of violence and
settlement activities.
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

It will be crucial to mobilize efforts to resume
the political process between Palestinians and Israelis
on the basis of the well-known international law on
the subject, including the decisions of the Security
Council and the principles of the Arab Peace Initiative,
the outcome of which should be the implementation
of a two-State solution and the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State with its
capital in East Jerusalem.
Our position on the demonstrations in Gaza
remains unchanged. We affirm the right to peaceful
protest action and firmly condemn the indiscriminate
use of force against civilians and the firing of rockets
into Israeli territory. We call on the parties to refrain
from steps that could lead to further deterioration of
the situation. It will be important to continue intensive
efforts to ease the difficult humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip. The continuing hopelessness of the
situation plays into the hands of forces with an interest
in further radicalizing the situation. Widespread
despair is a fertile breeding ground for extremism.
In that connection, we note the important work being
done by the United Nations and particularly by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We welcome and support the involvement of
regional actors in the Middle East peace process. We
commend Egypt and Jordan for the role they have been
playing in Palestinian affairs.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that the
direction of the developments in the situation on the
occupied Palestinian territories once again confirms
that the international community does not have the right
to ignore Palestine while addressing other problems in
the Middle East. We must act. In our view, the Middle
East Quartet is the appropriate and necessary forum, as
endorsed by Security Council resolutions, for ending
the impasse in the Middle East peace process.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
China closely follows the current tensions in
Palestine and is particularly concerned about the risk of
a potential escalation of conflict in Gaza. We hope that
the relevant actors, Israel and Palestine, will remain
calm, exercise restraint, work towards the same goals,
cease military action and take concrete measures in
order to achieve progress in de-escalation. China has
continued to call for the settlement of the Palestinian-

S/PV. 8272

Israeli dispute through peaceful negotiations. China
opposes all violence, which leads to a deterioration of
the situation and targets civilians.
The Security Council and the relevant parties
should aim to achieve peace and tranquillity and strive
to create the necessary conditions for stabilizing the
situation and resuming dialogue. China’s Special
Envoy on the Middle East issue paid a recent visit to
Palestine and Israel and met with Special Coordinator
Mladenov. The two sides held an in-depth exchange
of views on the Palestinian question, in particular the
current situation in Gaza, and conveyed the importance
of ongoing progress in the Middle East peace process.
The Palestinian question is at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. It is an underlying issue for
the attainment of peace in the region. Under the current
circumstances, the long-delayed resumption of peace
talks between Palestine and Israel is highly urgent and
necessary. The international community should do its
utmost to promote the resumption of talks and reach
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution as soon as
possible. That is the only way to achieve peace between
Palestine and Israel and to guarantee stability and
security in Gaza. The international community should
continue to uphold the two-State solution, work in
accordance with the existing international consensus,
including relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative
and play a constructive role in the political settlement
of the Palestinian question.
I would like to reiterate the fact that China has
always been committed to promoting the Middle East
peace process and supporting the just cause of the
Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national
rights. China supports the establishment of a fully
sovereign, independent State of Palestine on the basis
of pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China will continue to follow President Xi Jinping’s
four-point proposal for the promotion of a political
settlement of the Palestinian question, work together
with all the parties concerned in the international
community and play a positive and constructive role in
the achievement of peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his pertinent briefing. We very much
welcome his commitment to addressing the volatile
situation and contributing to a de-escalation of violence.

18-163419/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

I would like to begin by expressing deep regret about
the violence and about the large number of people who
have been killed and injured over the past few weeks.
Sweden condemns yesterday’s indiscriminate firing
of rockets by Palestinian militants from Gaza towards
Israel. Such attacks are unacceptable and must stop
immediately. We note that at least one of the rockets
fell in the vicinity of a kindergarten. As we have clearly
stated in the Chamber, children must never be the target
of violence, be put at risk or encouraged to participate
in violence.
Yesterday’s attack did not take place in a vacuum.
Since 30 March the Council has been seized repeatedly
of the violence in and around Gaza. As we all know,
Gaza is on the verge of social and economic collapse.
We must urgently address the humanitarian crisis and
alleviate the suffering of its people. Just last week, we
welcomed proposals to that end. We encourage efforts
to take such measures forward with renewed urgency
and determination.
It is important to prioritize initiatives that
have immediate positive effects on the daily lives
of Palestinians in Gaza and the wider region. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a critical
role in providing fundamental services, such as health
and education, thereby contributing to stability in
the egion. It must receive needed urgent political and
financial support from us all. In words and deeds,
Sweden has repeatedly encouraged and called for a
remedy to UNRWA’s financial crisis, .
We also underline the importance of unimpeded
access to Gaza for all humanitarian actors. It is crucial
that our humanitarian support contribute to increased
intra-Palestinian unity. It is therefore high time to end
the policy of closure in Gaza. While fully understanding
the legitimate security concerns of Israel, Palestine and
Egypt, we repeat our call for the lifting of restrictions
and full and sustained access and movement. We
welcome Egypt’s opening of the Rafah crossing point
during the holy month of Ramadan, as well as Egypt’s
efforts towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
Yesterday’s developments occurred at a sensitive
time. Once again we urge all parties to act with the
utmost restraint to prevent loss of life and protect
civilians, in particular children, ensure that all
measures taken are proportionate and take immediate
steps to de-escalate the situation and break the cycle
10/19

30/05/2018

of violence. We welcome the fact that the attacks and
retaliation appear to have ended, at least for now.
The Council has the responsibility to contribute
to de-escalation in Gaza. As many others around the
table have said today, we regret that the Council has not
been able to agree on public statements relating to the
situation. The Council must come together to address
the crisis and more broadely engage in efforts to advance
the peace process and the two-State solution. We thank
the Kuwaiti delegation for the draft resolution, which
includes a call for measures for improving the situation
for civilians in Palestine, including the establishment of
a mechanism for that purpose. We hope for constructive
engagement by everyone on the draft resolution.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing.
We have been following reports of escalating
violence in the occupied Palestinian territory and
of events taking place in Gaza, about which we are
very concerned. It has been just two weeks since the
emergency Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8256)
following the escalation of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territory, which left many Palestinians dead
and injured in the Gaza protest. At that meeting we
expressed our seeped sorrow and sympathy on the loss
of life. While we called on Israel to show maximum
restraint, we also stated that Hamas and the leaders of
the demonstrations had a responsibility to prevent all
violent actions and provocations. I would like to echo
what the Special Coordinator said yesterday, to the effect
that he was deeply concerned by the indiscriminate
firing of rockets by Palestinian militants from Gaza
towards southern Israel. He also said that such attacks
were unacceptable and undermined the serious efforts
made by the international community to improve the
situation in Gaza. His statement, which we feel is most
valid, highlights how dangerous the rocket attacks
from Gaza are and the hindrance they cause to making
progress in the peace process. This must stop, for they
are in the interest of no one, least of all the Palestinians.
Under these circumstances, it is impossible to deny
Israel the right to self-defence, a right that goes along
with a responsibility to ensure proportionality. We
in the Council have repeatedly said that any negative
action that runs counter to a peaceful settlement of
the conflict will only prolong the process of resolving
the problem. It is therefore self-evident that unless
the peace process is advanced and the underlying
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

problems solved peacefully, the tragedy at hand will
only happen again and again, eventually reaching the
point of no return. That is where we seem to be headed.
The situation is that grave, and much worse violence is
becoming imminent, despite the current calm situation.
This is part and parcel of the very logic of the situation,
and that is why preserving the possibility of finding a
solution through a two-State formula is critical. That
is also why a de-escalation of this dangerous situation
remains critical, so as to protect civilians, break
the cycle of violence and resume the much-needed
political process.
We appreciate the role played by Egypt in trying
to de-escalate the situation, and we note that today the
ceasefire appears to be holding. This could calm the
situation for a while, but to resume the political process,
the parties, as well as the international community, have
their own, respective responsibilities. While the parties
should show the flexibility to engage in direct and
meaningful negotiations so as to reach a final settlement
on all issues, the international community, in particular
the Council, should discharge its responsibilities in
helping and encouraging the two parties to do so.
In conclusion, let me say that it is very important
to get the narrative right. It would not be right to lose
sight of the root causes of this tragic and potentially
extremely dangerous situation. The possibility of
a two-State solution is shrinking by the day, to the
frustration of the Palestinians, whose living conditions,
particularly in Gaza, are deeply worrying indeed. As
Mr. Mladenov said recently, at one point weeks ago
Gaza was on the verge of total collapse, with all the
attendant consequences. He reiterated that view today.
That situation is conducive to the creation of groups
of all stripes that would pose a threat not only to the
peoples of Palestine and Israel but also to the region
as the whole. That is why the resumption of the peace
process is so critical and why there is no other option
for saving the possibility of the two-State solution.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for having convened this
emergency meeting. Our thanks go also to Mr. Mladenov
for his in-depth briefing.
Peru notes with deep alarm and deplores the recent
launching of rockets and mortar shells against Israeli
urban centres by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, one of
which struck the yard of a kindergarten. We condemn
any attack against civilians while also recognizing

S/PV. 8272

Israel’s right to guarantee its own security and to deploy
legitimate defence measures, in line with the principles
of proportionality, precaution and legality.
We are alarmed also by the bleak outlook for
the situation in the short and medium term and the
exacerbation of inflammatory rhetoric in the wake
of the acts of violence and terror over the past few
days and the deaths of Palestinians that occurred
in Gaza over the past few weeks. In that context, we
would like to commend the Egyptian efforts to bring
about a de-escalation and a ceasefire. We believe
that it is necessary that all parties act cautiously and
with restraint, and adhere strictly to international
humanitarian and human rights law. The Council,
which is responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, must ensure the proper levels of
accountability for the violations that have occurred.
We deem it regrettable that, faced with the
undeniable deterioration of the situation, the Council
has not thus far been able to achieve the minimum
consensus needed for this body to speak out and to
define the actions that need to be taken, including
the need to address the root causes of the conflict and
the urgent need to alleviate the tragic humanitarian
situation in Gaza.
Peru will continue to work constructively to
protect civilians on both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and to promote the resumption of a political
dialogue that will allow us to put an end to this spiral
of violence and to rekindle the negotiations required in
order to achieve a two-State solution with secure and
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his update on the
latest developments and would like to make the
following observations.
Kazakhstan condemns the rocket firings from
Gaza towards Israel on 29 May, which further erode
prospects for peace. We have followed with the utmost
concern reports of the overnight missile launches from
Gaza targeting Israeli positions, including the site
where a mortar shell from Gaza hit a kindergarten in
southern Israel, near the border with the Strip.
We want to make it clear that such attacks can cause
lasting damage to the peace process in several different
ways. We agree that the uncertainty and volatility of the
current environment are hardening diverse positions

18-1634111/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

30/05/2018

and sharpening the rhetoric on all sides, which may
well play into the hands of extremists. Astana urges
an immediate halt to all hostile acts and provocative
actions in order to avert a fresh conflagration in the
region, which is already embroiled in brutal conflicts,
resulting in the immense suffering of civilians. We must
prevent incidents that jeopardize the lives of Israelis and
Palestinians and urge both sides to exercise maximum
restraint and abide by their obligations under the
relevant United Nations and international conventions
and resolutions on the protection of civilians.

Finally, Kazakhstan supports the proposals of
Nickolay Mladenov and, as always, stands for the
early resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiation
process, especially in a bilateral format, of a two-State
solution. The immediate start of the deliberations and,
as a result, the speedy implementation of agreements
will allow us to solve the problem of confidence deficits.
It will also enable us to move to a more open dialogue
between the two sides upon mutually identified issues.
Only steps such as these can bring us closer to the goals
we have set for ourselves.

Both sides and the international community
must consolidate our collective efforts for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. We should ensure that words
are translated into concrete action. My country also
underscores the importance of intra-Palestinian unity,
so as to bring all factions together and unite them under
a legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority.

Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
insightful briefing.

My delegation also appreciates the efforts of the
Russian Federation and Egypt to ensure intra-Palestinian
consolidation and urge all Palestinian political parties
and movements to integrate into one national political
structure. It is critical that the Palestine Liberation
Organization take control of the Gaza Strip.
Kazakhstan calls upon the Middle East
Quartet — the United States, Russia, the European
Union and the United Nations — to intensify its efforts
to resume negotiations, with a view to defining mutual
borders and the principle of the peaceful coexistence of
two States on the basis of international law and Security
Council resolutions.
We note that the difficult humanitarian situation
in Gaza, which further contributes to instability and
frustration, could lead to a resumption of conflict and
an increase in terrorist activities. We therefore urge
the official authorities of Israel and Palestine to help
resolve the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip. At
present, the nearly 2 million Palestinian residents of
Gaza, more than half of whom are children, live in dire
conditions that are deteriorating daily. The future of the
sector’s young people is being shaped today, and we are
afraid that it is not the future that Palestinians or Israelis
or anyone of us in the international community would
want to see. It is clear that we need confidence-building
measures in the economic area, with the support of
the international community, for durable peace and
stability to take hold.
12/19

After the tragic events linked to the March of
Return, the Gaza Strip is once again the scene of violent
clashes, following a series of Israeli strikes carried
out in reprisal for dozens of mortars and rockets fired
at Israel from the Palestinian enclave. My delegation
remains deeply concerned about this new cycle of
violence, which threatens to plunge the entire region
into chaos. We unreservedly condemn these acts of
violence and call on the various parties to agree to an
immediate and lasting ceasefire. My country also urges
the parties to the conflict to engage in a constructive
dialogue to find a political solution to a crisis that has
shaken the region for decades.
Côte d’Ivoire cannot say it enough: there is no
alternative to peace, any more than there can be a
military solution to the conflict between Palestinians
and Israelis. Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its principled
position that only credible dialogue and political
negotiations between the parties will lead to a viable
solution for the two States living side by side in peace
and security, based on the mutual recognition of the
legitimate rights of both parties. My delegation therefore
urges the international community to continue, without
respite, its mediation efforts in the context of the
resumption of the political process between the two
parties, with a view to making the two-State solution
a tangible reality, in the best interests of the Israeli and
Palestinian populations.
My delegation deplores the lack of political prospects
in the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We are particularly concerned about the outbreak of
violence that we are unfortunately witnessing in the
Gaza Strip, which is largely sustained by a difficult
economic and humanitarian situation, heavily affected
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

by the blockade in force, youth unemployment and
various shortages of water, electricity and medicines. It
is therefore important that the international community
intensify its efforts to implement projects and concrete
measures to improve the humanitarian situation, but also
the economic development of the Gaza Strip. Moreover,
this situation also highlights the need to continue the
inter-Palestinian dialogue for the implementation of the
reconciliation agreement signed in Cairo on 12 October
2017 between Hamas and Fatah. That will allow the
effective return of the Palestinian Authority to, and
its full control of, the Gaza Strip to better address the
humanitarian and security needs of the people.
In conclusion, my delegation fully supports the
objective of a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East and reiterates its readiness to work with
all Council members towards a peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We reiterate our
call to the parties to refrain from any act of violence
that would have the effect of removing any hope of a
peaceful resolution of a conflict that has lasted too long.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, Bolivia wishes to thank
Mr. Mladenov not only for his briefing but also for his
active work in such a difficult and complex situation. In
addition, we thank the delegation of the United States
for having called for today’s meeting. We believe that
the situation in Palestine is a priority issue — and it
should be one — for the Security Council, and I believe
that we have not had enough meetings, and certainly
not enough results, on it.
Consistent with its pacifist policy, Bolivia
categorically condemns attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure in all their forms and
manifestations as unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed. Bolivia also welcomes the efforts made
by Egypt to seek a ceasefire in Gaza. We call on the
Government of Israel to act accordingly and desist from
its decision to continue the bombing and air raids.
As several members of the Council already stated,
this situation does not exist in a vacuum. The latest
escalation of violence that we are witnessing only
contributes to an intensification of the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza. More than 2 million Palestinians
continue to live without access to basic services, with
power cuts lasting more than 22 hours, overcrowded

S/PV. 8272

hospitals and congestion in the delivery of health care,
lack of medicines and a shortage of water for human
consumption, inter alia, as a result of 11 years of a
systematic blockade by sea, 11 years of a systematic
siege by land and 11 years of being prevented from
returning to their homes.
As the occupying Power, Israel has an obligation to
comply fully and scrupulously with its legal obligations
under international humanitarian law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention, to
resume without further delay the opening of crossings
for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods
and persons. In that regard, we demand that the parties
comply with and respect international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including on
the protection of civilians. We therefore call on the
membership of the Security Council to support the
draft resolution proposed by the Kuwaiti delegation,
which aims to adopt appropriate measures to guarantee
the security, well-being and protection of civilians.
We note with great concern that the atmosphere of
violence in the region has so alarmingly deteriorated
in recent weeks. Mr. Mladenov has constantly and
repeatedly warned the Security Council that we are on
the verge of a clash with unpredictable consequences.
This is of course aggravated by the unilateral decision
of the Government of the United States of America
to move its Embassy to Jerusalem in violation of
various rules of international law. For those who have
forgotten, the last flare-up in Gaza, in 2014, resulted
in the deaths of 1,462 Palestinian civilians, of whom
551 were children, and 11,200 Palestinians injured, of
whom 3,400 were children. That is to say that if we do
not remember what happened, we are doomed to repeat
its bitter reality.
We reiterate once again our rejection of Israeli
settlement plans and their expansionist policies as
being in open violation of resolution 2334 (2016), on the
illegality of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian
territories. Accordingly, we wish to state once again that
the root cause of the situation in the occupied territories
in Palestine, which of course is worth repeating, is the
illegal Israeli occupation of the territories. We reaffirm
our conviction that the only long-term solution is the
two-State solution, in which a free, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State is finally built, within the
pre-1967 international borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly.

18-1634113/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
thanking Mr. Mladenov for his accurate briefing and
dedicated work in very challenging circumstances.
As Mr. Mladenov said, yesterday’s events once
again show the great the risk of escalation in the
absence of progress in the political, economic,
humanitarian dimensions. The current situation is
simply not sustainable. In that context, I will focus on
three issues — first, yesterday’s escalation; secondly,
the crisis in Gaza; and, thirdly, developments in the
West Bank.
On my first point, the escalation we witnessed
yesterday, in the early hours of 29 May, Palestinian
terrorist groups fired rockets and mortars towards
Israel. Those rockets and mortars landed in civilian
areas, one of them in the playground of a kindergarten,
as others have already indicated. Luckily, no one got
hurt. The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns
these indiscriminate attacks from Gaza into Israel.
As our Swedish colleague just said, these attacks are
unacceptable and must stop immediately. The rocket
and mortar attacks were the beginning of a day of
attacks and counter-attacks — the heaviest since the
hostilities in 2014.
Yesterday’s events showed again how fragile the
situation is and how quickly things can spiral out of
control. Yesterday’s events followed weeks of protests,
with more protests announced. We must prevent new
and further escalation. We once again call on all parties
to exercise restraint and to prevent incidents that would
put the lives of both Palestinians and Israeli civilians at
risk. Civilians on both sides of the fence on the Gaza
border should not have to live in fear.
That brings me to my second point, the crisis in
Gaza, which has been discussed recently in the Chamber
on several occasions. We welcome the consensus in the
Council that the situation is most concerning and needs
to be addressed. Now the challenge before us is to come
to consensus on how the Council should act.
We welcome the initiative taken by Mr. Mladenov
to come up with a plan to fast-track urgently needed
projects for water, energy and health. For that approach
to succeed, the combined effort of the international
community and the cooperation of all parties is
needed. Crises should not be treated as an excuse to
delay further action. On the contrary, they are an extra
reason to redouble efforts to improve living conditions
on the ground.
14/19

30/05/2018

In that regard, we reiterate our support for an
appropriate public statement by the Council on the
current crisis. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes the initiatives taken by members to address
parts of the puzzle. We thank Kuwait in particular for
its efforts in that regard. We should be able to come to a
statement that does justice to our shared concerns.
A sustainable political solution is needed to the
humanitarian crisis for the security of Palestinian
and Israeli civilians. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports the Egyptian initiatives to achieve a return of
the Palestinian Authority as the legitimate Government
in Gaza, and we welcome Egypt’s constructive role in
maintaining calm between the parties.
That brings me to my third point, on the worrisome
developments in the West Bank. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply concerned by the intention of
the Israeli authorities to enforce the demolition of all
structures in the Khan Al-Ahmar community. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands stresses that Area C is
of critical importance for the viability of a future
Palestinian State in the context of the two-State
solution. We recall that demolitions and confiscations
of homes and humanitarian assets and the obstruction
of the delivery of humanitarian assistance are contrary
to Israel’s obligations under international law.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns the
announced plans to approve new settlement expansion.
The continued Israeli settlement activity is illegal under
international law. It remains an obstacle to peace, as
reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016).
In conclusion, this week has shown that on both
sides steps are taken that undermine the viability of the
two-State solution. This week’s events are an alarming
reminder that the current status quo is unsustainable.
We call upon all parties to reverse these trends and to
take positive steps that contribute to the possibility of
sustainable peace. We call upon all parties to make the
two-State solution possible.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like
to thank the United States for having requested this
important meeting. We also express our appreciation to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
Equatorial Guinea has been monitoring with great
concern the escalation of violence and rhetoric in the
region. We condemn all violence by any actors. We
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8272

condemn and deem any attack against civilians — in
any form — unacceptable and reprehensible.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

In that connection, Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the efforts of the Arab Republic of Egypt to mediate the
tension that has arisen between the Israeli forces and
the Palestinian factions in the Gaza Strip. We regret
that, despite the repeated appeal of the members of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General and his
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
as well as other actors of the international community,
we must meet again today for the same acts of violence.

At the outset, let me thank the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Mladenov, for his account of the latest developments
on the ground. Poland condemns in the strongest terms
the rocket attacks targeting the civilian communities
in southern Israel, carried out by militant groups from
the Gaza Strip. There is no justification under any
circumstances for indiscriminate and deliberate acts
of violence against the civilian population. They are
unacceptable. They must stop and never be repeated
again. Both Israelis and Palestinians have a right to live
in peace and safety.

Today, as we have done for the past two weeks,
we are discussing violence in Gaza. Last week,
Mr. Mladenov alerted us of the possibility of Gaza
collapsing. Regrettably, we are now confronting
exchanges of attacks between the parties, rather than
brokering a solution to the situation.
My delegation yet again calls on all parties to exercise
restraint and to refrain from acts that could aggravate
the already complex situation. The Government of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea always advocates for a
negotiated solution to any conflict or problem that may
arise, however difficult and complicated it may be. The
position of our Government in this case is no different.
Therefore, we invite the parties to do their best to
normalize the situation and to alleviate the suffering of
the civilian population.
It is critical to ease the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. We also believe it is important and call upon
Palestinians to honour the reconciliation pact. If that
had occurred, the Palestinian Authority would already
control the Gaza Strip. We also call upon the Israeli
authorities to use proportionate force in their legitimate
self-defence.
In conclusion, I reaffirm our position, based on the
standards and principles of international law, Security
Council resolutions, the declarations of the African
Union and the Arab Peace Initiative, which refer to the
solution of two independent States — one Israeli and
the other Palestinian — living in peace and security,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. We believe
that Israelis, Palestinians and any just mediator must
respect such results. We therefore urge the international
community to continue its efforts to restart dialogue
between the parties and to avoid actions that could
undermine the peaceful coexistence of Israelis
and Palestinians.

We concur with Special Coordinator Mladenov
that such attacks undermine the efforts to improve
the situation in Gaza. We strongly urge the parties to
exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from any
actions that may lead to a further escalation of the
situation and may endanger the safety of civilians.
We call upon all actors to ensure the protection
of civilians, particularly children. In that respect, we
reiterate our appeal to all parties to strictly comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I want to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. We would also
like to thank the many Council members who have on
principle defended the truth and demonstrated that they
have memories extending beyond the past 24 hours.
Time and time again we have come to the
Security Council to appeal to its members to act with
responsibility, in line with their obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the Council’s own numerous resolutions, to address
the dire situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Today is no different, as we
continue to face a protracted and deepening protection
crisis, a human rights crisis and a justice crisis and their
devastating impact on our people.
We come again to this Chamber two weeks
following the 14 May massacre by Israel, the occupying
Power, against Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip

18-1634115/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

and following a barrage of Israeli military strikes
against Gaza in the past 24 hours that have heightened
tensions and are a cause for alarm, creating even greater
urgency to reign in Israel’s warmongering and defuse
the current crisis.
Faced with the potential of yet another act of savage
Israeli aggression against the occupied, besieged and
blockaded Gaza Strip, we must make the same appeal
we made two weeks ago (see S/PV.8256) and at all prior
junctures: we urge the Council to act now to de-escalate
this dangerous situation, to avert a descent into more
violence and chaos and to prevent the occupying
Power from further terrorizing the Palestinian civilian
population and endangering innocent civilian lives.
Once again, we plead with the Council to act to
save civilian lives and to respond to such threats to
international peace and security. We call on the Council
to protect the defenceless, to stand firmly on the side of
international law, with a steady moral compass, and not
to fall prey to the cynical narrative that is constantly
dragging us to the brink of war and thwarting all efforts
to find a just solution to this horrific injustice.
We totally reject that narrative driven by Israel,
the occupying Power, which remains unrelenting in its
attempts to obscure and distort the realities we face,
repeatedly casting itself as the victim when it is in fact
the occupier, aggressor and oppressor and has appointed
itself judge, jury and executioner of the Palestinian
people — international law and human rights be
damned, and no less the authority and credibility of the
Security Council.
It is our hope that such strong messages will
reinforce the efforts under way to ensure a ceasefire for
the sake of saving civilian lives and sparing our people
further suffering and yet another month of Ramadan
filled with anguish and despair. We hope that the
ceasefire holds, and we commend the serious efforts
of Egypt in that regard, in addition to its efforts on
Palestinian reconciliation.
We appeal for conscience and reason to prevail.
We cannot act as though further escalation and
deterioration of the situation are inevitable; they are
not. We must act to avert the worst-case scenarios, for
the risks are immense.
The international community and, at the forefront,
the Security Council, long ago created the tools and
laws both to prevent and resolve conflict, as well as to
16/19

30/05/2018

ensure the protection of civilians. It is past high time
to use those tools and to implement those laws when it
comes to Palestine. The exceptionalism and impunity
too long accorded to Israel must stop.
It is time to stop making excuses for why the time
is not right or why it is not possible or convenient to
act, while continually absolving Israel of its crimes and
facilitating its evasion of accountability, when so many
human lives are at stake, and indeed the existence of
an entire nation is at stake. It is time for the Security
Council to act to ensure international protection for the
Palestinian people for as long as this illegal, abhorrent
Israeli occupation continues and their rights continue to
be violated, including the rights of our refugees.
The draft resolution that has been presented to
Council members by our brothers in Kuwait, as the
Arab representative on the Council, represents a
modest, first step in that regard, and we urge everyone
to support it. It is inexcusable for the international
community to continue standing idly by, expressing
only regret yet failing to act, even as the rights, safety,
well-being and dignity of our people continue to be so
grossly and systematically violated by what amounts to
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
As many Council members have said, it is time to
address the root causes and underlying issues of this
situation, not just the symptoms or a few selective
events. It has been repeatedly stated in these halls
that the Palestine question remains a litmus test for
the efficacy of international law and the international
system’s authority, and that the failure to justly resolve
it remains a stain on the international conscience. It is
time to right that historic wrong.
The harsh lessons of the past should have
been learned by now. Proper redress that is just,
comprehensive and lasting can be found only on the
basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the long-standing international consensus; it cannot be
detached from them in a politicized and biased manner.
We have been brought to this Chamber today
precisely because of the constant mistake of detaching
developments from the root causes and the reality of the
existence of the Israeli occupation, dispossession and
colonization of the Palestinian people and their land by
the most forceful and repressive means, in grave breach
of international law. That detachment is most often
coupled with erroneous attempts, including malicious
propaganda by Israel, to characterize the situation as
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8272

being one of terrorism, while completely twisting the
facts and undermining efforts, including by concerned
States and the United Nations, to address the many
serious issues before us.

deciding to respond with a heavy hand by using lethal
and indiscriminate force against thousands of peaceful
civilian protesters and setting off another cycle of
violence.

Accusations of a double standard when it comes
to the question of Palestine, regrettably, are not new
in this Chamber, and they will only be reinforced by
the hypocrisy on display today, namely, bringing us
here to address the recent Israeli air strikes and rocket
attacks from Gaza when the grave events that preceded,
and may follow, remain unaddressed as the Council
continues to be paralysed, and therefore prevented from
carrying out its esponsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.

Our people have remained bravely steadfast and
resilient in the face of all of that. But the suffocating
Israeli blockade has depleted their coping capacities
and intensified their despair. Their suffering endures
in a multitude of agonizing ways, as they continue to
be denied even the most basic life needs — a constant
reminder of the occupation’s cruelty and criminality.
Do not minimize their suffering: it is deep, traumatic
and unbearable. It is the incubator in which anger and
bitterness fester and hopes diminish, especially among
the youth, for a more peaceful and just future in the
glaring absence of accountability and genuine remedies
for their plight, including in the immediate term for an
end to Israel’s punitive and inhumane blockade.

It is hard to understand the attempts for a reaction
from the Council to yesterday’s events, as if those
events are somehow unrelated to those that preceded,
including when three previous attempts, led again by
our brothers from Kuwait, for an appropriate Council
reaction to the killing, injuring and maiming of
Palestinian civilians by the Israeli occupying forces
were summarily blocked by one Council member.
Perhaps some have already forgotten the slaughter
of unarmed Palestinian civilians, including innocent
children, that was committed on 14 May — the same
date as the provocative and unlawful transfer of the
United States Embassy to Jerusalem. Perhaps they have
forgotten that Israeli soldiers perched at Gaza’s borders
deliberately shot at peaceful protesters from hundreds
of meters away, in a craven and punitive show of force
that obviously intended to cause bodily harm and death
and sow fear and terror among the population.

That is the backdrop and context for recent
developments. The events of the past days did not
occur in a vacuum. The latest cycle of violence has
been fuelled and incited by a series of Israeli acts of
aggression and rhetoric, particularly from 30 March
onwards, including the massacre on 14 May and the
killing of three other Palestinians by Israeli forces on
28 May, just prior to yesterday’s escalation.

But we have not forgotten, and neither have the
families who are today mourning, and will forever
mourn, the 118 Palestinians killed, among them 15
children, since the Great March of Return protests began
on 30 March. Nor has it been forgotten by the thousands
who have been injured by the Israeli occupying forces.
They number at least 13,000 civilians, including
children, women, medics and journalists, among them
thousands still in need of surgery and medical treatment,
and hundreds who have been disabled for life.

We reiterate what has been repeatedly affirmed
by the Palestinian leadership, including President
Mahmoud Abbas: we do not condone and we reject and
condemn all violence against civilians. International law
must be respected by all and under all circumstances.
I challenge those who have memories from 24 hours
ago to repeat that same commitment of condemning
the killing of all civilians from all sides for whatever
reasons to also include the Palestinian civilians. We
have no problem whatsoever with the application of
international law to our situation, as long as it is applied
evenly, fairly, consistently and judiciously at all times,
not selectively and not as a means to exempt Israel from
the law and absolve it of its crimes, while it manipulates
the law to suit its distorted narrative and unlawful
claims.

They were pleading for their voices to be heard,
their human rights to be respected and an end to the
miserable isolation and desolation imposed on them
by more than a decade of the Israeli blockade and
wars and a dire humanitarian crisis that is worsening
by the day. Yet Israel chose to silence them, as usual

At the same time, we remain insistent that all
people seek, and are entitled to, security. Israel cannot
claim exclusivity to the right to security; the Palestinian
people also have a right to security. We cannot be
excluded from that. Only the Israelis currently have
security and we have no right whatsoever to it. Security

18-1634117/19

S/PV.8272

Threats to international peace and security

30/05/2018

should be for all, including the Palestinians. Attempts to
justify illegal actions in occupied Palestine, including
East Jerusalem, under the pretext of security are totally
unacceptable. Equally, we firmly reject attempts to
frame that issue as one of terrorism. The lines should
never be blurred between actions that can be taken
by States to ensure security, as per the Charter and
international law, on the one hand, and actions that are
in violation of the law and fundamental human rights
and constitute war crimes, on the other.

mortar shells from the Gaza Strip into nearby Israeli
towns and villages. The terrorists began their attacks
on Tuesday, just as parents were preparing their young
children for the school day.

Faced with that reality, we will persist with our
efforts to secure protection for the Palestinian people
to ensure their safety and well-being, in accordance
with international law, including humanitarian law
and human rights law. We appeal to Council members
to favourably consider the draft resolution now being
negotiated, with the aim of addressing the protection
needs of our occupied and besieged people.

We have warned the Council of Hamas’s intentions
time and again. We have explained the imminent danger
posed by the coordinated and violent riots that Hamas
has orchestrated along the security fence. The mob,
incited and paid by Hamas, attempted to breach the
fence by force, opened fire at our soldiers and detonated
explosives. Hamas terrorists even set fire to the Kerem
Shalom civilian border crossing, a crossing designated
for food and humanitarian goods to enter Gaza.

While we continue our endeavours in that regard,
alongside all of our efforts to realize justice and
fulfil the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including to self-determination and freedom, we call
on the Security Council to act, in line with its legal
obligations, resolutions and commitments, to address
the crisis and reinforce our faith in international law,
including for the protection of the most vulnerable
among us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing, as well as Ambassador Haley and the United
States for calling for this emergency meeting of the
Security Council. It is not often that the Council calls
for an emergency meeting following a provocation by
Hamas; today’s meeting marks a concrete step in the
right direction. But today we need action. The Council
must act on the opportunity presented to it.
In response to the most severe attack by Hamas
and Islamic Jihad since the 2014 Operation Protective
Edge, the Security Council must take two decisive
actions: the first is to condemn Hamas for its war
crimes against Israelis and Palestinians, and the second
is to adopt a resolution designating Hamas as a terrorist
organization, exactly as it did with Al-Qaida and with
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
Let us review the facts. Over the past 24 hours,
Hamas and Islamic Jihad fired nearly 200 rockets and
18/19

I will share with the Council a chilling example.
During the assault, a mortar shell exploded in the yard
of a kindergarten, damaging the structure. By sheer
luck, the kindergarten was empty, and no one was hurt.
But that attack was a war crime. The deliberate goal of
the terrorists was to kill civilians.

The latest attacks of the past 24 hours — the firing
of shells and rockets at our citizens and the destruction
of major electricity infrastructure for Gaza — only
confirm our countless warnings that Hamas not only
seeks to instil fear in the hearts of Israelis, but that
it could not care less about the Palestinians whom it
controls in Gaza.
In response to these terror attacks, the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) have targeted Hamas and Islamic
Jihad’s terror infrastructure. We also destroyed the
tenth Hamas terror attack tunnel uncovered in Gaza
since October. The IDF destroyed that tunnel, which
began in Gaza, wove through Egypt and ended right
in southern Israel, near the Kerem Shalom civilian
crossing. Like all of Hamas’s terror tunnels, this one,
too, was intended to infiltrate Israel and harm as many
civilians as possible. But this terror tunnel also had
a second purpose: to smuggle weapons weapons into
Egypt from Gaza.
Iran’s role in this latest unrest should not be
ignored. It is Iranian money that is used to pay the
Hamas rioters on the fence, and it is Iranian rockets that
were fired at our towns. Just like in Syria and Lebanon,
wherever there is terror and violence in our region,
there is Iran. Hamas is no different. No matter which
tactic it chooses, whether it is suicide bombers, rioters
at the fence or rockets and missiles, when Hamas has
the opportunity to harm innocent people, it does not
hold back. That is its sickening ideology.
18-16341

30/05/2018

Threats to international peace and security

We have here a situation that is black and white.
Israel disengaged from Gaza in 2005, as I keep
reminding the Council. Hamas took over the following
year and since then has done nothing but terrorize
Israel and prolong the suffering of the people of Gaza.
Let us not forget either that Hamas continues to hold
the bodies of two Israeli soldiers, Hadar Goldin and
Oron Shaul, and two Israeli civilians, Avera Mengistu
and Hisham al-Sayed. We will not rest until they have
returned home.
Let me remind the Council that the situation in
Gaza today is the direct result of Hamas’s refusal to
renounce violence. Let me also remind it that the
Quartet conditions, put forward by the United States,
the Russian Federation, the European Union and the
United Nations, were very clear about the need to
renounce violence as a means of achieving goals.
We have said it time and again: if there were no
terror, there would be no restrictions, and it is the
people of Gaza who would benefit most. Even today,
when the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov,
advocates for civilian projects in Gaza, it is Hamas that
destroys those prospects. It is Israel that attaches great
importance to the international efforts to assist Gaza’s
economy and development.
Hamas destroys civilian infrastructure because
it does not want the people of Gaza to live in peace.
Hamas has carried out endless terror attacks against
Israel and the Palestinians in Gaza, and the past 24
hours have been no different.
There is no moral equivalence; there is not even
a question of morality. Some cynical members of the

S/PV. 8272

Council are circulating a shameful draft resolution
that does not even mention Hamas. Look at the draft:
the idea that Hamas’s violence could be rewarded by a
resolution condemning Israel is absurd.
Every member of the Council needs to ask itself
how it could possibly support a draft resolution that
condemns Israel but does not even mention Hamas once.
Members should read the draft tonight; they are going
to vote on it. Maybe they can help me find the word
“Hamas” in it. How many times is Israel mentioned?
Hamas, not even once. What hypocrisy.
If this body does not issue a clear condemnation of
Hamas, it will raise the question of whether this body
is capable of protecting innocent life against terror. The
key step is to accept reality: that Hamas is a terrorist
organization, nothing less. Terrorist organizations
must be designated as such by the Security Council.
Designating Hamas as a terrorist organization would
enable the Council to sanction its leaders, its members
and every person or entity with which it associates. It is
a designation that would result in countless lives saved.
It is high time that the international community
combat Hamas with the same tools and vigour that it
uses against Al-Qaida and ISIS. Let me be clear: if
Israeli children cannot sleep quietly at night, then the
terrorists of Gaza will feel the might of the IDF. We
will not allow anyone to harm our citizens, and we will
do all that is necessary to defend them.
We ask the Security Council to have the courage
and the moral clarity to take the following actions:
condemn Hamas and designate it as a terrorist
organization recognized by the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-1634119/19
