S/PV.7558

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7558th meeting

Friday, 13 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The challenges of policing within a protection of civilians mandate
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2015/844)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-36450 (E)
*1536450*

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The challenges of policing within a protection
of civilians mandate
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2015/844)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Charles Bent, Deputy
Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan; Mr. Pascal Champion, Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and Mr. Gregory Hinds, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/844, which contains a letter
dated 5 November 2015 from myself, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
As we have a number of participants in this meeting
on this important issue, I encourage speakers to make
concise interventions. The intention of this meeting
is to be as interactive as possible, as we were in the
same briefing last November and as we are in our
individual dialogues with Force Commanders. We are
looking forward to questions from Council members
to the Commissioners and from the Commissioners to
the Council. To that end, brief interventions will allow
more time for subsequent exchanges, and I remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close.

2/28

13/11/2015

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this fresh opportunity for
dialogue with our police commanders and the Security
Council in the framework of following up on last year’s
resolution 2158 (2014). I am pleased to see here three
high-level officials of our police components, and I
fully agree that our dialogue must be as interactive as
possible.
I wish at the outset to make a few brief remarks.
First, while we most often associate peacekeeping
with military Blue Helmets, in reality the protection
of civilians is frequently primarily the responsibility
of the police. The reason is very simple: these men
and women have been trained, and their vocation is to
engage with the community, analyse potential threats
and, if necessary, take action. Police forces throughout
the world probably represent the greatest reservoir of
expertise in the area of protection. It is a reservoir that
we have only just started to tap into, but I think that its
potential is considerable.
It is clear that over the past 10 years, the number
of police troops in missions, of which 10 have civilianprotection mandates, has nearly tripled, to almost 13,000
police deployed, most frequently with multidimensional
mandates. I therefore take this opportunity to welcome
this expansion and thank the aforementioned for their
contributions.
In fact, the face of the United Nations police is
very frequently the one that local communities see
first, because it is they who have a relationship with the
community, who build relationships at the local level and
reflect one of the principles of peacekeeping: that it must
be people-centred. Indeed, their contribution has been
reaffirmed in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446).
Protection must start out as unarmed protection,
through the building of relationships with the community.
But it cannot be ruled out that this protection might
become, in very specific circumstances, a physical
contribution that, when circumstances dictate, requires
the use of force. For example, the Bangui task force,
in its normal configuration, was under the authority of
the police component; then that was changed, for the
time being, following the incidents that took place at
the end of September. But we did see clearly the role
that the police played in protecting, inter alia, camps

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for internally displaced persons, and also in preventing
attacks that could have resulted in many victims, for
instance when one of the camps was attacked by 200
armed ex-Séléka members. I think, therefore, that this
is very important. At the same time, the police presence
tends to decrease the number of zones to which our
missions have access and where the host Government
authorities themselves may have reason to intervene.
Ultimately, we have developed a mode of operations
that is being used, for instance, by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, where joint operations
with the Haitian National Police, United Nations police
and the United Nations military components have
allowed the the re-establishment of a certain degree of
security in the Grand Ravine slums of Port-au-Prince,
and enabled the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and medical care, as well as the restoration of order.
It can never be reiterated often enough that host
States have the primary responsibility to protect, and it
is clear that a peacekeeping mission’s mandate is very
often linked to whether or not the host State authorities
are able to take up their policing responsibilities. That
is why training is a critical mission of United Nations
police. We have seen how the restructuring and
operationalization of the various police services and
gendarmerie have required vast resources in Haiti, but
we must also recognize how in Mali, for instance, some
8,800 Malian personnel have already been trainined by
our police.
I wish to make two points before I conclude. The
first concerns capacities. We have made great strides in
predeployment training on the ground. We must make
every effort to continue to professionalize our police
contingents and ensure that they are up to their job.
This will also require us to make the best use of the
standing police capacity. It is equally important that
we place growing emphasis on specialized police units
and greater language capacities. I cannot overstress the
importance of that. I am in ongoing contact with the
International Organization of la Francophonie on this
issue.
We also need more female police officers and
women’s units. Our experience in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti and Liberia confirms
them as a component of engagement that is extremely
important and very useful, and we should make greater
use of them.

S/PV.7558

We must also coordinate all components with the
mission advisers for the protection of civilians, child
protection, women’s protection and gender. All of this
is the primary responsibility of our police leadership,
and we must continue to work on that. I recall that this
year we have drawn up our first policy document on
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping, along with
guidelines for the military. We are in the process of
drafting guidelines for the police, and will be happy to
share them with the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would urge the Security Council,
through you, Sir, to always communicate its directives
and requests to us as clearly as possible. We will
be able to do our jobs effectively only if we have
a crystal-clear strategic policy and if we enjoy the
Council’s support — as we generally do — vis-à-vis the
host countries, which are not always as receptive as we
would wish. Let us continue to strive in that direction.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing, including that important point at the end about
the requirement for clarity.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bent.
Mr. Bent: I would like to thank you, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to speak to the Council today in
representation of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and United Nations police and in
regards to the protection of civilians in South Sudan.
In the past 22 months, UNMISS has been engaged
with adjusting from a post-conflict/recovery mandate,
focused on capacity-building, to a series of crisis/
conflict-adjusted mandates focused on the protection of
civilians. The scope of this tasking is vast and includes
civilians sheltering for safety in various venues,
including those which are within United Nations
compounds.
UNMISS has seen its protection of civilian sites
expand from housing several thousand internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the first days of the
conflict to hundreds of thousands of IDPs spread
across the four major UNMISS protection of civilians
sites. The United Nations police has been tasked with
maintaining public safety and security within those
sites.There are constant, daily threats to our staff, and
situations can easily escalate to where staff members
are surrounded by tens and even hundreds of aggressive
and threatening IDPs. Serious physical injury to United
Nations personnel has happened on several occasions.

15-364503/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In reponse, UNMISS continues to look for
innovative ways and a better way of doing things.
As exemplified by the recent report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446), in which a change was called for to improve
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations. Considering
the dynamics of South Sudan, it is imperative that new
ways be identified to engage and improve the mission.
The Panel report calls for tailoring mandates to meet
the dynamics of the mission. In the section on four
essential shifts, it calls for being more field focused
and to awaken the United Nations on the distinct
and important needs of the field missions. It calls for
new approaches, a convergence of expectations and
capabilities, and for clarity of purpose and potential.
From our experiences and observances of the dynamics
in South Sudan, the Panel’s recommendations could not
fit our mission more appropriately.
Currently, UNMISS and the United Nations police
are engaged in supporting the pilot project for safe
return through curriculum support and human rights
training to select South Sudan National Police Service
(SSNPS) officers. This training is supported by the
respective components of our human rights, women’s
and child protection sections. The United Nations police
is also supporting the SSNP identification card project
and the 777 emergency call centre — all of which are
approved in consideration of the Human Rights and
Due Diligence Policy and are supported in an attempt
to foster an improved public perception of the SSNPS
and build confidence within the IDP populations that
safe return to their homes will be possible.
UNMISS is also actively engaged in supporting
and implementing cross-cutting programmes with other
mission components in the areas of gender violence
and women’s and child protection. These innovations
are combining the focus of these concerns into an
overarching community policing strategy that is being
supplemented by IDP community watch groups within
the protection of civilians sites. This overarching
strategy is also being aligned to support and enhance
the external portion of the community policing
strategy, which involves the SSNPS and community
watch groups as IDPs return to their homes, and also
to support the efforts of the SSNPS under the pilot
project for safe return. These efforts also align with and
support perfectly the concept of the newly proposed
joint integrated police. It is envisioned that this concept

4/28

13/11/2015

will be the future policing strategy and ethics base for
the future police service in South Sudan.
Finally, we would like to reference resolution 2185
(2014) and the Guidelines on Police Capacity-Building
and Development, considering that police are a bridge
between civilians and Governments. Police interact
with civilian populations on a daily basis while guiding,
assisting and protecting them. This is the embodiment
of resolution 2185 (2014), identifying the centrality of
police in peacekeeping. However, the Guidelines on
Police Capacity-Building and Development recommend
that the host Government have ownership of the process
of reform and that plans be phased, with one phase
being completed before the next begins
Let me conclude by restating that the UNMISS
protection of civilians mission faces many challenges
and dangers. However, we are confident that given
sufficient support, guidance and flexibility, as outlined
in the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, resolution 2185 (2014) and the Guidelines
on Police Capacity-Building and Development,
our mission has the capability to adjust and prevail
through innovative and sustainable approaches and
programmes. I would ask that the Council invest in the
Panel’s recommendations, which would help to provide
missions with the flexibility, resources, guidance and
support needed for the successful implementation and
maintenance of the protection of civilians mandate.
The President: I thank Mr. Bent for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Champion.
Mr. Champion (spoke in French): I am very
grateful to the Security Council for having given me the
floor today. I wish to introduce an aspect of our work on
the protection of civilians in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Strategy to Combat Insecurity in
Beni (SOLIB) in the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
territory. The model is not yet well known, and I wish
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Dmitry Titov
for mentioning it to the Council on 20 August (see
S/PV.7508).
SOLIB was established in April 2014 to respond
to serious threats and multiple killings in the previous
months in Beni. We were observing increasing insecurity
at that time. In four months, there had been 17 murders,
15 terrorist acts, 14 armed robberies, threats or assault,
and 6 cases of mob justice that had killed 20 and
injured 29. The diagnosis took into account a number

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of factors, including the infiltration of local criminals
and accomplices; insufficient coordination between
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and the Congolese National Police (PNC); the
uncontrolled movement of armed police and military
personel, who are poorly paid and poorly trained; the
intra-State and cross-border trafficking of weapons
linked to the illicit exploitation of natural resources;
and the people’s loss of trust in the security services.
The Congolese National Police suffer many
shortcomings in Beni territory, as they do in the entire
region. Officers are poorly trained, the infrastructure
needs to be overhauled and facilities are poorly
financed, primarily by the Government and the United
Nations. In that regard, I pay tribute to the courage
and determination of many police officers at all levels
who have shown their skill and determination despite
a situation of extreme deprivation. Progress, while not
very tangible, does exist. The number of deaths during
the presidential elections decreased considerably in
2011 as compared to 2006.
SOL1B was designed in accordance with the
following principles. The joint United Nations
police-PNC undertaking goes beyond the mere
police dimension and takes on a more comprehensive
approach that seekss to involve as many partners as
possible. The Strategy also combines the protection of
civilians and the restoration of State authority towards
the two objectives of strengthening the professional
and operational capabilities of the PNC and ensuring
security and public order through a coordinated
security response from all local actors, be they civilian
or military, Congolese or from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
SOLIB is involved in 37 operational, administrative
and logistical activities, including training, mobility
assistance, monitoring and advising; human resources;
rapprochement between the population and the
authorities and listening to their voices; joint security
management; civil-military coordination; and naturally,
strengthening joint, immediate-impact preventive
and law enforcement actions to assist the population.
SOLIB has benefitted from the performance leadership
of the United Nations police, including the Chief of
Staff’s office in Goma and Beni, and regular visits from
the United Nations police monitoring teams.

S/PV.7558

The MONUSCO police are committed to providing
specific responses to reduce threats to the population.
I will mention a few. On the authorization of the
Mayor, the SOLIB team coordinator participates in the
meetings of the Urban Security Committee. Meetings
have been organized between the PNC and civil society,
working to ensure community security. Three seminars
have been held by non-governmental organizations on
community policing and human rights. And we have
formally collected and processed information on armed
groups.
Our experience in 2014 on the police use of drones
has shown their added value in public security, but
it has not been currently implemented. The United
Nations police is also involved for 16 months in very
significant efforts to secure logistical support for the
Congolese National Police, for example by providing
$7,000 for two SOLIB telephone hotlines to be used by
the population to call for help or inform the police.
Concerning the Rights Up Front initiative, in
November 2014 we were able to act in accordance
with those principles. The formed police unit could
not, in accordance with United Nations regulations,
intervene in Beni because its initial training was not
complete. Given the disturbances, the United Nations
police decided on the immediate use of the unit, which
contributed to the security of the population.
Some results have been achieved. We have set up a
coordination, command and control centre linked to the
two SOLIB hotlines to improve police response. Over 16
months, we have had 3,000 calls that have led to 1,000
interventions, 700 interrogations and 7 search-and-raid
operations. The total number of arrests and individuals
brought to justice amounts to 1,500 in Beni — including
more than 300 soldiers and police officers and a dozen
ADF and Mayi-Mayi rebels — and 200 in Oicha. The
population and the authorities welcome this work and
its security benefits on a regular basis. We follow up
through a regular monthly satisfaction survey. The
elected officials have noted an improvement in the
climate of trust with the Congolese National Police and
now welcome meetings with civil society organizations.
The PNC authorities in North Kivu want to extend the
model to several cities, including Goma.
The United Nations police faces a number of
challenges and limitations — such as the complexity
of partnerships and coordination, the mobilization of
all kinds of resources, the transformation in the United

15-364505/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations police and MONUSCO, further developing
command and control, and performance guidance — that
it is seeking to overcome with the means at its disposal.
Attaining greater effectiveness in the United
Nations police will require certain measures. The
swifter and more resolute implementation of resolution
2185 (2014) would respond to many of our difficulties.
The integration of the United Nations police operational
strategy component, in particular, would facilitate the
tactical performance of our tasks. The police component
must continue to implement its strategy Forward to 2020
within the strategic guidance framework. The effort
on behalf of SOLIB was especially burdensome. The
United Nations police needs multidisciplinary, human,
technical, operational, methodological, logistical,
financial, administrative and performance assistance.
To conclude, the Congolese National Police are
in a delicate situation. No miracles can be carried out
without flexibility support. We must act beyond simple
advice and review. Finally, the protection of civilians
requires determination, capacities and resources, which
is as true for the Congolese National Police as for the
United Nations.
The President: I thank Mr. Champion for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gregory Hinds.
Mr. Hinds: I, too, wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to speak along with my colleagues on
the critical contribution of the United Nations police
on the protection of civilians in peace operations. Let
me also express my gratitude, on behalf of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), to the Council
and police-contributing countries for their continued
support to Liberia’s ongoing peacekeeping efforts. The
commitment and dedication of the police have been and
remain critical to maintaining peace and stability in
Liberia.
Today, I will speak about what the protection
of civilians mandate in Liberia means for the United
Nations police and how the devastating Ebola outbreak
presented both challenges and opportunities in moving
forward protection aspects for transition.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia was
established in 2003 by the Security Council , under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, with
a clear mandate to protect civilians under imminent

6/28

13/11/2015

threat of physical violence, within its capabilities, and
without prejudice to the efforts of the Government
of Liberia. Twelve years later, UNMIL still retains
a protection of civilians mandate, underscoring the
legitimacy and credibility of protecting civilians as
a significant part of any long-term peacekeeping and
peacebuilding effort. The protection of civilians is a
whole-of-mission responsibility. Notably, the United
Nations police is an integral part of the UNMIL
protection of civilians strategy, first, by supporting
protection through political processes; secondly, by
establishing a protective environment; and thirdly, in
building the capacities and capabilities of the national
police and other law enforcement agencies to protect
the population from physical violence.
The UNMIL comprehensive protection strategy
came into effect on 1 March 2014. It seeks to increase
the Government’s awareness and understanding of its
full and primary responsibilities to protect civilians
from physical harm and to enhance its capacity and
willingness to assume that responsibility. The strategy
also notes UNMIL’s strategic readiness to act to protect
civilians within its capabilities when the Government is
unable or unwilling to do so.
As we move towards transition, it is critical to
have national ownership and leadership in the Liberian
Government’s readiness to assume fully its complete
security responsibilities from UNMIL by no later than
30 June 2016, as called for in resolution 2239 (2015).
However, in consolidating this readiness, the Liberia
National Police and other security and justice actors
will require further support in three key thematic areas
to fulfil their protection of civilian role:
First, following years of capacity-building support
and while noting the gains made by the National Police,
support is still required for them to better understand
and fully assume their protection responsibilities
by strengthening police leadership; enhancing
accountability; establishing command, control and
coordination mechanisms; improving operational
planning and response; and strengthening substantially
its community engagement. Critical to ongoing peace
and stability in Liberia will be a stronger foundation
of confidence and trust in the Liberian criminal
justice system, built essentially on protecting civilians
through steadfast partnerships between the police and
the communities they serve. United Nations police, in
coordination with bilateral partners, continue to advise
and guide the Liberia National Police in its community

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

engagement strategy and in delivering targeted projects
to strengthen this relationship. Projects have been
successfully delivered in several counties and will be
extended across Liberia in direct support of the revised
national community-oriented policing policy.
Now, secondly, in order to extend protection
capabilities throughout the country, the decentralization
and decongestion of State, police and justice services,
including those to remote areas, is essential. Steady
progress is being made with those priorities identified
under the Government’s plan for UNMIL’s transition,
which also includes the deployment of increased
numbers of police countrywide. To that end, the Liberia
National Police are currently deploying 552 officers to
the border counties.
And, thirdly, further enhancement of accountability
and oversight is necessary to consolidate Liberia’s
protection of civilian responsibilities. During 2015,
after extensive consultations, Liberia’s legislature
is now deliberating the much-needed legislative
reform for its National Police. A draft police act
includes the provision for civilian oversight in two
keyareas — complaints made against the police and
in its policy development. Also for the first time,
the Police Professional Standards Division is now
deployed outside the capital, Monrovia, to strengthen
accountability and disciplinary mechanisms.
In each of the three thematic areas outlined
earlier — targeted capacity building and improved
community engagement; decentralized and decongested
service delivery; and enhanced accountability and
oversight — the Ebola crisis, which spanned more than
16 months and took thousands of lives, inadvertently
brought new opportunities to reinforce protection
capacities and responsibilities for the national
police, including fostering better police-community
relationships and strengthening the presence of police
throughout the country. Notably, United Nations police
supported the national awareness-raising and outreach
programmes to communities to prevent the further
spread of Ebola and they also supported an integrated
response to Ebola operations. In a partnered approach,
the United Nations police trained 1,000 Liberian law
enforcement personnel in human rights and in the
protection of civilians during the state of emergency
period, while our formed police units provided
backstopping support to the Liberia National Police in
public order management.

S/PV.7558

The Ebola crisis presented unprecedented
challenges. It tested the Mission’s ability to rethink
and adapt the execution of its protection of civilians
mandate and explored new areas of cooperation and
support with the National Police and other actors in
providing a security envelope to allow the necessary
health and humanitarian efforts to occur. This highlights
the critical role police play in often unpredictable
operational contexts in protecting civilians.
I wish to express my sincere appreciation to
Member States for standing by Liberia and UNMIL in
the face of these protection and operational challenges,
and thank especially UNMIL personnel for their
courage and commitment to peacekeeping during this
time. Moreover, Liberia’s security sector should also
be commended for its resilience and professionalism
in preventing the spread of Ebola, despite its limited
capacity and resources, and the risk posed by the
epidemic. Notably, Liberia is now Ebola-free.
Looking forward, UNMIL’s new protection-ofcivilians mandate, contained in resolution 2239 (2015)
of September, is not without challenges, particularly
given the transition of security responsibilities and the
Mission’s significant police and military drawdown in
the lead-up to June next year. The Security Council
reaffirmed UNMIL’s protection mandate and noted
that, from 1 July 2016, the Mission is still to support
Liberian security agencies to protect civilians in the
event of a deterioration of the security situation that
could risk a strategic reversal of peace and stability,
taking into account UNMIL’s reduced capabilities
and areas of deployment. This change in the Mission’s
operational response to the protection of civilians will
require clarity between the Government and UNMIL
as to the circumstances in which the Mission’s armed
capacities will be deployed and what actually constitutes
a security deterioration that risks a strategic reversal.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that policing
remains an integral part of United Nations peace
operations, and we must have clear, credible and
achievable mandates matched by appropriate resources.
There remains a pressing need to recognize that the
mandate for each peacekeeping operation, as can be
seen today, is specific to the needs and situation of the
country concerned. As outlined in last year’s inaugural
resolution for policing in peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, resolution 2185 (2014),
United Nations police play a critical role in supporting
protection efforts through the political process; in

15-364507/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

establishing protective environments; and by building
the capacities and capabilities of national policing
institutions to protect the population from physical
violence — all of which underpin lasting peace, security
and stability in post-conflict situations.
Once again, thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this briefing and affording me the opportunity to
address the Council today.
The President: I thank Mr. Hinds for his briefing,
and I thank all four briefers for, among them, raising
so clearly some of the important issues facing police
contingents, as part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in seeking to implement mandates for the
protection of civilians.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council and encourage them in particular to respond to
what they have just heard from our four briefers and to
put their own questions to the briefers.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for taking
the initiative of convening this important meeting on
the difficulties that United Nations police forces are
encountering in carrying out the protection of civilians
mandate. I would like to also thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, and the Deputy Police Commissioner of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) for their briefings.
About a year ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 2185 (2014), its first resolution on the
functions of the police. It provided strategic and
practical guidance for the heads of United Nations
police components. It is important to ensure high
levels of competence, adequate training and suitable
equipment for the United Nations police components,
without which they will not be able to effectively
discharge their protection-of-civilians mandate.
It is therefore logical that the United Nations police
and the Member States maintain a close collaboration
aimed at identifying areas where there are gaps to
fill or improvements to be made. Moreover, given
that the police components interact regularly with
the population, it is important that the officers be

8/28

13/11/2015

equipped with the linguistic and cultural knowledge
that are appropriate to the host country. Accordingly,
we encourage Member States to increase the number
of female personnel, trained appropriately within the
police components, including in high-level positions.
We think that women personnel are in a better position
to protect other women against sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as abuse directed against women and
children, in general.
Taking into account the threats arising from
organized crime, the proliferation of arms and the
insufficient number of officers within the police
components, those components must work together
in a coordinated and concerted manner with all other
components, as well as with local civil society, in order
to better implement the mandate to protect civilians.
I would like to cite the specific cases of South
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia
and the Central African Republic. In South Sudan,
despite the successive strengthening of UNMISS,
its mandates to protect civilians, to monitor and to
investigate human rights matters, the situation among
civilians is more troubling. That situation reflects a
departure from the Security Council’s original vision
when it established UNMISS in 2011, which focused on
peacebuilding, security and facilitating development.
Nevertheless, UNMISS continues to be useful in
providing refuge to tens of thousands of civilians within
its bases, even if that is not sufficient to accommodate
such numbers. In order to better protect civilians, it is
necessary to go beyond a simple physical presence by
increasing commitment to prevention, mobility, active
intervention and the protection of civilians against
imminent threats. We welcome the recent Rwandan
formation of a police force in Malakal in the Upper Nile
state, and hope that it will soon achieve full capacity
with the additional deployment of other formed police
units. Moreover, we need to think about protecting
individual police officers, who are neither armed nor
provided with protective equipment.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo, we welcome
the activities undertaken within the framework of the
Strategy to Combat Insecurity in Beni in the territory
of the Allied Democratic Forces. We also welcome the
progress made in certain key activities identified in
the 2012-2017 action plan for police reform, including
the establishment of a mechanism in support of the
reform and its implementation, as well as the increase
and reinforcement of specialized police forces. We

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

call on the MONUSCO police component to continue
to contribute to training Congolese police in the
maintenance of public order and human rights. It must
also strengthen its deployments in remote areas and
resolve its logistical problems, so as to conduct rapidresponse counter-offensives in cases where the civilian
population is attacked. In that regard, it is important
that its work focus on preventive measures and seek, in
particular, to strengthen its relations with communities
and the Congolese police, in order to improve rapid
warning and response. To that end, we also encourage
the Congolese authorities to complete the legal toolkit
on reform and to wage war on impunity by prosecuting
the alleged perpetrators of violent acts.
In Liberia, during its more than 12 years of
existence, UNMIL has made considerable progress.
However, much still needs to be done. While in
the transition phase, the Mission must redouble its
efforts for a successful transfer of all security-related
competencies to the Liberian authorities, in accordance
with resolution 2239 (2015), adopted on 17 September.
To accomplish that, we must strengthen the capacity of
Liberian security agencies — in particular, the Liberia
National Police and the immigration and naturalization
offices — and accelerate the implementation of lasting
programmes in the areas of the rule of law, justice,
governance and security-sector reform. The continued
contribution of the bilateral and multilateral partners
is essential. We must not forget that all of this must be
undertaken in close collaboration with the Government
of Liberia and with its participation.
In the Central African Republic, the reopening of
the police stations and the police patrols in Bangui are
positive signs, for in the quite recent past the population
itself formed committees and groups to provide for its
own self-defence. We encourage the Central African
authorities to further commit to bolstering the security
of their population and to building trust among the
people and forces of public order. However, we remain
deeply concerned about the violations of human rights
and the violence committed with impunity against
civilians. Furthermore, while welcoming the laudable
efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in the protection of civilians, we believe that it
must play a crucial role in restoring the rule of law and
assistance to the transitional Government in the fight
against impunity.

S/PV.7558

We commend the critical role played by the United
Nations police in the performance of their protection
of civilians mandates, and we pay deserved tribute to
all the women and men police officers who continue to
spare no effort in the protection of civilians, as well as
to all the police-contributing countries that have made
deployments in countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict.
I would like to close by asking the three Police
Commissioners a question. How, specifically, can the
Security Council help them to resolve the issues on the
ground, particularly those regarding the implementation
of the protection of civilians mandate?
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): I am the daughter of a
military man. I therefore promise that I will be very
organized.
(spoke in Arabic)
Let me begin by thanking all of the police
commissioners in the various United Nations
peacekeeping operations for their efforts and continued
sacrifice. We know the challenges and problems that
they are facing. I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous,
Mr. Bent, Mr. Champion and Mr. Hinds for their
briefings.
We all know that the United Nations is developing
strategies and defining activities to maintain and build
peace. Those activities and strategies are implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and focus on the rule
of law, respect for human rights and the protection of
civilians in the various peacekeeping operations. We all
know what the challenges are and how complex they
are in peacekeeping operations, and we are aware of the
importance of increasing the police component in the
peacekeeping operations.
We must reinforce the criteria for the rapid and
effective deployment of missions. We also need to
establish joint criteria to consolidate the capacity of
police and security personnel in host States, and we
must strengthen United Nations strategic planning with
a view to sparing future generations the fallout of wars.
We must have strategic guidance for peacekeeping
operations in the field. That was touched upon by the
various police commissioners. We need to define the
priorities and the various challenges on the ground. Our
focus should be on the following points.

15-364509/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

13/11/2015

First, we must focus on the nature of the training
programmes used by the troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries. Secondly, we must
strengthen the peacekeeping operations system and
ensure the safety of their personnel with a view to
protecting human rights and supporting the various
police and security institutions. We must also
strengthen the rule of law and train police on that point.
Jordan has set up a comprehensive training programme
on peacekeeping operations with the local police that
is aimed at enhancing respect for human rights. The
programme is based on various principles, including
the transformation of institutions into a citadel of
training for all peacekeeping components by focusing
on individuals and providing them with various kinds
of peacekeeping training. At present, Jordan’s security
leadership has established training aimed at combating
terrorism and strengthening social integration through
a number of training programmes based on a document
published by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in order to assist support missions. That is
one of the most important objectives in peacekeeping
operations.

mandates with respect to the protection of civilians. If
so, how can the security forces tackle that issue?

We must overcome the various challenges and set up
a comprehensive strategy for training police personnel
in the various components of peacekeeping operations.
We have also strengthened our strategic and security
plans in peacekeeping operations in order to meet their
main objective, namely, that peace and security is a
right for all. We support all efforts aimed at meeting
the objectives to which we all aspire, namely, meeting
the challenges that face peacekeeping operations on
the ground, strengthening the peacekeeping operations
system, which is one of the primary objectives of
peacekeeping operations, and providing necessary
assistance in the area of training, along with the
physical and financial resources for those operations.

We fully agree that police components provide
considerable added value to the complex mandates
that characterize today’s peacekeeping operations,
especially with regard to the protection of civilians.
Police units have an enormous potential to generate trust,
because they work closely with the local population, and
that proximity is quite important. However, we would
point out that, in order for that potential to be fulfilled,
the police units must be accountable for their actions
and must have adequate training. Accountability and
training are key to any mission, but that is even more true
in the case of police components. Troop-contributing
countries should provide trained police units that have
been rigorously selected and that have predeployment
experience in the areas of human rights, international
humanitarian law and sexually-based violence. Such
pre-deployment training would, we believe, meet the
objective established by the United Nations, and we
are therefore quite pleased that Spain has received
certification attesting to the fact that all our personnel
deployed in United Nations peacekeeping operations
have received appropriate pre-deployment training in
accordance with the standards set by this Organization.

Members already know that we are facing a number
of challenges that undermine the capacity of our
peacekeeping operations to carry out their mandates,
including the protection of civilians. That too was
mentioned by our briefers. I would like, therefore, to
focus on the various joint operations that are quite
complex in the way that they ensure peace and security.
We do not wish to duplicate the work of the police and
military forces. That raises the following question. Are
they addressing that issue in a manner that corresponds
to their mandates? Is there a lack of clarity in the

10/28

Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I welcome the briefings by Mr. Hervé
Ladsous and the Police Commissioners from the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. I thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative to
hold this meeting.
I am going to ask my questions now, at the
beginning, so that they are clearly understood. I
have two questions on gender policies in the police
components. First, what has been the recent evolution
with respect to the percentage of women in mission
police components, and what measures are being taken
to increase that number? Secondly, we know that there
is a senior gender adviser, and we would like to know
if there is an intent to appoint specific focal points
within the police components in missions to ensure the
incorporation of a gender perspective within each unit.
I have now asked my questions.

Mission police components can be effective only
if the missions themselves are effective. In that regard,
we share the recommendations aimed at ensuring

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the effectiveness of missions drafted by the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and in the Secretary-General’s report
reviewing the implementation of the recommendations
of the Panel (S/2015/682). Members of the Security
Council have the obligation to provide missions with
clear mandates that reflect sufficient political will
for their implementation, and to give missions the
necessary intelligence capabilities and training in new
technologies. We also share the idea expressed in the
Secretary-General’s report that conflict prevention
is a central component of peacekeeping operations
and a particularly relevant principle with regard to
the conduct of police components in the context of
protecting civilians.
Another point is the coordination between the
police and the protection advisers. We believe that
is crucial, since the work of the police, given their
proximity and direct contact with local populations, can
assist in detecting potentially conflictive situations and
can prevent outbreaks of violence. Moreover, we recall
that United Nations police play a very important role
in supporting security-sector reform, in particular that
of the police units of host States. Spain also supports
the development of a strategic guidance framework for
police units within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations that would establish a doctrinal basis for the
work of the police components of missions. We hope
that that pillar will be finalized by the end of the year.
We also find timely the decision to organize an
external review of the functions, structure and capacity
of the United Nations Police Division. The demand for
and the increasing complexity of the tasks performed
by the police units in peacekeeping operations means
that the Division needs to have an appropriate structure
and sufficient human resources to carry out their work.
At the recent Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping we
pledged to review future contributions of formed police
units and a gendarme corps — a Civil Guard of which
we are especially proud — which is doing outstanding
work in Haiti and the Central African Republic.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the essential
role that the police components play in missions in
the context of women and peace and security. The
participation of women in the police units is more
advanced than it is in the military components but
we are still far from our objective of 20 percent. We
welcome the recent launch by the Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United

S/PV.7558

Nations Police Gender Toolkit, but I think we could be
even more ambitious. As recently adopted resolution
2242 (2015) notes, we must do more to increase the
participation of women in peace operations. Women’s
participation will further promote trust among the
civilian population, help to protect women and children
against all forms of violence and abuse, and lead to
reporting of cases of sexual or gender-based violence.
Finally, I would like to refer to cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel.
On this point, we fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy and, as far as my country is
concerned, we are committed to applying that policy
most rigorously, as our Prime Minister stated at the
recent review of resolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PV.7533).
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for convening today’s informative meeting and the
briefers for their valuable briefings.
Police work in peacekeeping and peacebuilding is
relevant in terms of protecting the civilian population
and playing a leading role in restoring national security
institutions. The increase in the number of police
personnel deployed and the change in the nature of their
tasks is a necessary response to increasingly complex
realities and the need to strengthen the fundamentals
of their work, which we fully support. We also agree
that it is the responsibility of each State to protect its
civilians, but if a State fails to do so, the United Nations
police presence can play a central role in supporting
national authorities to fulfil the task.
The presence of United Nations police in conflict
zones produces a feeling of security in the population
through the deterrent effect it has and through the
interaction it generates with the local population. This
dynamic allows it to act as an early-warning mechanism
in line with the Secretary-General’s “Human Rights
First” initiative. It also facilitate the processes of
reconciliation and confidence-building between civil
society and the State, which is one of the objectives of
the security sector reform.
The protection of civilians must be at the core of
police training. Police units must be given the right
preparation and equipment for respecting human rights,
enforcing the rule of law and protecting the civilian
population, especially those in vulnerable situations,
such as women and children who have been subject to
sexual violence or gender-based crimes. In this vein, we

15-3645011/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
and call for prosecuting and punishing any misconduct.
Greater participation of women police would
meet the needs and expectations of civilian women
and would facilitate the recovery of trust and reduce
impunity. Therefore, in line with resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2122 (2013), we would highlight the need
to increase the participation and leadership of women
in police contingents from both police-contributing
countries (PCCs) and from missions’ host countries.
We encourage the PCCs to close the competency
gap that exists today so as to ensure greater female
participation. We also welcome with interest the
System’s innovative initiatives aimed at mainstreaming
the gender perspective in police personnel, such as the
United Nations police manual on gender issues, the
Gender Toolkit, which was launched on 10 November,
and the creation of the role of the gender adviser.
Finally, within the framework of the Government
of Chile’s International Cooperation Programme for
Uniformed Police, over 250 officers of the Haitian
National Police have been trained by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, contributing thereby to
vocational training both at the basic level and for officers
at the middle and senior ranks. A strong police training
is fundamental for the respect for human rights and
for the democratic development of any country. Police
units ultimately help to lay the foundations for the full
establishment of the rule of law, where reconciliation
and the promotion of development through economic
growth, poverty eradication and social and inclusive
development are keys to overcoming conflict and
consolidating peace.
We would like to close with a question related
to remarks made by our colleague from Spain. What
are the main constraints today on deploying a greater
number of women in police units in peacekeeping
operations and how they can these possible obstacles
be overcome?
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing
and welcome all the Police Commissioners. We thank
them above all for their service, often in very difficult
environments and for being here to brief us.
We wish to express our special thanks to the United
Kingdom for convening this important briefing. It is
extremely important that this become an annual event,
not only because of what happens in the briefing itself

12/28

13/11/2015

but for all of the side meetings that take place where
we get to hear directly from the Police Commissioners,
who offer a perspective that we do not get day to day,
which I will come back to shortly.
The world of United Nations policing is changing
rapidly. Just three years ago, there were 52 formed
police units (FPUs) participating in United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the world. There are
64 today, and at the Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping
six weeks ago, Member States pledged an additional
15. Earlier this year, just to give one telling example,
we authorized the deployment of more United Nations
police to just one Mission — in the Central African
Republic — than were stationed globally 21 years ago.
That is just one reflection of the large numbers, but it is
the incredible relevance of these police in post-conflict
societies and in societies that are still experiencing
conflict and in weak States. This is an extremely
important function, and as the Security Council we
need to reflect that in our engagement with and support
for the United Nations Police Division.
It is not just about numbers. As we deploy more
police, we are asking more of them, and we now
recognize that effective policing is critical to achieving
one of peacekeeping’s most important and challenging
mandates, namely, the protection of civilians. The
Commanders with us today know this better than
anyone. The individual officers on the streets represent
the first line of defence and the first point of assistance
for civilians in need. This work equips officers with
the kind of invaluable local knowledge, insight and
relationships that can help Mission leaders refine
strategies and tactics to more effectively address
potential threats to civilians. So the work that the
United Nations police do can inform the entire mission
and the way those missions are calibrated to serve their
foundational function.
In the longer term, of course, even more
foundationally and more fundamentally, United
Nations police contribute to the sustained protection of
civilians and to freedom from fear in the country by
training their local counterparts and building lasting
institutions that uphold the rights of civilians. Their
job is to try to put themselves out of business so that
we do not need United Nations police or peacekeepers,
and that is about building local security institutions and
particularly police forces.

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

From conducting daily patrols to formulating
multi-year programmes, it is evident that the growing
number of United Nations police can and must play
a leading role in protecting civilians, and we in the
Council must do all we can to position them for success.
I would like to briefly highlight four ways in which we
can do that.
First, we must ensure that the United Nations
approach to peacekeeping fully reflects the importance
of the police. As others have said, that means
supporting continuing reforms, including through the
external review proposed by the Secretary-General
to examine how United Nations policing is equipped
to carry out those enormous responsibilities. I know
there is a sense among many of those here that there
are deficiencies in how police are coming into mission
areas and in the kind of training and equipment they
have for doing their jobs. It also means supporting the
Police Division’s efforts to develop a strategic guidance
framework for United Nations policing, which many
have been hungering for.
Secondly, we must ensure that all United Nations
police are properly trained and equipped, and we in
the United States have sought to address those needs.
Since 2010, we have trained more than 5,000 police
peacekeepers, and next year we plan to conduct
training sessions across seven police-contributing
countries, enhancing pre-deployment preparation for
up to 14 units. We also continue to provide technical,
financial and material support to the United Nations
Police Division’s efforts to improve FPU standards,
training and curricula. And because well-trained police
can have an impact only once they are on the ground,
we are also working through the African Peacekeeping
Rapid Response Partnership to ensure that those
units can deploy quickly. Here, in a very important
point, by procuring and delivering the equipment an
FPU requires, the United States intends to shorten
deployment times from many months to as little as 30
days after the adoption of a Security Council resolution.
We know that is going to hard to deliver on, but it is an
extremely important ambition.
Thirdly, I would simply like to second everything
that the representatives of Chad and Chile have just said
about the importance of increasing the number of women
police. However, I think we also have to acknowledge
that part of the challenge is that our own nations’ police
forces — whether city, state or national — themselves
have a deficit of women police, which gets replicated

S/PV.7558

in United Nations missions. So as Member States, we
have to deal with that challenge in our domestic lawenforcement branches, and the United Nations system
itself must get involved and ensure that when there is
a pool of women who can be deployed that a special
effort is made to bring them into its missions.
Lastly, we must improve the channels of
communication so as to ensure that the Council has
insight into the critical work that police units are doing
and into their perspective, which is a distinct one. We
need the benefit of reports from police in order to ensure
that our missions are achieving their mandates. That
is why, as I said earlier, we must make this meeting
an annual one. It is also why Police Commissioners
should increasingly participate in our country-specific
briefings alongside Force Commanders and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. They have an
extremely important perspective and it will enable us to
ask questions of them beyond the kind of tour d’horizon
that we are doing today.
In the spirit of this free flow of information, I
will conclude today by asking a couple of questions.
I would like to ask Deputy Commissioner Bent about
the police contingent of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), which is now charged
with protecting more than 180,000 civilians living in
six designated locations. That was never the way the
Mission was supposed to be configured, and that kind
of deterioration was never what anyone expected to see
in South Sudan. I gather that the Deputy Commissioner
has around 1,170 police officers for accomplishing that
task, which has now sadly had to become a central part
of UNMISS’s mandate. But then there is also the fact
that those 180,000 are just the ones in the camps, and
that the rest of the country is filled with civilians in
desperate need of protection as well, at a very difficult
time. I would like to ask the Deputy Commissioner
to speak to the resources, capabilities and mandate
adjustments he needs in order to be able to walk and
chew gum at the same time, both in terms of police and,
as the police are integrated into the larger peacekeeping
Mission, where civilians outside the protection-ofcivilian sites are also crying out for protection. What
is the division of labour between police and troops in
that regard?
Finally, as someone who visited Commissioner
Hinds in Liberia at the height of the Ebola epidemic
when everybody else was racing for the exits, I would
first like to underscore how impressive was the

15-3645013/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

leadership that he and the police under his command in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia showed. I think
they are owed the gratitude of the Liberian people and
the entire international community for staying the
course and being there for those people in their hour
of most desperate need—something that I think will
never be forgotten, as I hope the Commissioner and the
officers who work with him are aware.
Of course, the big challenge for him as he faces
a drawdown is building up the local Liberian police,
and that has been a challenge for a very long time. I
would like him to speak a little more on the extent to
which having an exit strategy is helping to focus minds,
and whether he has seen concrete improvements in the
training and its results for Liberian police capacity. I
am interested particularly in how that applies outside
Monrovia, where much of the effort over time has been
focused because that is where the central Government
authorities are. How can the Liberian National Police
begin to make strides, particularly, as I said, with the
drawdown looming over the Mission, so that police
outside Monrovia have the capabilities they need in
order to keep the Liberian people safe?
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, as well as
Commissioner Champion, Commissioner Hinds and
Deputy Commissioner Bent for their briefings.
We welcome your decision, Mr. President, to focus
this briefing on the protection of civilians. About
13,000 United Nations police work in dangerous and
challenging conditions in 16 peacekeeping and five
political missions around the world. They certainly play
a key role in making civilians safer, whether through
direct patrolling of areas of increased risk and by
ensuring security in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs), or indirectly by supporting
building national police institutions and assisting in the
development of national rule-of-law capacities.
United Nations peacekeepers are deployed in
places where law-enforcement structures are weak or
non-existent or, worse, where the local security forces
that do exist commit crimes against the very people
they are expected to protect. The task facing United
Nations police in each and every mission is certainly
enormous. The Council must therefore make sure
that it engages in a genuine and regular dialogue with
Police Commissioners, not just in this once-a-year open
meeting but also in the various configuration briefings

14/28

13/11/2015

we hold, so as to ensure that we are fully apprised of the
challenges they face and are providing them with all the
support they need in their work.
Turning to the specific missions represented here
today, in South Sudan, as has been noted, almost
190,000 civilians have been forced to seek protection at
sites overseen by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. Forty per cent of the UNMISS force strength is
now dedicated solely to protecting those sites, a huge
and daunting task for the Mission’s police component,
not just of protecting civilians from outside threats but
also of ensuring order within the camps. We commend
Deputy Commissioner Bent’s efforts under such
extremely difficult circumstances. He has spoken about
the transformation of the Mission. I would like to ask
him if he could elaborate later on the key hurdles he
encountered in that urgent, unexpected task, and on the
lessons he could offer to other missions that might, God
forbid, face similar circumstances.
My second question is about the extent to which
the availability of the flow of small arms in the area
is complicating his task and what could be done about
that. The Deputy Commissioner also referred to hostile
IDPs and the difficulties created for the police in doing
their work; besides the issues that are created within
the sites, I would like to know if there is an issue, or
if there could be one in the future, with infiltration by
criminal elements, radical extremists or members of
armed groups coming in from outside and exploiting
the situation in the camps. What measures can the
Commissioner take to protect his own staff in such
situations, what do they need and what should the
Council pay greater attention to?
My next question concerns the measures that are
being taken to tackle sexual and gender-based violence
within and around the sites and, again, what the Council
can do to facilitate implementing that task in terms of
additional capacity or needed supplies.
I believe the Police Commissioner for the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) spoke
about drones. Certainly, the use of modern technologies
and equipment is always an issue. Could any of the
Police Commissioners elaborate as to what else would
be needed besides the drones, and how does that change
the effectiveness of what they do?
Bearing in mind the history of sexual exploitation
and abuse — unfortunately, not only in the Democratic

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Republic of the Congo in the past, but also the recent
unfortunate stories we hear about sexual abuse and
exploitation in the Central African Republic — we
certainly welcome some of initiatives that MONUSCO
has taken on additional training of personnel and
setting up whistle-blower mechanisms. I wonder if any
of the Police Commissioners could elaborate on the
good practices that they have introduced in that respect,
and what else needs to be done from their point of view
on that issue?
A number of delegations have spoken on the
percentage of police women. We fully support and agree
with what has been said in that respect. Again, we also
understand the constraints that the representative of
the United States referred to, but for our delegation the
issue of encouraging more female police representatives
is extremely important. Could any of the Police
Commissioners share some experience from the field?
How greatly does a female police presence change the
interaction with the local communities, and how would
that improve the work of the Police Commissioners?
The report of the United Nations High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) points out that national police development
and reform cannot be implemented separately from
the broader efforts to strengthen rule of law capacities
and the security sector. The police do not operate in a
vacuum. If other branches of law and order are weak or
inoperative — be it the prosecutor’s office, correction
facilities, or the courts — even the most genuine efforts
of the police can be compromised. In that respect, from
our point of view it is essential that the United Nations
presence on the ground develops a comprehensive
approach to strengthening the justice and security
sectors, ensuring close cooperation among all mission/
country team components, including United Nations
police.
As the largest United Nations peace operation,
MONUSCO is responsible for implementing a
particularly multifaceted mandate. My question to
Commissioner Champion is: How does he ensure
coordination among all mission components in assisting
the development of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s security sector and rule of law institutions?
How big a challenge is posed by criminal groups
or traffickers? He referred to natural resources and
poachers who are increasingly well equipped. What
additional needs does MONUSCO have in that respect?

S/PV.7558

With regard to the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, we appreciate the tremendous work done during
the Ebola crisis. It really is an inspiration to all of us.
That is an issue the Police Commissioner has spoken
about at length. What lessons could he draw from the
Ebola crisis with regard to preparedness, resources,
training and contingency planning needs?
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, and let me also thank and congratulate
the United Kingdom for organizing this briefing. We
fully agree with the comments of Ambassador Power
of the United States that this is an important event and
that we should annualize it. It might seem slightly odd
for those operating in the field to see the Council in
this rather remote environment from the realities that
the Police Commissioners confront on the ground, so I
think that it is very important that we have a chance to
interact with them. I will ask some questions in relation
to the different perspectives that we bring to those
different issues.
I want to thank all of the briefers — Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous and the Police Commissioners. Their
frank briefings are very helpful and address the issues
of concern to them. I particularly highlight the call for
a clear political strategy that Mr. Ladsous made of us,
and the request for a clear and credible mandate, based
on the circumstances of the country, which is an issue
highlighted in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), as a number
of speakers have noted. We believe that the challenges
of resources and training and the relationships with
host countries are the questions that are particularly
challenging, and bear on the central task of the
protection of civilians, which we all recognize as a
fundamental part of United Nations police operations.
As others have noted, policing is an extremely
important, relatively new expanding tool for the United
Nations and the Security Council. In the past, there
were complaints that peacekeeping operations were the
only tool at our disposal. We discarded that notion by
the wayside when we needed to do something. We do
not want to risk police becoming another variety of that
problem, but the Police Commissioners do offer — I
would be interested if they disagreed with us — a more
flexible and community-oriented response to some of
the situations that we face on the ground.
Let me say that it is a given that New Zealand
is a very strong supporter of United Nations police

15-3645015/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

operations, and we see the value of the work that they do.
We know from our own experience in the Pacific how
important getting people out into the field and being
part of the community is to bringing some stability and
order to society. I have three questions that I want to
ask the Police Commissioners.
The first is the issue of prescription. In the Council,
we love to have long discussions and negotiating sessions
on mandates, but it occurs to me that if one is operating
in the field having a very prescriptive mandate may be
rather unhelpful, so I would be interested in the Police
Commissioners’ views about how prescriptive they
need our directions to be in terms of the job they are
doing.
Secondly — and without wanting to tread on
anyone’s toes — how does it work for the Police
Commissioners when they are operating in a military
and police environment? How do the command-andcontrol issues get resolved, especially when complex
criminal gangs are operating in the margins of those
internally displaced persons and guerilla groups?
I would be interested in how that works. Is there
something we can do to help in relation to that?
Last is the question of host country relationships.
We recognize that this is a particularly big deal for the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the moment,
and it is a big challenge for the Council. Are there
things that the Police Commissioners can do, or that
we can do for them, to help improve the host country
engagement, because in those sorts of environments,
even though the three situations that each of the Police
Commissioners have spoken about re so very different,
there is a commonality of challenges in the remarks
they made.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to start by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the three Police Commissioners of police
components for their briefings. I would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening a meeting in
the same format one year after the meeting on the topic
of the protection of civilians in United Nations peace
operations (see S/PV.7317).
When one is talking about the protection of civilians,
it is always apt to recall that the principal responsibility
for the protection of civilians belongs with the host
country. It is good to bear that in mind. Nothing that we
say here takes mitigates the responsibility of the host

16/28

13/11/2015

country in that area. Having said that, obviously the
United Nations, and more specifically the police and
gendarmerie components of peacekeeping operations,
can have a central role to play, in particular in putting
all necessary measures in place when they are needed.
We have talked a great deal about the means and
capacities that are necessary to enable the United
Nations police to carry out their missions. Of course,
as many have said, the training issue comes into play.
Beyond that, there is also the issue of harmonization
and consistency. We have to prevent the norms and
practices that the police-contributing countries transfer
to the host countries from varying too much from
one contributor to another. I welcome the work on the
development of operational standards and guidelines
carried out by the Police Division of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for several years. That is
important, even essential, to ensure the performance of
the police dimension of peacekeeping operations.
The linguistic dimension is another central issue.
Here once again, if we want to ensure that peacekeeping
operations perform well, we must deploy police officers
and gendarmes who speak the language and know the
culture of the country to which they are deployed.
That is absolutely essential in order to facilitate the
relationship with the population and to guarantee
performance, in particular with regard to the training
carried out by the United Nations police.
Lastly, many speakers have said this but it merits
repeating, there is a gender element. We must deploy
a greater number of female police officer to facilitate
relations with the population, especially those who are
most exposed to human rights abuses — women and
children — and they certainly bring a value added to
sexual violence investigations. I will listen with great
interest to the answer to the question posed by the
Ambassador of Lithuania on the experience that each
of the Police Commissioners has had with their female
police contingent.
I will conclude with several brief comments and
questions.
First, I wish to emphasize that, just like the military
component, United Nations police should not wait for
attacks to happen to intervene. Instead, they should be
proactive and ready to take action, through the setting
up of prevention and rapid-response mechanisms in
situations in which civilian populations are under
threat.

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secondly, I would stress the importance of the issue
of the penal chain. The Security Council, when it went
to Haiti on mission last January, was truly shocked to
see to what extent the judiciary and penal component
in Haiti was, shall we say, in ruins. There was a stark
contrast between the considerable and effective effort
that had been made by the police and the total lack
of engagement by the host country in particular on
judiciary and penal issues. I think that it is vital to have
a comprehensive view of the penal chain in order to
ensure its effectiveness. This is of course not the case
only for peacekeeping operations, and it is not the
responsibility of the United Nations alone. But I think
that all stakeholders must have a comprehensive view
of the penal chain so as to avert situations such as the
one we saw in Haiti.
Lastly, a question was asked about modern
technologies. They are essential, of course, and
can play an important role in terms of warning and
evidence-gathering. The Lithuanian Ambassador also
asked a question on this issue. I would be interested in
hearing how Commissioners have been able to use these
technologies. I believe that General Champion said that
he no longer used them. Why is that, and what does he
need in order to be able to use them to a greater extent?
I would ask one last question of General Champion,
since the light is not yet blinking. A very specific part of
his briefing related to the strategy to combat insecurity
that he put together in Beni. He very clearly underscored
the need to take an integrated approach to the protection
of civilians by showing that this was the only effective
means of doing so. Having said that, we are aware that
his resources and equipment are limited and that police
mandates in peacekeeping operations are increasingly
multidimensional. They are being given many tasks: to
protect communities, ensure the continuing training of
their own police and of local police, and build capacity.
I am sure that he has to prioritize and make choices, and
I would be interested in hearing what criteria he uses in
order to allocate his resources.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Mr. President, let me
join others in thanking you for having convened this
briefing. I wish also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous for his informative remarks. We owe a
great debt to the Police Commissioners for the firsthand knowledge they have provided to us in their
briefings, especially the insights they have given us on
the civilian police in the protection of civilians.

S/PV.7558

Nigeria recognizes the significant role of police in
United Nations peacekeeping and continues to deploy
its police personnel in support of United Nations
operations. We have deployed formed police units
in the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali; and we have deployed
individual police officers in UNMIL, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
One vital aspect of police work in the framework
of peacekeeping is community policing. The regular
engagement by the police with local communities
and their leaders is crucial to addressing disorder and
criminality. These and other mandated activities serve
to enhance trust and confidence between the police and
the people they serve. Indeed, it lays the foundation for
the performance of other police functions, especially
the protection of civilians and crime control.
This brings me to the issue of accountability.
Guidelines for the conduct of mission personnel, both
civilian and military police, are always clearly delineated
at the first instance. The challenge lies, therefore, in
identifying the appropriate entity to enforce discipline.
Nigeria believes that as the State bears responsibility
for training and equipping its personnel, it must also
take charge of enforcing discipline when infractions
are proved. We underscore the imperative of ensuring
that offenders, especially those who engage in sexual
exploitation and the abuse of women and children,
are brought to justice. The Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy for such offenses must be enforced
scrupulously and without exception.
In terms of human rights and the protection of
civilians in a peacekeeping context, police officers
play a vital role. We acknowledge the incremental
improvements in the levels of resource provision and
training provided by the United Nations to enable this
role. This support must be sustained with a greater
focus on understanding, and I want to emphasize
this, regional geopolitics and other dimensions of the
conflict in question.
Several speakers before me have touched on the
need for an increase in the deployment of women in
police contingents. We all seem to accept this in
principle, and we support increasing their numbers
in police contingents and ensuring that they are

15-3645017/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

properly and adequately equipped so as to ensure their
effectiveness. As women bear the brunt of violent
conflicts, we believe that women police officers are
better placed to appreciate their challenges and mitigate
their plight. Women should therefore be sufficiently
represented in all efforts to investigate and prosecute
alleged perpetrators of sexual exploitation and abuse in
the context of peacekeeping.
It is also important to deepen the level of
consultation and collaboration with police-contributing
countries so as to clarify the responsibilities, demands
and necessary skill sets required of its personnel. To
achieve this, there must be appropriate training, so as
to inculcate international best practices and standards
on a continuous basis.
We note the outcomes of the recent reviews
initiated by the Secretary-General on peacekeeping.
What remains to be done, we believe, is implementing
them in a manner that will enhance the accomplishment
of their mandates, especially as they pertain to the
protection-of-civilians mandate. It is our hope that
the challenges faced by individual police officers and
formed police units in the context of peacekeeping
missions will be addressed comprehensively. This is
critical to empower them and ensure the overall success
of United Nations peacekeeping.
The question our delegation would ask is this: how
receptive have communities been to women police, and
what are the challenges that these women face on the
ground?
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting.
We welcome the presence of the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, and the Police Commissioners of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. We take this opportunity to thank them on
behalf of our country for the work they are doing in
peacekeeping operations.
The tasks carried out by the United Nations police
are divided into three key areas. The first involves
providing assistance to host countries in the area of
the rule of law through police services. Secondly, in
countries with a more limited infrastructure, the police
carry out tasks on a short-term basis, including law

18/28

13/11/2015

enforcement. And thirdly, they can have the function
of supporting reform and restructuring efforts and,
at times, creating a new national police service or
other type of service that is then responsible for law
enforcement in the country concerned.
We would like to focus in particular on the third
case, in which efforts are deployed to support the
reform, restructuring or creation of police services in
host States. I cite our experience of the work undertaken
by the police component of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) — whose
Police Commissioner I wish to commend — which
we feel is worth emulating. One of the primary tasks
of a mission is to recruit national personnel to serve
the cause of human rights and the rule of law, and to
ensure that they are not vulnerable to organized crime
and international crime. The police component of
MINUSTAH has fulfilled that task successfully, as we
saw during our visit in January.
Another critical task that has proven to be a
challenge to all police missions is establishing a corpus
of national officials of the host country capable of
effectively assuming the tasks of the police component
and of undertaking the important job of interacting with
the civilian population it is charged with protecting.
This will give it the confidence to addressing the
language, ethnic, religious and cultural barriers it needs
to overcome in order to meet these objectives.
We also feel that it is extremely important that the
competencies of the military and police components
be clearly defined. They are two completely difficult
things, in particular when it comes to ensuring
appropriate treatment for criminal matters and the
maintenance of public order, with a special emphasis
on preventive action. Another important aspect is
strengthening and establishing, alongside the host
country, an adequate legal framework for duly defining
police action, crime-fighting, respect for human rights,
accoutability and the protection of civilians.
We believe that gender equality cannot be addressed
within police missions on an exceptional basis. On
the contrary, we think that women must participate
heavily in the protection of civilians, including women
and children, accountability, the fight against sexual
abuse and the necessary interaction with the local
population. Women have a fundamental role to play in
the prevention of crime and conflicts.

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peacekeeping missions, and police missions
in particular, must, from the very conception of
their mandate, plan when and how to transfer their
competencies to the national personnel of the host
country. This is critical. We believe that a mission’s
success depends on its ability to ensure the rule of law,
the protection of civilians and the transfer of capacities
to the host country itself. That is closely linked to the
sovereignty of the countries that host peacekeeping
missions, since they cannot remain in tutelage to the
United Nations forever.
Moreover, the Security Council is responsible for
providing the material and technical support necessary
to the work of police missions, as we do not believe
that any technology is beyond the needs of certain
countries. We must help to reduce trafficking in
the small arms and light weapons that cause terrible
damage and promote criminal activity, including drug
trafficking and other international organized crime.
However, we stress that in most countries that are host
to peacekeeping operations, the root problem is the
serious social and economic crises that arise in those
countries. In Haiti, although crime is a major issue,
by far the largest problems are linked to the awful
social situation of the Haitian people. We must make
every effort to overcome them. I do not believe that the
police component of our peacekeeping operations could
foresee that the source of many of the problems they
face are the social situations of host countries.
We fully endorse ongoing dialogue between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries on
peacekeeping operations, in particular the planning
and drafting of mandates in accordance with Article
44 of the Charter of the United Nations. We echo the
desire expressed by representatives of countries that
provide troops and police to peacekeeping operations
to participate in the planning and drafting of mandates
with the respective Force Commanders.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the
role of police contingents of United Nations peace
missions. Nonetheless, the Security Council must bear
in mind that the United Nations police is an integral of
peacekeeping operations and that the Council must in no
way encroach on the mandate of the General Assembly,
in particular the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s

S/PV.7558

meeting. We also thank Mr. Hervé Ladous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
the three Police Commissioners of the United Nations
missions in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Liberia for their briefings.
I also take this opportunity to thank all police
officers working within the United Nations system for
their selfless work, which they carry out in sometimes
very difficult circumstances.
The importance of the work of police officers
in contemporary peacekeeping operations is not
questioned by anyone. United Nations police, which
is a conduit of the Organization’s peacekeeping work
worldwide, play a substantial role in helping national
authorities to assume their main responsibility for the
protection of civilians. This is accomplished not only
in the traditional formats of patrolling, observation and
suppressing disturbances of public order, but also in
growing the host country’s national law enforcement
potential by assisting in security sector reform.
Extending such assistance on behalf of the entire
international community, the police and all United
Nations peacekeepers must adhere strictly to Security
Council mandates; abide by the basic principles of
peacekeeping; respect the sovereignty of the host
country, in particular the primacy of the national
responsibility of States for establishing their own
law enforcement; be impartial and not be the first to
resort to force except in self-defence or under a special
mandate of the Security Council.
The nature of conflicts has grown increasingly
complex in recent years, and peacekeeping operations
have grown increasingly manifold as they are assigned
ever-more burdensome tasks. Very good examples of
this include the challenges faced by the United Nations
Mission in Liberia in the outbreak of Ebola virus disease,
and the need to protect civilians in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo when illegal armed gangs were
rampant there. The role of the police component of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan has grown in
response to the need to implement the peace agreement
concluded in August. At a certain stage, the mandate of
that Mission will probably have to include a resumption
of State-building tasks in order to help the country to
establish effective law enforcement bodies.
In order to enhance the effectiveness of the police
and other components of peacekeeping operations,
the Council must ensure that every mandate issued

15-3645019/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

or extended is carefully considered in the light of
the specific conditions of the host country at the
time when the decision is taken. We believe that a
mere technical copy of settlement formulas will only
exacerbate situations. The Council will be unable to
adopt effective decisions unless it cooperates with host
and contributing countries in that task. We also need to
review police activities. Given the expansion of their
tasks and scope, they too need to be duly reviewed in
the light of the changes that arise in host countries.
Increasing the effectiveness, rapid deployment and
operational capacities of United Nations police can
impact a peacekeeping operation’s ability to fulfilling
its mandate in unpredictable situations. In that
regard, we fully endorse the idea that it is necessary
to strengthen communication and coordination
among police contingents, local authorities and the
military component of a mission, as well as among
the various missions that operate within a region. In
future, what we need to improve is the process of the
organization and deployment of the police component
of peacekeeping operations and of formed police units.
We also need to optimize their equipment. Within
that process, the Secretariat must very carefully take
into account the opinions and recommendations of
the police-contributing countries. Missions need to
improve their planning and management, increase
the effectiveness of their use of resources and avoid
unnecessary expenditures and the duplication of
functions. The United Nations should expand its
activities aimed at strengthening the potential of police
peacekeepers from the various regional organizations,
first and foremost the African Union, and help them
play a greater role in maintaining regional peace and
stability.
With regard to the gender aspect of peacekeeping,
which has been widely discussed today, we are
convinced that, as we seek balance in that area, we need
to remember that the key factor remains the professional
qualifications of the individual. Otherwise, if we
simply try to reach numerical parity between genders,
we could put at risk the civilian population of those
countries that have requested international assistance.
Twenty-five per cent of Russian police serving in
peacekeeping operations are women. Russia contributes
considerably to efforts to increase the effectiveness
of United Nations police. Our training centre in
Domodedovo has trained more than 350 foreign police
peacekeepers, including commanding officers, from

20/28

13/11/2015

more than 50 countries all over the world, most of
them African countries. Among them, more than 70
have been women. Russia has unique experience in the
area of professionally preparing peacekeepers, and we
would be happy to share that in future.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia for their briefings.
China pays tribute to United Nations peacekeeping
police officers, who serve under difficult and complex
circumstances, for their dedication and sacrifice.
As a result of the diverse nature of conflicts and
disputes, there has been a marked increase in United
Nations peacekeeping policing mandates in recent
years. China would like to make four points with
regard to ensuring proper conduct in United Nations
peacekeeping police units.
First, peacekeeping police units must strictly
implement the mandate of the Security Council, abide
by the basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping
and respect the sovereignty of the host State. While
assisting the host country with its security-sector
reform and its police capacity-building and training,
United Nations police must fully respect the opinions
of the host country, while also constructively providing
training, advice and other support. Police units must
also formulate work plans suited to the conditions of
the host country, pay attention to communications
and public advocacy and seek the understanding and
support of the public of the host country.
Secondly, efforts should be made to make
peacekeeping policing more relevant. When deploying
a peacekeeping operation, the Security Council should
ensure that the mission’s mandate is viable and practical.
The Council must clearly prioritize the mission’s tasks,
and not attempt to cover everything in its mandate. The
result of the peacekeeping-policing mandate should be
evaluated in a timely manner. The mandated tasks and
the scope of the deployment should be correspondingly
adjusted in the light of the changes in the situation on
the ground.
Thirdly,
there
should
be
comprehensive
improvement in the management of peacekeeping
policing
contingents.
Peacekeeping
operations
should streamline and optimize procedures for their

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

establishment, deployment and rotation, be more
forward-looking, ensure better planning, optimize the
set-up of the police component and utilize the limited
resources available for maximum results. Concerning
the rotation of police contingents and the transportation
of equipment, police-contributing countries should
be afforded more options and greater freedom. It is
necessary to seek, and pay attention to, the opinions
of police-contributing countries when adjusting the
rotation of contingents
Fourthly, capacity-building in peacekeeping
policing should be strengthened. Peacekeeping missions
should set up complete peacekeeping policing training
mechanisms and ensure that the training helps police
officers fulfil their mandate, implement their tasks and
respond appropriately to various contingencies and
emergency conditions and situations. Furthermore,
peacekeeping missions should explore ways and means
to improve and implement a system of performance
evaluation in order to effectively monitor and assess
the capacity for discipline and the equipment of their
personnel so as to be able to implement dynamic
management and ensure the quality of the police
contingents.
China dispatched its first peacekeeping police
contingent to the United Nations in the year 2000,
and it is now one of the major police-contributing
countries of the United Nations. Last September, in the
course of attending various United Nations summits,
President Xi Jinping announced a number of concrete
initiatives and measures that China will take to support
United Nations peacekeeping operations. China is
ready is undertake joint efforts with the international
community to promote ongoing progress in United
Nations peacekeeping policing efforts.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank this month’s United
Kingdom presidency for convening this meeting with
the heads of the police components of peacekeeping
missions. We also welcome the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations and the Police
Commissioners present in the Security Council
Chamber today and thank them for their insightful
remarks on the important mission entrusted to them.
In recent years, the police components of
peacekeeping and special political missions have
greatly increased in number and scope — a development
that illustrates the challenges facing missions and that
reflects the changes in the character of conflicts and

S/PV.7558

the growing number of threats, ranging from traditional
security problems in cases of insurgencies and civil
strife, to combating terrorism and the organized
crime associated with it, to the insidious forms of
asymmetrical conflicts. A common factor in all of them
is that civilians become the main victims, and there has
been an impressive toll of civilian casualties associated
with egregious violations of their fundamental rights.
Under such circumstances, the police components of
peacekeeping operations play a crucial role in assisting
host countries, as do the missions themselves in
protecting civilian populations through the delivery of
police services and in cooperating with, and providing
expertise to, local authorities. They are also crucial in
supporting security-sector reform and in restructuring,
and quite often working to revive, collapsed national
police forces and other law-enforcement structures.
In some cases, namely, in weaker countries with
a devastated social fabric, the rules of engagement of
United Nations police also include law-enforcement
duties. Police components thereby assume even greater
relevance, as in many instances they are the first line
of contact with local populations and play a crucial role
in strengthening local police capacities. In addition to
their mandate to protect civilians and provide security,
United Nations police contribute to restoring trust
between the population and the local police, which
usually is shattered in conflict situations.
In their core mission of protecting civilians, United
Nations police seek to structure their activities around
preventing and, if necessary, responding to situations
where civilians are under the threat of physical violence.
They also focus on creating a protective environment,
which basically involves establishing a relationship of
mutual trust with populations living under stressful
conditions of insecurity, whose cooperation they need
for the establishment of a more secure environment.
Moreover, problems related to public order can ignite
dangerous security situations, especially for women
and children, which calls for special attention to gender
issues by ensuring greater integration of women in
United Nations policing as well as in national police
forces.
The presence of women in the United Nations police
staff increases the ability of missions to strengthen trust
with communities, especially with women. The role of
police women is essential in creating an environment
in which victims, including victims of rape or sexual
violence, acquire a level of confidence to denounce

15-3645021/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

crimes and report them. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment of a project for training and selecting
police women and the holding of training courses on
gender.
In conclusion, the extremely complex scenarios
faced by United Nations policing underscores the need
to increase the number of police deployed in order to
implement United Nations peacekeeping mandates
and special political missions in which the protection
of civilians is a central feature. To ensure that
peacekeeping objectives are fully met, it is important
that police-contributing countries pay greater attention
to selection, direction, staff training and skills before
deployment, as all that is vital to establishing feasible
relations between the host nation and United Nations
police.
I would like to address two questions to Mr. Gregory
Hinds concerning the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL). Since UNMIL is carrying out its exit
strategy — and Mr. Hinds referred to the need for clarity
between the Government and UNMIL in the transition
period — will it be possible to ensure that police and
law enforcement structures can manage effectively after
the withdrawal of UNMIL? How are things proceeding
with the joint development of a strategy for the reform
of the Liberian police, the benchmarks for the transition
and the exit strategy itself?
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, and the Deputy Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for
their respective briefings, which we have listened to
very carefully. In line with its strong commitment to
United Nations peacekeeping, Malaysia has contributed
personnel to all three Missions.
I wish to begin by reaffirming Malaysia’s support
for resolution 2185 (2014), which paved the way for the
Council’s closer engagement with the men and women
serving in the police components of United Nations
peace operations, including through meetings such as
these. We strongly support the convening of similar
meetings in the future and hope that the discussion
and outcome of this meeting will contribute to the

22/28

13/11/2015

Secretary-General’s report requested in paragraph 33
of resolution 2185 (2014).
I wish to pay tribute to the bravery and sacrifice
of United Nations police personnel in the field and to
their commitment in discharging the mandates and
responsibilities with which they have been entrusted by
the United Nations in pursuit of lasting peace, security
and stability in their respective theatres of operations.
One of the most significant policy shifts concerning
the scope and role of United Nations police operations
relates to the protection of civilians, with increased
emphasis on both the protection of women and girls,
including protection from sexual and gender-based
violence, and the protection of children in armed
conflict — mandates that we welcome and strongly
support. In that regard, we also support the call by
earlier speakers for the deployment of more women
police personnel on the ground. Through individual
police officers and formed police units (FPUs), United
Nations police have a niche role, including through
training and capacity-building, and in particular in
assisting national authorities to uphold their primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. In that context,
Malaysia fully supports the efforts of United Nations
police to enhance the accountability of national security
forces as a means to further strengthen the rule of law.
Once local police are empowered and the security
sector is reformed over time, the United Nations can
hand over the business of the maintenance of law and
order to the Governments concerned.
Malaysia recently pledged additional contributions
to United Nations police. Specifically, it will contribute
280 officers and personnel from the Royal Malaysia
Police to be deployed as two teams of FPUs, as well
as 100 police officers and personnel to be deployed
as individual police officers. Malaysia is currently
working to deploy those officers as soon as possible.
We agree with the view that the current ongoing
review processes of United Nations peace operations,
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, present opportunities for
effecting improvements to the operational capabilities
and capacities of United Nations police and for better
clarifying its role and functions, among other things.
To that end, Malaysia looks forward to working
with all interested partners and stakeholders. We
also see much scope for enhancing interactions and

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7558

consultations between the Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries.

political affairs sections within missions, in particular
on issues such as electoral violence?

In support of your call, Mr. President, to keep this
briefing meeting interactive and lively, I conclude
at this juncture with three questions for the briefers.
For Mr. Gregory Hinds, as the Mission is currently in
drawdown mode, how has that affected, if at all, the
tasks related to transferring responsibility to Liberian
security institutions? If it has affected them, I request
him to elaborate on the specific challenges faced and
possible solutions to address them. I also ask him
to elaborate on the experiences of UNMIL’s police
component in implementing the protection-of-civilians
mandate, including by its family protection unit. I ask
the other Police and Deputy Police Commissioners to
elaborate on how the use of technology such as social
media and telecommunications equipment has, or has
not, helped in discharging their respective mandates,
in particular with regard to the rule of law and
institution-strengthening activities.

With regard to the second theme — the institutional
framework — the starting point is that the police
component of peacekeeping is quite often neglected as
compared to others. We should therefore think creatively
about the part that policing can play in resolving
instability. Is resolution 2185 (2014) fully effective?
What more do the heads of the police components
need from the Council? What more needs to be done to
ensure that the mission leadership understands the role
of United Nations policing? There is a lot of support for
having this briefing every year, and we look forward
to working with the presidency of Senegal at this time
next year.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I shall recap the questions that have been posed and
invite the briefers to respond to those questions.
As President, let me thank everyone for asking so
many questions. There are too many, in fact, for the
briefers to respond to all of them at this meeting today.
Let me therefore extract from the discussion the three
overarching themes of the questions, and ask our briefers
to respond accordingly. The first theme has to do with
the cooperation within the Missions among the police
and other components as it relates to the protection of
civilians. The second is the institutional framework,
including our own role in the Security Council, for
supporting policing as part of peace operations. The
third relates to resources and capabilities for policing,
including, crucially, the role of women in policing. Let
me say a little more about each theme.
Under the first theme, several of the questions are
an important follow-up to the Secretary-General’s June
report (S/2015/453) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I hope those questions will also be a
key part of the upcoming independent police review.
For instance, how effective is cooperation between
police and other force components when dealing with
the protection of civilians? Are the rules of engagement
clear? Do they differ between the police and the force?
To what extent do police components coordinate with

Many questions were also raised about resources
and the capabilities of policing. Some were directed at
specific Commissioners, which I will not recap now; I
will leave the Commissioners to respond to them. There
were alaso a number of questions about the important
role of women in policing, as well as comments about the
strategic guidance framework. Finally, some questions
were about the use of technology, other equipment and
management.
I will now give the floor to the briefers for responses
to the questions posed and for any other remarks that
they may wish to make.
I give the floor first to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Mr. President, for putting
the numerous questions into focus. I would first like to
thank all the members for their comments. I think they
reflect a real interest in what our police components are
doing, as is fully justified.
As the Council knows, the Secretary-General has
proposed an external review of United Nations police.
That is a review in which we will engage thoroughly,
because it represents an important opportunity to
improve on a number of the points that were mentioned,
including intra-mission cooperation. As I said it in my
initial remarks, we have made a lot of progress. With
regard to the protection of civilians, for example,
the fact that police components interact on a daily
basis with senior protection advisers of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and with
specialists on children and women seems to me as it
should be. Protection can nevertheless be improved,
and it should be.

15-3645023/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Taking up the specific question of women, let
me say that there has been progress. Clearly, though,
there has not been enough. At present, women make
up 12.2 per cent of the United Nations police, which
is substantial progress as compared to the situation
10 years ago, when they made up only 5 per cent. Two
questions, however, arise. The first one is the extent
to which 12 per cent reflects the make-up of police
forces throughout the world. Were we to use an average
country as an example — whether from the North, the
South, the East or the West — we would come up with
a similar statistic. That is a fact. It is easy to arrive at
a 20 per cent women component in terms of a national
contribution. However, as that relates to an extremely
small figure, I am not certain that it is convincing. I
completely agree that we have to continue to improve
on that count. We have increased that percentage over
the past four to five years, and we will continue to do so
to the extent that it is possible. Another topic has to do
with all-female police units, which, as I said previously,
have proved their worth. I am happy that, at the last
peacekeeping summit, several countries made offers of
all-female units. I remember that Nigeria, Bangladesh
and Rwanda made offers. I hope that by the time of
the next United Nations chiefs-of-police summit, next
spring, new pledges will have been made.
Let me address some of the issues raised. Two years
ago. we launched an initiative under which selection
assistance and assessment teams train and subsequently
select well-trained female officers with specific skill
sets. That initiative has already yielded 260 women
recommended for deployment, with 161 actually
deployed. There will be another such programme in
the Niger, where 187 women participants have already
been registered. As one can see, things are progressing,
although perhaps not to the extent that we would like.
The toolkits involving gender issues are proving their
worth in terms of mainstreaming, capacity-building
and eradicating sexual and gender-based violence.
The training package consisting of exercises that are
based on case studies and scenarios. It is essentially
e-learning, but it is proving effective and, moreover,
helps in building the capacity of the police of the host
State. We have gender focal points in all missions,
and they were here this week for the launching of the
gender toolkit. We have been able to put together some
extrabudgetary funding for a general adviser here
alongside Police Commissioner Feller, which I think
will be very worthwhile.

24/28

13/11/2015

Finally, let me make a couple of very general
points. First, I want the police, as I want my entire
Department, to be constantly adaptable and innovative,
as we had to be in the case of new arrangements in the
Central African Republic, which were demonstrated
by the Bangui task force. Sometimes things work,
and sometimes they do not. While we need to make
adjustments from time to time, we need to persevere
in our efforts. A very important element in all of that is
technology, which not only relates to unmanned aerial
vehicle drones. It is also a question of better information
and intelligence in order to know what is happening
around us. It is about better communications. And it
is also about specialized capabilities. We have created
the only forensic laboratory in Mali that is able to deal
with improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and mines.
In that regard, we are doing much better in terms of
finding those responsible for placing IEDs intended for
our units on the ground. That is only one example out
of many.
We have to continue in our efforts concerning
formed police units (FPUs). The concept is adapted to
the situation and basically works well, but I think that
it can be improved. I am often struck by the percentage
of staff members whose work is devoted to selfsustainment in an FPU, which numbers approximately
140 individuals. That is to say that the number of people
who do the actual work that the personnel of an FPU
are supposed to do is not at 100 per cent — in fact, it
is sometimes substantially less. We therefore need to
work on that issue.
Lastly, problems of sexual exploitation and abuse
are as unacceptable in police departments as they are in
the military and civilian components. We continue to
deal with those problems with increasing severity. Zero
tolerance is an absolute necessity, but the goal has to be
zero incidents. While we probably have some distance
to go before achieving that goal, all of my colleagues
and I are nevertheless fully committed to doing so.
We want to very substantially reduce the number of
deplorable situations we have had to face, including
some in the recent past.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Bent.
Mr. Bent: I thank the members of the Security
Council again for their kind remarks, their obvious
support for United Nations police and their concerns
about our operations within peacekeeping. I probably

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

will not be able to answer all the questions, but I will
try to.
At the outset of the conflict, intra-Mission
cooperation was very tenuous. We were engaged in
capacity-building, which was mostly unrestricted.
Everybody focused on his or her own area of importance,
and there was not much integration. When the conflict
started and forced us to all come together, making the
world a lot smaller, there appeared to be some stepping
on toes and some conflicts of interest in the cooperative
relationships among the different components. There
was a lack of clarity on the issue of primacy and
focus. One must remember that, during that interim
period, we had no adjusted mandate. During that gap,
United Nations police tried to push forward without
restrictions, with the knowledge that we needed to
maintain some type of policing and control of the
growing camps. During that time, we started to identify
our own inabilities, with a view to addressing, through
policy and procedure, exactly what we could and could
not do, and we learned how to tie it all together.
With regard to the rules of engagement, we knew
that we needed to focus internally and that the force
needed to focus externally. We had trouble securing
the porous perimeters of the sites because of a lack of
resources, inadequate fencing and an inadequate ability
to observe the perimeters day and night. Weapons
were being sneaked in — including machetes and
knives — and we therefore quickly had to combine with
the force contingent directly in order to handle some of
those situations.
With respect to protective gear, we asked for it
up-front in January 2014. And we pushed for it again,
because many police-contributing countries cannot
provide such equipment. We lacked it, so we were at
risk. We were trying to rely on the minimal formed
police units (FPUs) that we received in-mission and
on the force contingent. That is where the rules of
engagement began to become apparent. When FPUs
were unable to engage quickly to get into position in
the presence of an armed component that required
the use of higher force in a situation they could not
control — and in many such situations we have had
armed opponents with knives and machetes, throwing
rocks or beating us with sticks, which meant that we
were suffering injuries — we often had to withdraw. It
is not simply a matter of having 20 or 30 formed police
units armed with weapons that one thinks can defend
itself and control the situation. We are talking about

S/PV.7558

hundreds of civilians surrounding them with machetes,
knives, rocks and sticks, even jumping and biting. The
decision to use force to protect themselves becomes a
very critical issue because of why we are there in the
first place. Sometimes such escalation occurs just on a
whim. Anything can ignite them. As soon as you lay
hands on someone who is beating a woman and try to
pull him off, you can suddenly be surrounded by 20 or
30 of his supporters who want to know why you are
taking that person away.
Thus the rules of engagement became very critical.
We tried to address that through a standard operating
procedure in responding to such incidents. But we
found that the force contingent was correct in the view
that it should not engage the civilian population and
that its only capacity in most of its work with us was to
support us in containing an area of conflict and locking
it down. Most of what the force cotingent does is to
help us form a perimeter and shut down a site. It comes
in and extracts us from a perimeter whenever we have
an issue. If I have a team that is cut off inside a site
and things get to the point where the team is suffering
injuries that require the use of deadly force — which
has happened, and deadly force has not been used — the
force contingent does not come in with a higher level
of escalation; they come back in with containment and
control. That leaves us vulnerable to an apparent abuse
of force.
We are not properly equipped. We do not have the
resources to go into a site such as Bentiu, which has
121,000 internally displaced persons, with 30 FPUs
to control a situation where 200 or 300 people may be
rioting. The dynamics of some of the content of the
mandates therefore become almost irrelevant.
We have been working intra-mission to coordinate.
But it is incredibly dynamic, in part due to the
institutional framework. Within a mandate, we can
have statement that says “by any and all means
necessary within your resources and capabilities in
areas of deployment”. What exactly does that mean?
Is your area of deployment South Sudan? Is your area
of deployment the protection-of-civilians site you are
assigned to? Is your area of deployment the specific
purpose you came to the mission to perform? In the first
parse of that, we had people who came to the mission
for capacity-building. They were not there to carry out
any engagement with civilians. Yet for almost a year
we had to reassign them to do something with which

15-3645025/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

they were not comfortable and for which they were not
trained. Those things get very critical.
Resources and capability come into play too,
because the training is not as simple as training people
to come to a mission. You have to train them for the
environment they are in. And you have to train them,
within that environment, for what they are up against.
In the first stages, we realized that our induction
training was inadequate for when people came to the
mission. I am not saying that the external training was
inadequate, but we had to get them to understand what
they were going to be facing when they came to the
mission. We adjusted our induction training to focus on
the protection of civilians, women’s protection, sexual
and gender-based violence and dealing with the locals
as separate ethnic groups.
Along with that, we also started to request more
females. We had always been in search of female police
officers, but we needed more because, as has been
pointed out by several members of the Council, women
have a unique advantage in those sites, where we are
dealing with a population that is primarily made up
of women and children. We had to have some way to
take advantage of that and leverage it, so we asked all
the police-contributing countries to provide as many
women as they could. We were at 20 per cent at one
time, but I believe our numbers are sliding down below
18 per cent now. That is not enough.
One point I would like to make in that regard is
that we also have to look at the fact that we are dealing
with a very harsh environment: people are working
outside in the elements, with a hostile group present
and females going unprotected. There are not enough
FPUs to work with the groups that focus on protecting
women and children. We put them in and expose them
to great danger, without giving them the protection they
need to comfortably do their jobs. I think it may be for
that reason that some countries have started to reduce
their contributions. No one feels good about asking
people to volunteer for a mission and then putting them
in harm’s way. And while we do have a gender focal
point, we also have to deal with rotations. Taking in
and training someone as a gender focal point and then
having her rotate out eight months later means that
there is no longevity.
We have been asking for team packages in order to
address some of those issues. We are short on resources
and personnel, and we need to make the most of the

26/28

13/11/2015

limited resources we have available. That is what we
have been trying to do in restructuring the entire
mission, specifically United Nations police, so as to
put in place dedicated teams for the specific areas we
have to address. We have teams for public order, which
are made up of a combination of United Nations police
and FPUs. We have teams for community policing,
which do nothing but work with community watch
groups — nationals at the sites. And we have teams
on gender and child violence. We are working very
well with those teams, but the dynamics are immense.
I would therefore ask again that we look at this as a
package. We need to focus on what we absolutely need
to get done.
In a sense, capacity-building takes place from the
top and the bottom at the same time. Building from the
bottom up takes too long, but if we do not structure
it correctly it will collapse. In fact, it collapsed right
after the conflict began. We need to have clarity on this
matter, and we need to take the time to do it right as
we put the pieces together. Many of the missions I have
been involved in suffer from diluted potential because
we start to move too quickly. I believe we were doing
that prior to the conflict. That is what we are hoping
to do now in this case, and what we have been trying
to do through these regimented programmes that focus
on community-oriented policing and the protection of
civilians.
The President: I now give the floor, very briefly,
to Mr. Champion.
Mr. Champion (spoke in French): With regard to
the role of women, last year we set up a very active
United Nations police women’s committee, and this year
I appointed a very dynamic woman as gender equality
adviser. Through our action plan to protect the victims
of electoral violence, which consists of 120 points for
the next two years, we have been trying for the past
two months to figure out how we can fully integrate a
gender perspective across our work. That is not an easy
undertaking given the role of women in the Congo, but
we are working on it and it is very motivating.
With respect to sexual violence and abuse, since
the month of August we have obviously made an
extremely great effort under the leadership of our
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
I would just like to note that we have put in place a
mechanism for reporting any allegation of sexual
violence or abuse to the Special Representative and

15-36450

13/11/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic People’s Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) within three hours. I think this
is the key to a number of other mechanisms, since the
disciplinary unit is also informed within in the same
time period.
On the use of new technologies, in particular
drones, the police use of unarmed drones last year
showed some promise with respect to maintaining
public order, monitoring of illegal barriers, deterrence
of crime in urban areas and a range of police-oriented
aspects as to the use of these new technologies. If we
have reduced our use this year, it is because priority
must be given to military use for dealing with a number
of armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, particular the Allied Democratic Forces, the
Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri and the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. A second
reason for the reduction in the use of drones by police
is that we also have to recruit police officers who have a
certain sensitivity on the police use of unarmed drones,
give them some training on the ground and follow up on
and manage them in a somewhat specific manner. But it
is a subject that we have naturally not set aside.
With respect to organized transnational crime which
is connected to one of the questions that was raised in
the context of the very prescriptive versus somewhat
flexible mandates adopted by the Security Council, I
would say that, in the context of the current MONUSCO
mandate, the trafficking of natural resources is an
important subject. We do not necessarily see the
mandate as very prescriptive in terms of requiring
the MONUSCO police to work specifically on serious
organized crime. Indeed, in bringing all of these items
together in the context of budgetary constraints, I would
say that the right balance has to be found, first, to take
into account that, as stated in the mandate, there is a
problem involving the trafficking of natural resources.
Secondly, there are budgetary constraints and, under
the traditional mandate of the United Nations police in
terms of capacity-building, serious organized crime is
one of the elements of the judicial police and as such
those aspects cannot be completely overlooked.
I believe, therefore, that we must find the right
balance of resource allocation. For our part, we are
currently dedicating four MONUSCO police officers
with some limited resources, but they still manage to
have an impact and, in terms of civilian and military
coordination, it is possible, for example, to have some

S/PV.7558

aspects of this effort linked with those of the military
component of MONUSCO beyond dealing with armed
groups in eastern Congo, as the aim of our general
approach on the serious organized crime is to work on
a national scale.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Hinds.
Mr. Hinds: I thank Council members for their
questions, praise and recognition of the work that
we are doing in some of these tough peacekeeping
environments.
First, with respect to institutional frameworks and
mandates, as discussed, we need clear, credible and
achievable mandates that are matched by sufficient
resources, whether it be in terms of logistics, mandates
or guidance so that we can implement the mandates.
We would also like to see a greater role for the
Security Council in engendering the political will
that is necessary and the commitment that needs to
be undertaken by host States in relation to working
in partnership in achieving the mandates and at times
providing some tough love to make sure that the hosts
actually do come on board and are part of the political
process and making sure that a mission and its mandate
can actually be achieved. We need to ensure that the
tasks are prioritized, well understood and based on the
necessary building blocks for peace and security and
stability in each of the countries concerned. As the
Council can see today, they do differ.
As far as what United Nations policing brings to
these mandates, a better understanding of resolution
2185 (2014) would ensure that the resolution is put
to its greatest effect when the Council is devising
new mandates. It would also assist us in thinking
creatively about what policing brings to the continuum
of peacemaking, peacebuilding and peacemaking/
peacebuilding processes and in ensuring that we are
more accountable for the delivery on our mandates.
A better understanding of resolution 2185 (2014)
would also ensure that the police advisers who are
part of permanent missions are fully utilized. In the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), we
have more than 20 police advisers from more than
90 police-contributing countries. The Council needs
to look into tapping into that resource as part of its
deliberations and discussions because they truly
understand what the police bring into peacekeeping
operations.

15-3645027/28

S/PV.7558

United Nations peacekeeping operations

On the second issue of gender and resources, I
will just touch on the basics. Mine is actually one of
the missions that has an all-female formed police
unit, from India. We are very lucky to have it and
grateful for it. I think it provides and demonstrates
and showcases the opportunities that are presented
for women in peacekeeping and peacemaking roles. It
really demonstrates equality. They stand equally beside
men and women of other formed police units, those of
our force and those of our civilian counterparts. They
really do have an impact, particularly for the women and
children in the areas of the protection of the civilians
whom they serve. There is a much more nurturing and
caring bond between them and the communities where
they serve.
I think our current representation in missions, as
mentioned, mirrors our national and domestic policing
institutions globally. I have to say with some regret that
I have only 20 per cent female officers as my individual
police officers and slightly fewer in my formed police
units, but we have created an environment in the Mission
and a leadership culture that provides opportunities
based on fairness and equity to allow everyone
regardless of gender to reach their full potential. But
in this Mission it is also an opportunity to stretch and
grow our female officers, to give them opportunities
that they may not have been gotten in their own
countries, build their capacity and further enhance the
skills, knowledge and expertise that they bring to the
Mission while maximizing and optimizing what their
contribution. We are very fortunate that we have our
men and our women, but we are especially lucky to
have the women, as they are incredible role models, not
only within the communities where we serve, but also
with their national counterparts, showing that women
do have a significant role to play in communities and in
security services.
Lastly, I would touch upon some of the questions
specific to Liberia and its readiness during transition.
As the Council knows, the Government of Liberia has
a security transition plan. the Council having urged it
to adopt one in resolution 2190 (2014). There has been
steady progress in this area. However, focus on process
has been greater than on implementation. Through the
Mission, through the broad range of United Nations
partners on the ground and most importantly through
the international community we are stepping up urgency
with respect to the ways in which we can provide support
and help the Government to achieve the benchmarks

28/28

13/11/2015

and the timelines that have been put in place for their
transition and for their peace consolidation plan.
The Liberia National Police (LNP) has had
the primary responsibility for in-country policing,
regardless of the United Nations Mission’s presence.
Our role has been to develop, build capacity and
reform, as well as to support them operationally and
intervene in situations that have got beyond their
control. Encouragingly, we have been seeing less and
less of that being required. What do they need? They
need to be capacitated. They need the necessary tools,
resources and equipment to do their jobs. That is an
area where Member States can look to support the
Government of Liberia, since some of what is needed
is currently beyond its capacity and resource abilities,
given the fact that the country is also recovering from
Ebola, which had a significant impact.
There is a saying: “It is time to go.” That has
been absorbed by the LNP. We are starting to see in
it a national pride and ownership in relation to the
transition, and an attitude that is looking to move the
process forward. We will continue to work with the
LNP to build the trust and confidence in communities
that will be an important part of the country’s security
and stability. The future of Liberia is in Liberian hands.
We are working to support that and to contribute the
timely effort needed to ensure that it is ready for the
transition of security in eight months’ time. We look
forward to having the support of the Security Council
and Member States in achieving that aim alongside the
Mission.
The President: I thank all four briefers for
taking our questions and responding with such useful
insights, so that together we can go on with our work
to continually improve United Nations peacekeeping. It
is clear that we have a healthy appetite for continuing
these discussions. We have not been able to fully answer
every question raised, but I hope that the conversations
will continue so that we can do so. I encourage the
Commissioners to continue to tell us exactly how they
feel, to tell us about their experiences in the field, on
the front lines and in the most vulnerable communities.
I would also like to thank my colleagues on the
Council for their comments and questions.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

15-36450
