A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/202
5 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 98 (f)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/629/Add.6)]
52/202. Implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/116 of 20 December 1995 and 51/183 of 16 December 1996 on and related
to the implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, held at Bridgetown, Barbados, from 25 April to 6 May 1994,
Convinced that small island developing States are particularly vulnerable to the potential effects of global
climate change and sea-level rise, and that tropical storms, the El Niño phenomenon and drought have
resulted in the inundation of some islands and have caused serious loss of resources in their exclusive
economic zones, economic infrastructure, human settlements and culture,
Reaffirming the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 adopted by the General
Assembly at its nineteenth special session held from 23 to 28 June 19971 and resolution 5/1 adopted by the
Commission on Sustainable Development at its fifth session, held from 7 to 25 April 1997,2

1

Resolution S-19/2, annex.

2

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 9 (E/1997/29), chap. I.

98-77095

/...

A/RES/52/202
Page 2

Reaffirming also the decision taken at its nineteenth special session3 to convene a two-day special
session, preceding its fifty-fourth session, for the review and appraisal of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,4
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,5 and welcomes in particular the action that has
been taken by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat to support the system-wide
implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States;4
2. Welcomes the action of the Secretary-General to restructure the Small Island Developing States Unit
within the above-mentioned Department in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 49/122 of 19
December 1994 and 51/183 and his proposal to suitably strengthen the Unit;6
3. Appreciates the support that has been provided by the Commission on Sustainable Development
in following up the implementation of the Programme of Action in accordance with resolution 49/122 and
the Programme of Action itself, and welcomes the multi-year programme of work for the Commission on
Sustainable Development, 1998-2002, as adopted by the Assembly at its nineteenth special session,7 pursuant
to which the Commission will, inter alia, review the outstanding chapters of the Programme of Action;
4. Decides to invite States members of the specialized agencies that are not members of the United
Nations to participate in the two-day special session for the review and appraisal of the Barbados Programme
of Action, and in the preparatory meetings therefor in the capacity of observers;
5. Welcomes the progress made by the United Nations Development Programme in implementing
resolution 49/122, invites the Programme to continue to implement all the provisions of the technical
assistance programme, known as SIDSTAP, and the small island developing States information network,
known as SIDSNET, and welcomes the regional and subregional efforts by small island developing States
that have enabled the commencement of the implementation of both programmes;
6. Also welcomes the actions taken by the regional commissions and organizations in support of
activities related to the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development continues to have the strengthened capacity to carry out, in accordance with its mandate, the
research and analysis necessary to complement the work of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
with respect to the implementation of the Programme of Action, and in that context notes with satisfaction
the strengthening of the Office of the Special Coordinator for Least Developed, Landlocked and Island
Developing Countries as reflected in the above-mentioned report of the Secretary-General, following the
recent restructuring of the Conference;6

3

Resolution S-19/2, annex, para. 71.

4

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. 94.I.18 and corrigenda),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5

A/52/319.

6

Ibid., para. 20.

7

Resolution S-19/2, annex, appendix.
/...

A/RES/52/202
Page 3

8. Calls upon Governments, as well as the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, other intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, to continue to take the
necessary actions for effective follow-up to the Barbados Programme of Action, including action to ensure
the provision of the means of implementation under chapter XV thereof, the commitments and
recommendations that were made at the Global Conference, and the modalities that it adopted for the full
and comprehensive review of the Programme of Action;
9. Takes note with appreciation of modalities that have been instituted by the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize resources,
including technical capacity for small island developing States, with respect to the further implementation
of the Programme of Action, and in that regard requests the Secretary-General to implement fully the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 51/183 and 51/185 of 16 December 1996;
10. Calls upon the bilateral and multilateral donor communities to mobilize adequate financial resources
to supplement efforts by small island developing States, at both the national and the regional levels, in the
implementation of the programmes referred to in paragraph 5 above, including support to existing regional
and subregional institutions;
11. Welcomes the action taken by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, in collaboration with
the United Nations Development Programme, as regards a meeting between representatives of small island
developing States and prospective bilateral and multilateral donors, and stresses the need for further
collaboration among small island developing States and agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system to facilitate preparation of project portfolios;8
12. Requests the secretariat of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, in cooperation
with the international community, to enhance efforts in respect of coordination activities within the United
Nations system and to strengthen national and regional partnerships for a disaster reduction strategy for the
twenty-first century,9 including requirements for effective disaster reduction and prevention capacities and
measures for small island developing States in line with resolution 51/183;
13. Urges the international donor community, including international financial institutions, to support
adaptation efforts by small island developing States to cope with the threatening sea-level rise that may be
experienced as a consequence of the impact of greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere;
14. Welcomes the activities undertaken by the Global Environment Facility, in accordance with its
operational strategy, and invites it, in accordance with relevant provisions of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change10 and the Convention on Biological Diversity,11 and the decisions of its
Council, to support further the objectives of the Barbados Programme of Action;
15. Notes the progress in the development and compilation of a vulnerability index for small island
developing States, in collaboration with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other
relevant organizations, and invites all relevant actors to continue to support the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs on further work in refining the index, as necessary;12

8

A/52/319, paras. 8-10.

9

Ibid., para. 14.

10

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.

11

See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law and
Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
12

A/52/319, paras. 3-7.
/...

A/RES/52/202
Page 4

16. Invites the Commission on Sustainable Development, the United Nations Environment Programme
and other relevant United Nations bodies, funds and programmes, and the World Tourism Organization, to
develop urgently strategies with existing national, regional and subregional tourism organizations in small
island developing States to further facilitate sustainable tourism development as an essential element towards
an action-oriented international programme of work on sustainable tourism;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session, under the item entitled
"Environment and sustainable development", the sub-item entitled "Implementation of the outcome of the
Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States";
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session a report
on actions taken to implement the present resolution and paragraph 10 of Assembly resolution 50/116 of 20
December 1995.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
