United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.23

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

23

rd meeting
Monday, 8 December 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
The President: I declare the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly on illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory resumed, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution ES-10/13 of 21 October
2003, whereby the Assembly decided to adjourn the tenth
emergency special session temporarily and to authorize
the current President of the General Assembly to
resume its meeting upon request from Member States.
In this connection, I should like to draw the
attention of delegations to document A/ES-10/249, which
contains a letter, dated 1 December 2003, from the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Kuwait
to the United Nations, in which he requested, on behalf of
the States Members of the League of Arab States, the
resumption of the tenth emergency special session; and to
document A/ES-10/251, which contains a letter, dated 3
December 2003, from the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia to the United Nations in his capacity as
Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and by which he conveys the support of the
Non-Aligned Movement for the request for the
resumption of the tenth emergency special session.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/ES-10/250)
The President: In keeping with the established
practice, I should now like to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/ES-10/250, which

(Saint Lucia)

contains a letter addressed to the President of the
General Assembly by the Secretary-General, informing
the Assembly that 12 Member States are in arrears in
the payment of their financial contributions to the
United Nations under the terms of Article 19 of the
Charter. May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of this information?
It was so decided.
The President: In this context, I would like to
clarify that, in accordance with Article 19 of the
Charter and resolution 58/1 of 16 October 2003, two
Member States will not be allowed to vote.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Report of the Secretary-General (A/ES-10/248)
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.16)
Draft decision (A/ES-10/L.17)
The General Assembly will now resume its
consideration of agenda item 5, entitled “Illegal Israeli
actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
In connection with this item, the General Assembly
has before it a draft resolution, issued as document

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-64427 (E)

*0364427*

A/ES-10/PV.23

A/ES-10/L.16, and draft decision, issued as document
A/ES-10/L.17.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Kuwait to introduce draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16 and
draft decision A/ES-10/L.17.
Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me pleasure, as I speak before you in my capacity
as Chairman of the Arab Group, to extend our thanks to
you for your response to resume the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly on the illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory. We also thank the
Secretary-General of the United Nations for his report
submitted in pursuance of resolution ES-10/13 adopted
by the tenth emergency special session on 21 October
2003, in which the Assembly requested Israel to stop
and reverse the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories because it violates the Armistice
Line of 1949 and breaches the norms of relevant
international law. As was expected, the report of the
Secretary-General reaffirmed in clear terms that Israel
does not respect and disregards deliberately international
resolutions, and ignores the serious implications of its
policies and practices that contravene the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The Secretary-General concluded in his report
that Israel has not complied with the General Assembly
resolution that demanded that the construction of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territories be stopped
and reversed. The report further indicated that the
Israeli Government has continued to confiscate land in
order to build the barrier with serious implications on the
economic and humanitarian conditions of the Palestinian
people. All reports of international observers have
concluded that the construction of the wall would
dissect the West Bank, isolate Palestinian territories
and restrict the movement of Palestinian goods and
citizens, in clear violation of the norms and provisions
of the International Covenants on Human Rights.
The Arab position regarding the construction of
this wall is clear and explicit and has been expressed
on several occasions, both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council. This position emanates
from our deep conviction that Israeli practices and
policies in the occupied territories violate international
law and United Nations resolutions and do not
demonstrate in any meaningful way a genuine desire by

2

Israel to reach a just, comprehensive and durable peace
with regard to the Palestinian issue. Israeli measures
and actions are trying to impose a fait accompli on the
ground, including the confiscation of land, recurrent
incursions into land under Palestinian Authority control,
continued building of settlement posts and detention of
civilians and closures. They do not lead to building
confidence and they create unfavourable conditions for
the continuation of negotiations. Persistence in these
policies will undermine all prospects for peace and will
create obstacles and difficulties to the implementation
of international initiatives especially the road map,
which was developed and sponsored by the Quartet and
was supposed to lead to the establishment of an
independent, viable Palestinian State.
We condemn those Israeli practices and policies,
which have aggravated the suffering of the Palestinian
people, and we call upon the international community
to fulfil its obligations and compel Israel to respect
international legality and cease forthwith pursuing
those policies that will undoubtedly lead to further
deterioration of the security situation and to increase
instability in the region. The Israeli Government must
realize that these measures and policies, which aim at
perpetuating the occupation and seizing more land, will
not achieve the security that it strives to impose, and
that the only viable option aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, lasting and just settlement must be based
on United Nations resolutions, especially Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and the land-for-peace principle, as well as on
fulfilling all obligations relating to the road map, as
endorsed by Security Council resolution 1515 (2003).
I have the honour, on behalf of the sponsors of
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16, namely, Jordan, United
Arab Emirates, Indonesia, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam,
Bangladesh, Tunisia, Algeria, the Comoros, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, South Africa, Djibouti, Senegal, the
Sudan, Somalia, Oman, Qatar, Cuba, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Egypt, Morocco, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, Mauritania, Namibia, Yemen and Palestine, and
of draft decision A/ES-10/L.17, namely, Jordan, United
Arab Emirates, Indonesia, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam,
Bangladesh, Tunisia, Algeria, the Comoros, South
Africa, Djibouti, Senegal, the Sudan, Somalia, Oman,
Qatar, Cuba, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Egypt,
Morocco, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Mauritania,
Namibia, Yemen and Palestine, to introduce the two
drafts.

A/ES-10/PV.23

We are introducing these drafts in the wake of the
issuance of the Secretary-General’s report, which
indicates that Israel has failed to comply with the
General Assembly resolution to halt and reverse the
construction of the barrier. The two drafts are being
introduced also as a follow-up to General Assembly
resolution ES-10/13, dated 21 October 2003, which
was adopted at the resumed tenth emergency special
session.
That resolution represents for us an extremely
important step, showing in clear terms the legal
implications of the construction of the wall in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.
The draft resolution before you today reaffirms the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention and its
Additional Protocol to the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. It reaffirms the need
to end the conflict on the basis of the establishment of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living in peace side by side
according to the Armistice Line of 1949. It also
underlines the fact that, with the passage of time, the
conditions on the ground will become more difficult
because of the construction of the wall, which can only
have serious and dire consequences.
In conclusion, the draft resolution in its first
operative paragraph decides, pursuant to Article 96 of
the Charter of the United nations to call on the
International Court of Justice, pursuant to article 65 of
the Statute of the Court, to urgently render an advisory
opinion on the following question: What are the legal
consequences arising from the construction of the wall
being built by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in and
around East Jerusalem — as described in the report of
the Secretary-General — bearing in mind the rules and
principles of international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, and relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions?
We hope that all Member States will support the
draft resolution by voting in favour, which would
reflect a vote in favour of respecting the rules and
principles of international law.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): In
his report to the General Assembly, submitted pursuant
to the request made by the tenth emergency special
session in its resolution ES-10/13, the SecretaryGeneral reached the conclusion that

“Israel is not in compliance with the Assembly’s
demand that it ‘stop and reverse the construction
of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory’” (A/ES-10/248, summary)
Moreover, resolution ES-10/13 stated that, upon receipt
of the report, “further actions should be considered, if
necessary, within the United Nations system”.
All of this is very clear. Israel has not complied
with the resolution and therefore further actions must
be taken. As you are all aware, we believe that further
possible action at this stage is to request an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice about
the legal consequences arising from the construction of
the wall by Israel, the occupying Power, in disregard of
the relevant provisions of international law, as well as
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.
In the absence of any other specific practical
measures to compel Israel to stop building the wall and
to dismantle the existing parts we must, at a minimum,
seek to affirm the legal aspects of this matter, such as
the illegality of the wall and the necessity of nonrecognition of the wall and its implications by States
and by the United Nations system. We also hope that
that will put additional pressure on Israel, the
occupying Power, so that it will comply with and
adhere to the provisions of international law and the
will of the international community.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
addresses the previously mentioned report of the
Secretary-General, and we hope that it will be adopted
by an overwhelming majority. In our view, all lawabiding nations that believe in the importance of
respecting the law and working within the United
Nations system should support the draft resolution
before us today. There is no credibility to the opposing
argument, particularly in light of Israel’s intransigent
stance on the ongoing construction of the wall, in
flagrant disregard of international opinion.
With regard to the expansionist conquest wall, its
nature and its function, the accompanying confiscation
of land, the creation of enclosed areas, and, finally, its
humanitarian and socio-economic impact, we do not
feel it is necessary to expand on the report of the
Secretary-General (A/ES-10/248). That report presents
the facts as they are on the ground and does so in
greater detail than my delegation was able to do in our
presentations in the General Assembly and the Security

3

A/ES-10/PV.23

Council. Now that the facts have been confirmed, we
feel that it is our right, on behalf of the Palestinian
people, to ask how this could possibly happen? How is
it possible to allow the destruction of the livelihood of
tens of thousands of people through the confiscation of
their lands and the destruction of their farms? How is it
possible to allow the confinement of thousands of people
within walls from which they can enter and exit only
through a gate? What is happening is the enslavement of
the whole Palestinian people, who are being increasingly
cantonized by the Israeli fascist colonial occupier. It is the
shame of the century. It is the shame of the twenty-first
century, which cries out for serious action to be taken to
stop the construction of the wall.
Above and beyond our feelings and our deep
wounds, I would like to highlight two matters that we
think are quite clear in the Secretary-General’s report.
First, the wall cannot be considered a security
measure. That pretext was used before to justify the
colonization of our land. Israeli settlers were
encouraged to establish illegal settlements on our land
in what constitutes an immense war crime. Today, the
same excuse is being used to acquire our land by force
and to commit yet another immense war crime. The
issue was, and still is, the land, and the illegal
expansionist designs of Israel, at the expense of the
Palestinian people and their national existence.
In the 1948 war, immediately after the declaration
of its creation, Israel seized and began incorporating
more than half of the lands allocated by the United
Nations to the Arab State in the Partition Plan on the
pretext that it had been attacked by Arab countries. In the
1967 war, Israel occupied the remaining half of the land
allocated to the Arab State — which represents less than
one quarter of the Palestine of the Mandate — and for
over 36 years it has refused to withdraw from that land.
When the Palestinian leadership made the unprecedented,
historic compromise of accepting the coexistence of the
two States, with Palestine to be established only on the
territories occupied since 1967, Israel continued to
colonize our land and illegally transfer its citizens to it.
In the period following the initiation of the Oslo peace
process — including the period since the road map was
launched — the occupying Power has doubled the number
of its settlers. Now, Mr. Sharon and his Government want
to forcibly acquire half of the territory occupied since
1967, while simultaneously claiming that they want
peace and the implementation of the road map.

4

The Israeli Government is pursuing all these
policies while it has not even resolved the issue of the
ownership of land and properties in Israel itself. There
are 5.5 million dunums of land personally owned by
Palestinian refugees — and that represents claims
based on private ownership alone. Those claims have
been recognized and registered by the United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Palestine, composed of
the United States, France and Turkey. Five and a half
million dunums represents more than 40 per cent of the
territory of Israel, if we exclude the Negev desert.
Not only has Israel taken over that land instead of
returning it to its rightful Palestinian owners, it
continues to colonize the rest of the Palestinian land in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza
Strip, once again committing one of the biggest war
crimes of its kind in modern history.
Secondly, the wall means an end to the two-State
solution, and of course, the end of the road map, which
seeks to achieve that goal. In that respect it totally
violates Security Council resolution 1515 (2003).
Mr. Sharon and his Government have worked to
sabotage all attempts to stop the violence, halt the
deterioration of the situation and return to the path of
peace. They destroyed the Mitchell recommendations
and they are now destroying the road map, starting
with their reservations on the road map and now with
the construction of the wall. It is not possible to claim
willingness to implement the road map while building
the wall at the same time. For us, any negotiations are
meaningless without first stopping the construction of
the wall. For us, it is either the wall or the road map.
The entire international community, particularly the
Quartet, should take that same position.
If Israel continues building the wall, it will be the
end of the road map and the end of resolution 1515 (2003)
and there must be a reaction to that, particularly by the
Security Council. That reaction should take the form of
a comprehensive resolution in which the form of the
final settlement would be defined, while calling upon the
parties to negotiate its details. The Non-Aligned
Movement, in its last ministerial statement on Palestine,
has already called for that solution. It also called for
the United Nations to ensure that Israel’s credentials to
the General Assembly not be recognized as covering
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, as a first practical step in that regard.

A/ES-10/PV.23

I also wish to refer to the civil society initiatives
from both the Palestinian and Israeli sides with regard
to the form of the final settlement of the conflict,
including the use of the Geneva Accord as a useful
model upon which we can build. In that regard, we
reiterate our general support for the Geneva Accord.
The political meaning of what we are saying
should be clear: construction of the wall must be
stopped, at any cost. If we fail to do so, Israel should
have to bear the consequences and the international
community should accelerate the imposition of a final
settlement on both sides.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
cooperation with the request to resume the tenth
emergency special session. We believe that in the
future this meeting will be viewed as one of historic
importance. I would also like to express our thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for his report. Although it does not present any
analysis, the report contains an honest description of
the facts as they are and as we all know them.
Israel, on the other hand, has expressed extreme
indignation towards the report and has rejected it. Prior
to that, Israel also expressed extreme indignation
towards Security Council resolution 1515 (2003) and
considered it non-binding. This is part of Israel’s
definitive pattern in dealing with the United Nations,
its Members and its organs. During the current session
of the General Assembly, Israel has attacked the
following: members of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories; the Committee for the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People; the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
the Special Rapporteur on the right to food; the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral; the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA); and finally, the
overwhelming majority of Member States. Today, I am
certain we will hear yet another attack on the tenth
emergency special session and the General Assembly
itself. All these attacks represent the height of
insolence, arrogance and sense of superiority, and they
accuse others of being anti-Israel and sometimes even

anti-Semitic. All this reflects the classic thinking of
occupiers and colonizers and the arrogance of power. It
represents a combination of two elements: the
conviction that threats and intimidations will lead to
results and the inability to see things as they are.
The problem is not with the United Nations, it is
with Israel. The United Nations is the institution that
created Israel and nurtured it. The United Nations is
not anti-Israel, but it is opposed to the policies of Israel
that violate the Charter, international law and the
resolutions of the Organization based on that law. It is
opposed to the policies that have destroyed and continue
to destroy the lives and future of another people. The
United Nations wants peace and security for the Israeli
people, but it also wants peace, security and the right to
self-determination for the Palestinian people.
What is required, then, is not a change in the
position of the United Nations, but a change in the
policies and positions of Israel. Israel must understand
this and its main ally must stop pampering Israel through
automatic protection and pressure on others to accept
Israel’s positions. We must all reject the current unlawful
Israeli positions. If we are unable to change the
situation on the ground, we must at least insist here, in
the General Assembly, on affirming positions that are
correct.
In our world there is no room for walls, especially
if they are built in occupied territories, with the aim of
expansion and annexation. Let us unite to stop the war
and remove this destructive obstacle to peace. Let us
unite for peace. We trust that the judges of the
International Court of Justice will uphold international
law, thus contributing to the achievement of that goal.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): The temptation to dissect
the litany of lies that we have just heard is very, very
great. But the dangers in descending to that level seem
even greater and, because of this, I will stick to my
prepared statement.
I should stress at the outset that my comments are
without prejudice to our clear position of principle that
the convening of this emergency special session at the
behest of Syria and other delegations is in violation of
the fundamental conditions of the Uniting for Peace
procedure and the United Nations Charter. As you
know, Mr. President, we have raised this concern with
you and with other delegations. The Palestinian side
has expressly claimed, both orally and in writing, that
this meeting is taking place under the Uniting for Peace
procedure, but one of the fundamental preconditions

5

A/ES-10/PV.23

for that procedure, namely the failure of the Council to
meet its responsibilities, is patently unfulfilled. This
requirement was not met last month when the Assembly
convened after the Security Council rejected the
resolution on the security fence, not because of a lack
of unanimity amongst members, but because of the
refusal of the sponsors of the draft resolution to engage
in any genuine negotiations on their blatantly one-sided
text. And this same requirement has not been met
today, barely a week after the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1515 (2003) on the road map. This
is far from the only defect with this meeting.
Let us leave aside for the moment the obvious
legal and political abuse involved in this never-ending
tenth emergency session, the procedural invalidity of
which is clear. Among other failings, this so-called
emergency session has taken place despite the fact that
the issue of requesting an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice was not even raised
before the Council, despite the fact that the Assembly
is presently in regular session and despite the fact that
a majority of Members have not requested that an
emergency session be convened. Let me be clear. We
consider the resolutions adopted by this so-called tenth
emergency session to be ultra vires and an abuse of the
powers of the General Assembly under the Charter.
We need not repeat in detail our arguments
regarding the legality of and necessity for the security
fence. Our position has been set forth both in the Council
and in the Assembly, as well as in correspondence with
the Secretary-General and in a variety of other official
documents and statements. As we have stated before,
Israel does not deny that in exercising its inherent right
to self-defence against terrorism of the most brutal
kind, it must act within the limits of international law.
But we do reject attempts to apply that law incorrectly
and selectively, to misrepresent the nature and purpose
of the security fence and to ignore the context in which
Israel’s actions are taken.
Let me be perfectly clear: this is the Arafat fence.
This is the fence that Arafat built. His terrorism
initiated it and made its construction inevitable. If there
were no Arafat, there would be no need for a fence. My
comments regarding the fence will be brief and nonexhaustive. The security fence is a temporary, proven,
necessary and non-violent measure adopted in
accordance with international and local law to defend
the people of Israel from a continuing and vicious
campaign of terrorism that has killed hundreds of
innocent civilians and will kill thousands more, if not

6

prevented. As long as the Palestinian leadership
continues to flout its most basic obligations to fight
terrorism, there is simply no alternative to it. Indeed,
the only reason for the construction of the fence is the
Palestinian strategy of terrorism. As soon as the terror
ends, the fence will no longer be necessary. The fence
is not a border and has no political significance. It does
not change the legal status of the territory in any way.
Israel remains committed to determining the final
status of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, including the
issue of the border, through negotiations as has been
agreed by the parties. As we have proven before, we
will be ready to dismantle or alter the route of the fence
in accordance with any political settlement reached. If
built along the 1949 Armistice Line, the so-called Green
Line, which was never intended to enjoy, nor has it every
enjoyed, legal status as an international boundary, the
fence would constitute an arbitrary and artificial line that
simply would not adequately fulfil its sole function: the
prevention of terrorist attacks against civilians. The
route of the fence is determined not by politics, but by
a difficult and painful balance between security,
humanitarianism and topographical considerations.
Israel is working to ensure that the fence does not
cause undue hardship to local Palestinian residents,
both through extensive consultations with the local
population over the route of the fence and through an
active process of appeals and judicial review. We will
continue to engage in this process and seek individual
solutions to problems that arise. At the same time, we
reiterate that the fence will allow a significant
reduction in the presence of Israeli forces in the West
Bank, thus improving overall humanitarian conditions
for the majority of Palestinian residents. We stress that
while the rights of local residents are legitimate and
important, we should not forget that the right not to be
murdered by terrorists is a right that is certainly no less
important and, if violated, is impossible to redress.
Some have argued that the fence is
counterproductive to the peace process and to future
negotiations. We believe this assessment to be mistaken
and unjustified. If anything, by reducing the capacity of
Palestinian terrorists to infiltrate and carry out acts of
terror, the fence will help take terrorism out of the
equation, restore calm and encourage an environment
in which negotiations and the implementation of the
road map can take place.

A/ES-10/PV.23

In those areas where it has been erected, the fence
has already significantly reduced the terrorist threat,
and it has aided in preventing multiple suicide attacks,
just in the last few weeks. If, because of the fence,
terrorism ceases to be a tool readily available to the
enemies of peace seeking to derail the process, the
chances of making progress at the negotiation table can
only be enhanced.
In fact, in spite of what some may perceive as a
recent calm, a very misleading recent calm, the
terrorists have not stopped for one minute to try and
carry out their barbaric acts. Since that horrific
bombing in Haifa on 4 October and up to 4 December,
a period of just two months, the Israeli security forces
have foiled 27 attempts to bring death and destruction
to Israel’s cities. Fourteen of these attempts were
suicide attempts foiled and stopped minutes before they
were to be perpetrated.
To give just one example, only last Wednesday,
Israeli forces arrested two suicide bombers who were
members of the Palestinian Authority’s own security
services and also affiliated with a terrorist organization,
Islamic Jihad, headquartered in Damascus, Syria. The
two terrorists, Munir Rabia and Murad Zeytun, were on
their way to perpetrate a suicide attack against Israeli
schoolchildren in a school in Yokneam near Haifa. If
this is not shocking enough, the terrorists are reported
to have told investigators that, in order to infiltrate into
Israel, they had sought out an area where the security
fence had not yet been constructed. Had they succeeded in
their horrific plan, innocent schoolchildren would have
been murdered in cold blood and attempts to restart the
peace process would have been seriously harmed. In
this reality, where Palestinian Authority employees
seek to murder schoolchildren, how can it be seriously
argued that the fence is counterproductive to the peace
process, when it is crucial to stopping the terror that
seeks to destroy that very process?
The fence is not an obstacle, not to a two-State
solution nor to the creation of a contiguous, viable and
democratic Palestinian State, living side by side in peace
and security with Israel. It will help create a terror-free
environment, in which a peace can be agreed through
negotiations, and when the terrorism has ended and
negotiations bear fruit, the fence can make way to any
territorial solution agreed upon by the parties.
Prompted as it was by a clearly one-sided
resolution, it is hardly surprising but still very unfortunate

that
the
Secretary-General’s
report,
document
A/ES-10/248, issued last Friday, should lack fairness,
balance and perspective. Even in its presentation of
Israel’s legal position, the report makes virtually no
reference whatsoever to the brutal and calculated
campaign of terrorism being waged against Israel,
which the fence is specifically designed to counter.
Since the outbreak of the latest wave of
Palestinian violence in September 2000, there have
been literally thousands of separate terrorist attacks:
bombings, rocket attacks, stabbings and shootings,
directed against both Jewish and Arab citizens of
Israel, by Palestinian terrorist groups. The planning and
preparation of such terrorist attacks, including megaterror attacks against targets such as skyscrapers, fuel
depots and chemical plants, continues unabated and
unrestrained by the Palestinian leadership and its
security personnel. The silence of the report on the
threat posed by Palestinian terrorism and the
complicity of the Palestinian leadership is
incomprehensible, given that the construction of the
fence is a response to that threat.
The question of whether Israel’s defensive
measures are permissible depends on whether they are
proportionate to the threat faced by Israel and its citizens.
As numerous leading scholars and judicial bodies,
including the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, have found, the determination as to
whether a defensive measure is disproportionate in any
given circumstance is a particularly complex and
delicate one that needs to be measured against the
amount of force or other defensive actions necessary to
remove the threat that is posed. It requires legal,
operational and security expertise, and a close
familiarity with the extent and nature of the threat.
And yet this fundamental principle of
proportionality, accepted in the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) legal position attached to the
report, is sadly quite absent from the report itself. To
the contrary, the report’s conclusion seems to rewrite
the international law of self-defence in a quite alarming
manner. The report states:
“I acknowledge and recognize Israel’s right and
duty to protect its people against terrorist attacks”,
but then it goes on the qualify this principle, saying
that not only must this duty be carried out in a way that
is in accordance with international law, but also it must
not make

7

A/ES-10/PV.23

“the creation of an independent, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State more difficult”
or increase “suffering among the Palestinian people”.
In other words, any Israeli measure, however many
innocent lives it may save and however much it may serve
to release the stranglehold of terrorists on Palestinian
society — if it has any impact, even temporary, on the
lives of Palestinians, it is unacceptable.
This is not just bad law, it is bad morality. Let us
be quite frank. There is no way of protecting the lives
of the innocent from terrorists who hide in the heart of
civilian areas without having some impact on the lives
of those the terrorists have chosen to hide among and
those that have chosen to offer them shelter. At a time
when every Israeli, and every Jew, is a declared target
for Palestinian terrorist organizations, the question is
how to allocate, humanely and effectively, the balance
of hardships between those who are blown up on buses
and those who are held up at checkpoints or are
otherwise disadvantaged. This is not an easy balance,
and the painful dilemma it poses is one that Israel
struggles with every day. But it is a dilemma which this
report seems not to have struggled with for one minute.
The approach of this report, like that of this
emergency session, which ignores the brutality of
Palestinian terror and the fundamental Palestinian
obligation — restated in every Israeli-Palestinian
agreement and at the very outset of the road map — to
fight
terrorism
and
dismantle
the
terrorist
infrastructure, is profoundly troubling. Not only will
the United Nations not call on the Palestinian side to
stop the terror, the report says, but this Organization
will not allow Israel to do it either.
Given the abundant energy and resources devoted to
examining Israeli defensive counter-terrorist measures, it
may be instructive to consider the Assembly’s response
to other actions embarked upon by States in fighting
terrorism. In past decades, literally thousands of civilians,
including Palestinian civilians, have been killed by certain
Arab States in the Middle East, often in the name of
fighting terrorism; and yet, the Assembly has remained
silent. In 1982, one State in the Middle East, claiming
to be fighting terrorist insurgents, murdered some
20,000 of its own civilians in the towns of Homs and
Hama; and yet, the Assembly remained silent.
Since that time and to this day, countless counterterrorist operations have been embarked upon, with a

8

greater or lesser degree of legitimacy. Whole cities
have been razed to the ground, thousands have been
killed, maimed or tortured by various countries around
the globe; and yet, the Assembly has been silent.
This sacred silence has been broken only in the
case of Israel. And each time, the Assembly has been
galvanized into action, not to condemn the brutal acts
of terrorism but to condemn Israel’s response to it.
After a two-State solution was rejected by the
Palestinian side at Camp David and after three years of
unending terrorism, Israel has reluctantly adopted a
non-violent defensive measure to protect its citizens
from death. It has done so while seeking to balance
security and humanitarian considerations and
exhibiting infinitely more concern for the welfare of
innocent civilians than either the terrorists or other
States that have been spared the scrutiny of the
Assembly have shown.
The double standards are astounding. Just last
week in the Third Committee, Israel was denied the
opportunity to present for vote a resolution on Israeli
children, even after a resolution on Palestinian children
was adopted. We were told then that Israeli children
deliberately targeted by terrorists would not receive the
protection of the Assembly. Today, we are being told
that we cannot even protect them ourselves.
How dare the people who would not even consider
protecting Israeli children by words tell Israel that it
cannot protect them by deeds? How low, how callous
can duplicity, hypocrisy and double standards sink?
These are the children we are talking about and
are trying to protect. This is Tomer Almog, age 9, who
was brutally murdered by a suicide bomber at a
restaurant in Haifa on 4 October. He was slain together
with his two grandparents, his father and his cousins,
while his family was peacefully sitting down to lunch
in a beachfront restaurant. And this is his brother, Oran
Almog, age 10, who lost his eyesight in the same
attack. One of his eyes was shattered, and while we
were all sitting here in this Hall last month cynically
having the same cynical debate in yet another
emergency special session, a world-renowned surgeon
in Birmingham, Alabama was trying to save the
beautiful eyes of this lovely little boy. Oran can now,
with one eye — the other was shattered completely —
barely distinguish between light and dark. But he is
watching us all today — he is watching this Assembly
today — to see whether we can distinguish between the

A/ES-10/PV.23

forces of light that seek to protect our children and the
forces of darkness that are trying to extinguish them.
But the double standards do not end there. If the
professed concern of the Assembly for the welfare of
Palestinian civilians were indeed genuine, we would
have seen by now a plethora of resolutions condemning
Palestinian terrorism and requesting the SecretaryGeneral to submit detailed reports on such things as the
misuse of funds by the Palestinian leadership, the
incitement of children to suicide terrorism, Palestinian
human rights violations and the policy of encouraging
and funding terrorist groups adopted by regimes in the
region.
Let us take corruption as an example. The
Palestinian economy has been plundered for years by
its own leadership, to the grave detriment of the
Palestinian people, without the General Assembly so
much as raising the issue for discussion. About one
month ago, an International Monetary Fund audit
uncovered the fact that between 1995 and 2000 Yasser
Arafat diverted fully $900 million from the Palestinian
Authority budget into a special bank account under his
personal and unmonitored control. Recent reports
indicate that Arafat’s office — his office alone, not the
Palestinian Authority — receives some $9 million a
month, a full $2 million more than the entire amount
allocated per month to the Palestinian health system.
European Union audits have disclosed that $20
million in Egyptian funds meant to build low-income
housing were instead turned into a luxury apartment
complex that was given over to top Palestinian
Authority officials and Arafat cronies. Money intended
for feeding, housing, clothing and educating
Palestinian civilians has been diverted, not just for
personal gain but to fund terrorist groups, including, as
was recently revealed, direct payments by the
Palestinian Authority of $50,000 a month to members
of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, responsible for
scores of suicide attacks in the past three years.
The majority of Palestinian people, who suffer
greatly as a result of this unprecedented corruption, are
denied full knowledge of these facts because of the
lack of a free press and of free access to information in
Palestinian society. But these facts are known to the
world and to this Assembly. Yet where is the
indignation? Much of the stolen money that perpetuates
and greatly exacerbates the humanitarian suffering of
innocent Palestinians is donor money. It is your money.

Yet where are the resolutions, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral, the demands that this policy — to use a familiar
phrase — cease and be reversed? Donor money flows
into the pockets of Arafat and his wealthy accomplices;
terrorism and incitement continue unabated; and all the
while anti-Israel initiatives, led by States that treat the
United Nations as their private property, take up hugely
disproportionate amounts of the Organization’s time and
resources, while poor and developing countries must
scramble and plead for the attention of the Assembly and
the assistance of the international community.
Israel is not immune from legitimate and balanced
criticism. But we have the audacity to demand that some
of the repressive regimes in our neighbourhood that
sponsor terrorism and systematically violate human
rights should be of equal, if not greater, concern to the
international community. At the very least, the
representatives of those regimes should not be allowed
to dictate the conduct of this Assembly. What has been
going on here is not justice or fair criticism; it is
hypocrisy and double standards. It is self-righteous,
self-serving and deeply counterproductive. It is the
United Nations at its worst. And it rewards terrorism.
The draft resolution presented for adoption at this
meeting again hopelessly fails to reflect the reality on
the ground or to help the Israeli and Palestinian peoples
move closer to a peaceful settlement. In the draft
resolution we are presented, yet again, with the harmful,
divisive, illegal and diversionary tactic of a request for an
advisory opinion. Instead of rejecting that destructive
idea out of hand, delegations are yet again expected to
plead, barter and compromise on principle in the hope
that it will be removed from the table. Surely by now
delegates must be aware that unless and until we stop
playing this game, the exploitation and extortion will
only continue. Israel will vote against the draft
resolution, and we strongly urge delegations that care
about peace, about the International Court of Justice
and about restoring the credibility and reputation of the
United Nations, to do the same.
The preposterous nature of the draft resolution
presented today is highlighted by the fact that it
pretends to seek guidance from the International Court
of Justice on the very issues on which the General
Assembly has already determined its response. If this
initiative was reckless and irresponsible when introduced
a month ago, it is patently absurd today. What guidance
is sought here? How exactly is it relevant to the work
of the Assembly? And how can it be fair or just to

9

A/ES-10/PV.23

purport to seek legal advice on a non-violent defensive
measure adopted by Israel to protect against terrorism,
while ignoring the terrorism itself that destroys lives in
cold blood and without discrimination?
This is an abuse of the International Court of
Justice and of the advisory opinion procedure of the
highest order, and it constitutes a dangerous precedent
for all States. The politically biased text, rife with
supposed legal conclusions, makes a mockery of the
Court and threatens to undermine its status. Moreover,
it raises a question that directly relates to matters
fundamentally in dispute between various parties in the
region, when the parties have already agreed, and the
road map itself affirms, that these issues can only be
resolved by negotiation.
At a time when there is hope for renewing the
negotiating process through the road map, this proposal,
and the attempt to involve a new actor in the conflict, is
especially counterproductive. It will severely complicate,
undermine and delay — if not halt altogether —
current efforts to restart the implementation of the road
map. Indeed, it contradicts the very letter and spirit of
the road map and the role of the United Nations as one
of the main sponsors of the road map.
Either the Palestinian side must finally get serious
about complying with their obligations, or they can
continue to abuse multilateral forums to try to score
political and propaganda points. They cannot keep
doing both. It is our genuine hope that, after seeing the
misery and despair on all sides that its current strategy
has created, the Palestinian side will finally act to
confront terrorism and end incitement. The moment it
does so, it will find in Israel a willing partner. Until
then, the Arafat fence — the fence that Arafat’s actions
necessitated — will stand to protect our children from
further terrorism.
Today, the delegates in this Hall must ask
themselves one more question. The fifty-eighth regular
session of the General Assembly is coming to an end.
Looking back on it, we must ask ourselves if we are
proud of it. Have we accomplished anything? Have we
made the world a better place? Have we lived up to the
high standard and noble aims that you, Mr. President,
set for us in September? And today, especially, we
must ask one more question: do we lead, or are we
being misled? Are we doing right or are we being
manipulated? Do we stand for what is right and just, or
do we side with evil?

10

I raise these issues only to emphasize a point we
have made repeatedly in this Assembly. Peace,
prosperity and security for both Palestinians and
Israelis will not be found in this Hall or in any other
organ of the United Nations. Only the end of the
morally bankrupt strategy of terror that glorifies
murder as martyrdom would obviate the need for
Israeli security measures, including the security fence,
pave the way for peaceful negotiations and concessions
and end the suffering of both peoples.
No amount of United Nations debate, distorted
texts or abusive diplomatic manoeuvres can alter that
basic reality. No one-sided resolution, no ill-conceived
and harmful attempt to request an advisory opinion and
no report can substitute for it — unless, miraculously,
we find the courage to change. We all have the
opportunity to start doing that today by rejecting this
cynical draft resolution.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I do not wish to take too
much of the General Assembly’s time.
On behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting of the resumed tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly. The fact that this
meeting has been convened is extremely important. It
will enable the General Assembly to consider and
respond to the findings of the Secretary-General, as
contained in his report in document A/ES-10/248 of 24
November 2003, prepared pursuant to General
Assembly resolution ES-10/13. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his incisive and informative
report, which is extremely useful for the Assembly’s
deliberation on this important question.
It may be recalled that debate on this question
began in the Security Council on 14 October 2003. The
Council failed to act. The debate was brought to the
General Assembly during a resumed session of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly on 20
October 2003. On both occasions, the Non-Aligned
Movement stated its position on the Israeli expansionist
wall. The Non-Aligned Movement stated that the wall
was illegal, that it must be dismantled and that its
further construction must be immediately discontinued.
I wish to reiterate that position today as follows:
First, the wall, sections of which are constructed
deep inside the occupied Palestinian territory, departs
from the Armistice Line of 1949 and is therefore illegal
under international law.

A/ES-10/PV.23

Secondly, the wall gravely violates the Fourth
Geneva Convention in that it involves the illegal and de
facto annexation of massive areas of Palestinian land and
resources, the transfer of a large number of Palestinian
civilians and the further denial of the Palestinians’
human rights, resulting in further dire humanitarian
consequences for this already deprived people.
Thirdly, the wall presents a major obstacle to the
implementation of the road map, as it undermines the
creation of a viable contiguous Palestinian State and
thereby hampers the realization of the two-State solution.
Fourthly, the wall could trigger the end of the
Middle East peace process, since it has the potential for
provoking further, unprecedented violence among the
severely oppressed Palestinians in their desperate effort
to survive under the brutal oppression of the Israeli
Government.
The conclusions and observations made by the
Secretary-General have confirmed what the Non-Aligned
Movement has stated all along. The Secretary-General
has observed and concluded, inter alia, as follows.
First, Israel is not in compliance with the General
Assembly’s demand that it “stop and reverse the
construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory” (A/RES/ES-10/13, para. 1).
Secondly, the construction of the wall in the West
Bank is
“a deeply counterproductive act. The placing of
most of the structure on occupied Palestinian land
could impair future negotiations” (ibid., para. 29)
and
“damage the longer-term prospects for peace by
making the creation of an independently viable
and contiguous Palestinian State more difficult”
(ibid., para. 30).
Thirdly, the security of both Palestinians and
Israelis can be assured
“only through a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace settlement based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)” (ibid.,
para. 31).
As we revisit this question at this resumed tenth
emergency special session, it is clear that Israel has
chosen not to comply with the demand of the General
Assembly, which was clearly pronounced in resolution

ES-10/13. As of today, Israel has neither stopped nor
reversed the ongoing construction of the wall. Indeed,
Israel has released the first official map showing the
planned route of the wall and a declaration of intent to
complete it by 2005. The map was defiantly posted on
the web site of the Israeli Ministry of Defence on 23
October 2003, two days after the General Assembly
adopted resolution ES-10/13.
The Secretary-General’s report has confirmed
most of the facts that were available from various
sources, even before the Israeli Government released
the official map. The Secretary-General has stated that
Israel continues with the construction of the wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory along the north-east
boundary of the West Bank and East Jerusalem, with
the levelling of land for a section of the wall in the
north-west of the West Bank and with the issuance of
land requisition orders.
The Secretary-General has also stated that, based
on the route on the official map, approximately 975
square kilometres, or 16.6 per cent of the entire West
Bank, including the depth barriers and the portions in
East Jerusalem, will lie between the wall and the Green
Line. This area, the Secretary-General further states, is
home to approximately 17,000 Palestinians in the West
Bank and 220,000 in East Jerusalem. If the full route is
completed, 160,000 Palestinians will live in enclaves
completely encircled by the wall. The planned route
incorporates nearly 320,000 settlers, including
approximately 178,000 in occupied East Jerusalem.
The Secretary-General has also commented on
the humanitarian and socio-economic impact of the
wall on the Palestinians. He has stated that the wall
“appears likely to deepen the fragmentation of the West
Bank” (A/ES-10/248, para. 23). The Israeli checkpoints
and blockades would cause socio-economic harm to the
Palestinians, by, inter alia, severely limiting access to
land, jobs and markets. The town of Qalqiliya is
completely surrounded by the wall, according to the
Secretary-General, with “the only exit and entry point
controlled by an Israeli military checkpoint” (ibid.,
para. 24). This observation by the Secretary-General
has indeed confirmed what was previously stated by
many: Israel has virtually turned Qalqiliya into one
large prison, isolating the town’s 41,606 residents.
Similarly, other parts of the wall will create further
isolated enclaves, dislocating Palestinians from their
land and families.

11

A/ES-10/PV.23

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict can
only be achieved on the basis of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In addition, serious efforts must be undertaken to
achieve a two-State solution that would ensure the
creation of a sovereign, independent and viable State of
Palestine and the existence of Israel, both living side
by side in peace and security within secure and
recognized borders, as envisaged in Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that an
advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice
would provide an independent and impartial
pronouncement on the legal consequences arising from the
construction of the wall by Israel, taking into consideration
the rules and principles of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

Mr. Fall (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of my delegation, Senegal, I wish to associate myself
with the statement just made by our colleague, the
Ambassador of Malaysia, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I wish to thank you for having given me
the floor on this agenda item, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
The tenth emergency special session has been
reconvened once again because the Israeli Government
persists, alas, in ignoring resolution ES-10/13, adopted
by the Assembly on 21 October. You will recall that in
that resolution, the Assembly requires Israel to stop the
construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and
to restore the pre-existing situation since the unlawful
construction deliberately departs from the Armistice
Line of 1949, and thus contravenes relevant provisions
of international law.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that this
Assembly should muster the necessary political will,
wisdom and courage to decisively respond to this
question now before us. We remain fearful of the
inevitable damaging and dangerous consequences if the
wall were to continue along its planned route. The
Non-Aligned Movement firmly believes that the
passage of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16 today would
send a powerful message to Israel. It would also
demonstrate in a tangible way the continued concern
and sympathy of the General Assembly for the dire
plight of the Palestinian people, who have been
severely disadvantaged by the existence and continued
construction of the wall, and the plight of those who
have and will become virtual prisoners in their own
homeland behind the wall and the trenches, fences and
security roads. It would be most unfortunate and tragic
indeed if the General Assembly were to fail in its
responsibility to uphold justice and promote peace.
Justice must be done in Palestine and for the people of
Palestine, and it must be done expeditiously.

The Assembly today has before it a report
requested of the Secretary-General pursuant to that
resolution, and you will have seen that the SecretaryGeneral’s conviction is clearly established. It is
articulated in paragraph 28 of the report (A/ES10/248), which is crystal clear and has no need of
being explained, annotated or qualified. I quote the
Secretary-General:

The President: May I ask for a reduction in the
noise level, which has become very loud? I ask those
who are having their side meetings to please take their
seats, if possible, so that the speakers can be heard in
some degree of silence.

The Israeli Government still claims that the
building of the separation wall, coyly christened a
fence, forms part of its security measures and cannot be
likened to the delimitation of a political border, and
that this measure does not seek to prejudge or
anticipate the outcome of the negotiations on final
status. But if that is the case, we need to ask why Israel
did not build a wall parallel to the Green Line on its
own territory. This question was asked here in this very

I now give the floor to the representative of
Senegal, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

12

“In keeping with the request of the General
Assembly in resolution ES-10/13, I have
concluded that Israel is not in compliance with
the Assembly’s demand that it ‘stop and reverse
the construction of the wall in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory’.”
Undoubtedly, the report tells us in substance that
Israel is resolved to continue the construction of the
Barrier in defiance of the opinion of the international
community, and particularly that of the United Nations,
whose rights and competence in dealing with the
question of Palestine are being denied by Israel.

A/ES-10/PV.23

Hall on 20 October, without — and this is something
that I especially deplore — any satisfactory answer.
In actual fact, the configuration of the fence,
which Israel declared it is ready to change, is that of a
barrier reinforced by sophisticated and complex
auxiliary structures, in the form of a concrete wall, in
some places cutting deeply into Palestinian territory
and separating Palestinians from other Palestinians.
This Barrier is a means of unilaterally setting the
borders of the future Palestinian State — whatever our
Israeli friends may say — and this Barrier is likely,
without any doubt, to compromise negotiations on final
status once the parties reach that stage.
Moreover, the building of the wall has already put
a brake on Palestine’s economic development,
considerably worsened the humanitarian situation,
caused fragmentation in Palestinian society, and
exacerbated the already unbearable living conditions
for the Palestinians, who have thus been compelled to
leave their lands and to wander, dragging a burden of
despair, resentment and anger.
It is regrettable to see that the Israeli Government
thus far has turned a deaf ear to all the appeals and
admonitions of the international community to
dismantle the wall and put an end to such a disputed
project. The intransigence shown by the occupying
Power would seem to sound the death knell of the
efforts currently under way to reconcile the two parties
and bring them back to the negotiating table.
Yet today there is still a chance, however tenuous,
of relaunching the political process. The new
Palestinian cabinet is in place, and has declared itself
ready to restore public order to end the violence and to
work with the Israeli party. Talks are still going on,
admittedly laboriously, among Palestinian groups with
a view to a possible ceasefire with Israel. Civil society
has just launched the so-called two-track process by
publishing the Geneva initiative and the NusseibehAyalon declaration of principles. It is, nonetheless, the
case that the measures taken by Israelis on the ground
are utterly counterproductive in that they are likely to
undermine the delicate and praiseworthy endeavours of
the Quartet to restore peace.
Thus I need hardly state again that we shall never
tire of urging our Israeli friends to listen finally to the
voice of reason, to join the path of peace and heed the
urgent appeals of the international community by
immediately ceasing construction of the wall and

lifting the siege imposed on the Palestinian people,
including President Yasser Arafat, who remains
unjustly confined behind his very last line of defence in
the Muqata in Ramallah.
As Deputy Avraham Burg, the former President
of Knesset, graciously recognized with admirable
clear-sightedness, building walls or intimidating, less
still humiliating, an occupied people is not the way for
Israel to enjoy greater security. Rather the way is to
restore their confiscated lands and dignity and their
shattered hopes to the oppressed Palestinians. To our
Israeli and Palestinian friends, we would state once
again that the best way of putting an end to the conflict
is to achieve a comprehensive, peaceful settlement
based on the road map, which provides for two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security within secure and recognized borders on the
basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003) of the Security Council.
With this in mind and in our concern to make a
modest contribution to the plan to salvage the road
map, our Committee urges the General Assembly to
support the sponsors of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16
in their action. The specific objective in the light of the
report of the Secretary-General is to apply to the
International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion
on the legal consequences, considering international
law and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
arising out of the construction of the wall that Israel is
building in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
within and on the periphery of East Jerusalem.
In conclusion, it is my ardent hope that the
international community will remain all the more
watchful and do its utmost to induce Israel to abandon
immediately all its unlawful activities associated with
the building of the infamous Barrier. Our Committee
exhorts the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
Authority to commit themselves with determination to
political negotiations, their sole weapons being the will
and courage to work for peace, so as to make the
Middle East a prosperous region sheltering two States,
Israel and Palestine, in peaceful coexistence within
secure and internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): On behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference group at
the United Nations, I wish to thank you for convening
the resumed tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly. The General Assembly, in its

13

A/ES-10/PV.23

resolution ES-10/13, of 21 October 2003, adopted at
the resumed tenth emergency special session, decided
that the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory was “in departure of the Armistice
Line of 1949 and ... in contradiction to relevant
provisions of international law”. The Assembly
therefore “demand[ed] that Israel stop and reverse the
construction of the wall ...”.
The fact that Israel explicitly ignored the decision
of this Assembly and insisted, in its contempt for the
will of the international community, on continuing the
construction of the expansionist wall, brought the
Secretary-General to conclude, in his report contained
in document A/ES-10/248, that “Israel is not in
compliance with the Assembly’s demand”. The
Secretary-General details in his report the ongoing
Israeli activities with regard to the construction of the
wall, including land requisition, levelling of land and
the recent release of the first official map of the wall.
The report also details how the separation wall cuts
deep into the occupied West Bank up to 22 kilometres
from the Green Line and how it, if completed, will result
in de facto annexation of 16.6 per cent of the entire
West Bank, forcing about 300,000 Palestinians to live
in enclaves and in isolation from their agricultural
lands, markets, workplaces and public services.
The wall must be seen in the context of the
continued attempts by Israel to deprive the Palestinians
of their inherent national rights — this time under the
guise of security. It is along the same line of previous
attempts, such as Jewish settlement activities and
unlawful annexation of East Jerusalem. In constructing
the wall, the Israelis are intent on complementing and
underpinning their settlement building activities on
occupied Palestinian territory in contravention of
international law, as those settlements are the principal
beneficiaries of the wall.
The expansionist wall under construction marks
the beginning of a new phase in the plight of the
Palestinian people. The wall will cause direct harm to
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians living in dozens
of villages and towns. It means the demolition of more
Palestinian houses and businesses, the ruin of more
Palestinian lives and the further degradation of the
environment. As the latest report by Mr. John Dugard,
the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights in the Palestinian territories, indicates, the
Palestinians are moving out of their homes in the

14

affected areas to the security of what remains of Palestine.
The report specifies, for example that “already some 600
shops and enterprises have closed in Qalqiliya, as a result
of the construction of the Wall”. It concludes that, “The
Wall will therefore create a new generation of refugees
or internally displaced persons”. Thus, the magnitude
of the injustice resulting from the construction of the
separation wall is indeed alarming. If unchecked, it
would exacerbate the plight of the Palestinians and
render them even more desperate and with even less
hope for a better future. The enormous consequences
for the whole region would be self-evident.
Now that the unfortunate exercise of veto at the
Security Council has prevented it from fulfilling its
responsibility with regard to the Palestinian question
and that the recent decision of the General Assembly
has been flouted by Israel, this Assembly has to
proceed with the next necessary step. We believe that
the International Court of Justice, as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations system, is
competent and best placed to provide an advisory
opinion on the occupying Power’s legal obligations under
relevant provisions of international law with regard to the
construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the legal repercussions of such action.
Allow me to close by stressing the need to take
concerted action to uphold international law. The first
step is to provide overwhelming support to the draft
resolution before the Assembly.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the Associated Countries Bulgaria and
Romania, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, as
well as the European Fair Trade Association countries
Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.
After less than two months from its last meeting
on 20 October, this emergency special session is
convened again to discuss the issue of the barrier that
Israel is building in departure from the Green Line
within the occupied territory of the West Bank.
The European Union is particularly concerned by
the route marked out for the barrier in the occupied

A/ES-10/PV.23

West Bank. The envisaged departure of the barrier from
the Green Line could prejudge future negotiations and
make the two-State solution physically impossible to
implement. It would cause further humanitarian and
economic hardship to the Palestinians. Thousands of
Palestinians west of the fence are being cut off from
essential services in the West Bank. Palestinians east of
the fence will lose access to land and water resources.
In this context the European Union is alarmed by the
designation of land between the barrier and the Green
Line as a closed military zone. This is a de facto
change in the legal status of Palestinians living in this
area, which makes life for them even harder.
Hence the European Union has presented
resolution ES-10/13 approved by the General
Assembly on 21 October demanding Israel to stop and
reverse the construction of the barrier inside the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in and
around East Jerusalem, which is in departure of the
armistice line of 1949 and is in contradiction to the
relevant provisions of international law.
The European Union thanks the SecretaryGeneral for the detailed and pertinent report he
presented pursuant to this resolution. The European
Union shares the concerns expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in this report and fully supports the
observations he made.
The European Union regrets the fact that Israel,
according to the report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to General Assembly resolution ES-10/13, is
not in compliance with the Assembly’s demand that it
stop and reverse the construction of the wall in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
The European Union believes that the proposed
request for an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice will not help the efforts of the two
parties to relaunch a political dialogue and is therefore
inappropriate. It is for that reason that the European
Union will abstain on the relevant draft resolution
before the emergency special session.
The European Union remains firmly committed to
the clear objective of two States — Israel and a viable
and democratic Palestinian State — living side by side
in peace and security within the framework of a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, as laid out in
the road map presented by the Quartet to the parties on
30 April 2003. In that context, the European Union

welcomes the unanimous endorsement of the road map
by the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003).
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
situation in the region and has noted that, despite the
international community’s support for the quest for a
just and lasting solution, so far the parties concerned have
not made a sufficient effort to seize the opportunity for
peace outlined in the road map. We therefore call once
again on both parties — Israel and the Palestinian
Authority — to live up to the commitments they
undertook at the Aqaba Summit on 4 June 2003, and
stress the need for rapid implementation of the road
map and compliance with its provisions.
The European Union also urges all sides in the
region to immediately implement policies conducive to
dialogue and negotiation. The European Union’s
relations with those that take steps in a contrary
direction will inevitably be affected by such behaviour.
Despite the bleak picture presented in recent
months, the European Union welcomes and is encouraged
by new initiatives from Israeli and Palestinian civil
society
aimed
at
promoting
rapprochement,
confidence-building and the establishment of a lasting
peace. The Geneva initiative confirms civil society’s
willingness to attain peaceful coexistence by means of
two independent, viable and prosperous States, living
side by side in security, to the benefit of all Israelis and
Palestinians, as well as of all countries in the region. It
is also helpful to increase public awareness on both
sides of the need to identify the necessary actions and
reciprocal concessions that will have to be made to
achieve a negotiated settlement of the conflict.
In that regard, the European Union considers the
document presented on 1 December in Geneva to be a
valuable contribution by civil society in support of the
Quartet’s road map — which remains the only path for
the immediate resumption of the peace process.
The European Union wishes once again to
emphasize its strong condemnation of the suicide
attacks and other acts of violence that have recently
occurred in the region and calls on all sides to refrain
from any provocative acts that could further escalate the
situation. Terrorist attacks against Israel have no
justification whatsoever. The European Union
reiterates that the fight against terrorism in all its forms
remains one of their priorities, as well as of the entire
international community. It is the duty of all countries,
in particular of those in the region, to actively

15

A/ES-10/PV.23

cooperate in the fight against terrorism and to refrain
from supporting terrorist organizations, either directly
or indirectly.
The European Union also stresses once again that
the Palestinian leadership must concretely demonstrate
its determination in the fight against extremist
violence, in compliance with the road map. We urge the
Palestinian Government and the Palestinian President
to take immediate steps to confront individuals and
groups conducting and planning terrorist attacks. The
European Union still believes that the Palestinian
security services should be consolidated under the
control of the Prime Minister and the Interior Minister.
While recognizing Israel’s right to protect its
citizens from terrorist attacks, the European Union
urges the Government of Israel, in exercising that right,
to fully respect international law, in particular human
rights and international humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention; to take maximum
precautions to avoid civilian casualties; and to take no
action that aggravates the humanitarian and economic
plight of the Palestinian people. It also calls on Israel to
abstain from any punitive measures that are not in
accordance with international law, including extrajudicial
killings, and to reverse its settlement policy and
dismantle settlements built after March 2001.
In conclusion the European Union wishes to
reiterate once again its determination to contribute,
with its partners in the Quartet, to re-launching the
peace process through the rapid implementation of the
road map. In that connection, we stress the importance
and urgency of setting up a credible and effective thirdparty monitoring mechanism for the road map that
includes all member of the Quartet.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency session on
the ongoing construction of the separation wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
concise and factual report he has prepared
(A/ES-10/248). In addition, we would like to associate
ourselves with the statement delivered by Malaysia, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The last time we assembled here, on 21 October
2003, the European Union and its associated States
introduced resolution ES-10/13, demanding that Israel
stop and reverse construction of the wall in the

16

occupied Palestinian territory. That was a landmark
resolution and more than 100 Member States joined the
European Union in sending a clear message to Israel
that the construction of a wall on Palestinian land is
illegal. At the same time, the resolution requested the
Secretary-General to submit the report that we now
have before us (A/ES-10/248) on Israel’s compliance
with the resolution, for further action by the
international community. The question before this
Assembly today is whether the sponsors and other
supporters of resolution ES-10/13 can summon the
necessary political will to take that further action,
within the United Nations system, to address noncompliance with that important resolution. The world
is watching to see whether we are prepared to move
from words to action: whether we will directly support
the peace process by taking steps to stop the parties
from acting in ways that are inconsistent with the
Quartet’s road map. All too often the General
Assembly has been criticized for passing resolutions
that are never implemented. Today we have an
opportunity to act.
The Secretary-General’s report informs us in
clear and unambiguous terms that construction of the
separation wall is ongoing and that Israel is not in
compliance with the demands of the United Nations.
The report makes the important point that, in the midst of
the process to implement the road map — which requires
each party to make confidence-building gestures in good
faith — the construction of the wall can only be
regarded as a counterproductive act that could impair
future negotiations. Furthermore, the report raises
serious concerns about the wall’s violation of the rights
of the Palestinian people to work, health, education and
an adequate standard of living. Palestinians who find
themselves trapped between the Green Line and the
separation wall would now be required to renew even
short-term permits to continue living on their own land.
The Palestinians have asked that we refer the
legal issues related to the construction of the wall to
the International Court of Justice (ICJ) for an advisory
opinion. A clear precedent already exists for such an
approach. In 1971 the Security Council called for an
advisory opinion from ICJ on the legal consequences
for States of the occupation of Namibia. That opinion
proved to be a turning point in the long struggle for
independence in that country. We believe that
Palestinians and Israelis alike would similarly benefit
from a ruling by ICJ. The General Assembly would no

A/ES-10/PV.23

more endanger the political neutrality of the Court by
requesting its assistance on the matter, in line with the
Charter, than the Security Council did in the case of
Namibia.
The statistics provided in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/ES-10/248) on the numbers of Palestinians
who have been, or shortly will be, imprisoned by the
wall or otherwise cut off from their places of worship,
agricultural lands, markets, sources of employment,
schools and fellow citizens are deeply disturbing.
However, no statistics can truly convey the magnitude
of the human misery and destruction that the separation
wall has brought to both sides.
Due to the ongoing construction of the wall and
settlements, the Palestinian peace camp now finds final
status issues predetermined in ways that are not
favourable to the creation of a viable, independent and
democratic State of Palestine. For the Israeli peace
camp, the separation wall represents the failure of a
decades-long effort to protect the Jewish identity of the
State of Israel over the long term by trying to establish
good neighbourly relations with the Palestinians and
the rest of the Arab world.
There is an alternative path to the self-perpetuating
and self-defeating policies of confrontation and violence.
The parties could choose, instead, to re-embark on the
path of direct negotiations and to call for increased
international assistance from the United Nations to
monitor the implementation of any agreements they
reach.
The recent Geneva initiative by Palestinians and
Israelis who seek peace has demonstrated that each
side can, in fact, find a partner for peace. It also shows
that the principle of land for peace continues to offer
the only viable basis for a negotiated settlement of the
dispute. The time has come for Israel and Palestine to
take encouragement from this remarkable achievement
of private citizens and to make the painful
compromises that are sometimes necessary for peace.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The entire course of events thus far confirms
that it is not possible to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The status quo is entirely untenable, since it is
not in keeping with the interests of either party. The
Palestinians will not be able to achieve creation of their
national homeland and the Israelis will not be able to
ensure their national security.

Security Council resolution 1515 (2003) has
become a unanimous appeal to the parties, in close
interaction with the Quartet of international mediators,
to immediately begin implementing the road map,
which has now achieved international legal status. It is
important to now restore direct Palestinian and Israeli
dialogue. Russia hopes that this will be furthered by
the prompt holding of a meeting between Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon and the head of the Palestinian
cabinet, Mr. Qurei.
In accordance with the road map, the Palestinian
Authority needs to take effective measures to halt the
actions of extremists against Israeli civilians. We note
efforts taken in this regard by the Palestinians, drawing
on the important assistance from Arab States,
especially Egypt. The Israeli leadership, in turn, needs
to implement its obligations under the road map, that
is, to refrain from the disproportionate use of force and
extrajudicial killings, to take effective steps to ease the
economic burden on the Palestinian people and to end
such impediments to peace as settlement activities and
the construction of the dividing wall.
This has been clearly called for by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (A/ES-10/248) pointing out that
Israel is not in compliance with the requirements of the
General Assembly. No one can deny Israel’s right to
protect its citizens, but this right should not be
exercised by cutting off other people’s lands or
contravening the norms of international humanitarian
law. Such action cannot be allowed to jeopardize the
prospects for establishing an integral, viable
Palestinian State.
We understand the motives of the sponsors of the
draft resolution aimed at studying the legal
consequences of the construction of the wall. However,
such an approach, politically, would mean that the
international community condones the current
situation. In our view, at this juncture all efforts must
be focused on halting and reversing the construction of
the wall. This is called for in Security Council
resolution 1515 (2003) and General Assembly
resolution ES-10/13. This has been firmly advocated by
all members of the international Quartet of mediators.
Therefore, we should not now stand idly by nor
create the impression that the worst-case scenario is
inevitable, but bring to bear the entire arsenal of
political means in order to ensure implementation of
the decisions that have already been adopted by the

17

A/ES-10/PV.23

international community. We believe that the General
Assembly and the Security Council need to continue to
closely monitor this process, while supporting the
efforts of the Quartet. Russia, in close cooperation with
the United Nations, the United States and the European
Union, will continue active work to achieve a
Palestinian, Israeli and comprehensive regional
settlement based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
Mr. Wagaba (Uganda): Our delegation has noted
the Secretary-General’s report, contained in document
A/ES-10/248. Uganda remains a firm supporter of the
Palestinian cause, and our proposed course of action
should be seen in that light. We are looking for ways of
bringing both sides back to the negotiating table.
Uganda supports a two-nation policy, whereby
the State of Israel and the Palestinian State exist side
by side in peace, each State with internationally
recognized and secure borders. It is within this context
that the conflict in the Middle East should be
addressed, and as a way forward, the ongoing Quartetled road map for peace initiative should continue to be
supported. On 19 November 2003 the Security Council
adopted resolution 1515 (2003) supporting the road
map. This mechanism should be given a chance.
The international community, especially the
United Nations, should be part of the solution and not
be seen as a part of the problem in the search for peace
in the Middle East. Adopting resolutions to condemn
one side would only harden attitudes, a fact to which
the statements by the main protagonists this morning
have eminently borne testimony. The United Nations
should endeavour to bring the two sides, the
Palestinians and the Israelis, together to the negotiating
table to arrive at an amicable solution.
Resolutions should not be perceived as solutions
per se or solutions in themselves, but as viable means
to a solution. Without minimizing the importance of
resolutions as a way of garnering international pressure
for a particular cause, Uganda believes that if adopting
resolutions has not produced the desired results to date,
an alternative mechanism should be found. The
solution lies in a negotiated settlement by both sides.
That is why, in our opinion, referring the matter to the
International Court of Justice would not serve the cause
of peace. We should avoid politicizing the Court, as
this would undermine its impartiality and credibility.
Furthermore, going to the International Court of Justice

18

would amount to forum shopping when there is already
a mechanism through the Quartet-led road map to
address the issue.
Uganda will continue to support all international
efforts aimed at bringing about a just and equitable
resolution to the conflict and we believe that this
General Assembly, the most representative and most
universal of all such assemblies, can play a vital role in
bringing the parties back to the negotiating table. We
call upon all nations to support that process.
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for presenting the report pursuant to
the provisions of General Assembly resolution
ES-10/13, issued as document A/ES-10/248. My
delegation would also like to associate itself with the
statement made by Malaysia on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The construction of a separation wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory is part of the lengthy
history of aggression, illegal settlements, occupation
and violation of the most fundamental and inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. The inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force, which became an
accepted principle of international law, was clearly
addressed by this Assembly in its resolution 2625
(XXV), when it considered the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
For that reason, the international community has
always refused to recognize the unlawful Israeli
settlements and Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem and
the Golan, as noted respectively in Security Council
resolutions 465 (1980), 478 (1980) and 497 (1981).
Israel is presenting the building of the separation
wall between Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory as a security measure, but the wall is being
built on Palestinian territory and is intended, according
to its placement on the official maps, to enclose 16.6
per cent of the total area of the West Bank, including
agricultural land and water resources and villages,
representing a de facto annexation in which the
security situation is being manipulated as a crass
pretext for Israel’s territorial expansion.
The building of the separation wall, the expansion
of settlements and the construction of security roads

A/ES-10/PV.23

between the settlements themselves, and between them
and Israel, together represent a clear territorial
expansion, to the detriment of the Palestinian people
and their inalienable right to self-determination and to
establish their own independent and sovereign State.
The construction of the wall raises a real question
concerning Israel’s sincerity in pursuing a genuine
peace process in a serious and responsible fashion. The
bantustanization of the occupied Palestinian territories
entails further physical alterations which complicate
even more any possible future negotiations on
permanent status, and negates the possibility of
establishing a contiguous Palestinian State throughout
its entire territory.
The international community must be cognizant
of those violations and their consequences, for the
present and the future. The use of force cannot lead to
the solution the world anxiously awaits, of a conflict
that should have been resolved many years ago.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
This emergency special session which has been
ongoing since 1997 does not contribute to the shared
goal of implementing the road map. The path to peace
is the Quartet performance-based road map to a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The road map, endorsed in Security Council
resolution 1515 (2003), very clearly outlines the
obligations and responsibilities of the parties to achieve
President Bush’s vision of two-States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in peace and security.
The international community has long recognized
that resolution of the conflict must be through
negotiated settlement, as called for in Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). That was
spelled out clearly to the parties in the terms of
reference of the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991.
Involving the International Court of Justice in this
conflict is inconsistent with that approach and could
actually delay a two-State solution and negatively
impact road map implementation. Furthermore, referral
of this issue to the International Court of Justice risks
politicizing the Court. It will not advance the Court’s
ability to contribute to global security, nor will it
advance the prospects of peace.
The United States policy on Israeli construction
of the fence is clear and consistent. We oppose
activities by either party that prejudge final status
negotiations. President Bush said on 19 November

2003, “Israel should freeze settlement construction,
dismantle unauthorized outposts and the daily humiliation
of the Palestinian people and not prejudice final
negotiations with the placements of walls and fences”.
But this meeting today and this draft resolution
undermine rather than encourage direct negotiations
between the parties to resolve their differences. This is
the wrong way and the wrong time to proceed on this
issue. Furthermore, the draft resolution itself is onesided and completely unbalanced. The text itself is
clearly not designed to promote a process towards
peace. It doesn’t even mention the word “terrorism”.
We will vote against this ill-advised resolution and
urge Assembly members not to support it.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16 and draft
decision A/ES-10/L.17.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): We will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us. As this draft resolution,
if adopted, will carry the issue to another forum, the
legal one, I would like to explain our views on the
matter. We agree with much of the contents of the
statement made by the presidency of the European
Union. However, we believe that the political process
and the process of obtaining a legal opinion are not
mutually exclusive.
We think that the wall, or security fence or
barrier — whatever one may wish to call it — might
commit a fundamental wrong against the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples alike. It is a blunt tool that punishes
both the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples —
including women, children and the elderly — by
condemning them to live behind gates. As such, we
feel that it might play into the hands of the terrorists,
who aim to polarize both societies and block any
progress towards a just and lasting peace.
We believe that another reason why the wall is
wrong is the fact that it is being built on other people’s
land. We feel that, as that man-made obstacle is
constructed, Palestinian society will be pushed towards
further desperation and the radical elements within that

19

A/ES-10/PV.23

society will gain the upper hand. That is clearly not
what Israel would want to achieve. It is our strong
belief, therefore, that it is our joint duty to speak out
and tell our Israeli friends that that is not in the
interests of anyone, including themselves.
Before concluding, I would like to say a few
words about the threat of terrorism that Israel is facing.
A series of heinous acts of terror may have pushed
Israel to build the wall. While we are trying to
convince Israel that that measure is excessive and must
be terminated, we must at the same time do our utmost
to convince the Palestinian leadership to prevent
terrorist attacks against innocent Israelis and dismantle
the terrorist infrastructure. The international community
will stand behind the Palestinian leadership in that line
of action. We call upon both sides to act with reason.
Excessive security measures and terrorism create a
vicious circle in the region, and the main victims are
innocent civilians on both sides. Our hearts go out to
the families of all the victims. They expect the two
sides to break the cycle they are trapped in and to put
their energy into finding a peaceful solution to the
problems they are facing. They should cast aside the
distorted maps they are using today and return to using
the road map, which has the backing of the whole
international community.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.16 and then on draft decision
A/ES-10/L.17.
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16 is entitled, “Illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,

20

Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Ethiopia, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16 was adopted by 90
votes to 8, with 74 abstentions (resolution
ES-10/14).
The President: Draft decision A/ES-10/L.17 is
entitled “Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
decision, I should like to announce that, since the

A/ES-10/PV.23

publication of the draft decision, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has become a sponsor of A/ES-10/L.17.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia

and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
The draft decision was adopted by 111 votes to 7,
with 55 abstentions.
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution and
decision just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom remains concerned about the route
marked out for the barrier in the occupied West Bank.
We regret that Israel has not complied with the General
Assembly’s demand, in resolution ES-10/13, that it
stop and reverse construction of the barrier inside the
occupied Palestinian territories. Nevertheless, the
United Kingdom abstained on the vote on the draft
resolution calling for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the wall. We consider it inappropriate,
without the consent of both parties, to ask the Court to
give an advisory opinion. Moreover, it is unlikely to
resolve the problem on the ground. This is not a case in
which the General Assembly genuinely needs legal
advice in order to carry out its functions. It has already
declared the wall to be illegal. The United Kingdom
voted in favour of that resolution. The question of the
wall can be settled only through direct negotiations
between the two parties and through positive action on
the ground in the framework of a comprehensive
settlement. To pursue an advisory opinion will in no way
help the parties to re-launch the much-needed political
dialogue necessary to implement the road map — and
implementing the road map should be the priority.
Mr. Mavroyiannis (Cyprus): I have taken the
floor in order to explain my Government’s position on
the draft resolution just adopted by the General
Assembly. As a long-standing and strong advocate of
strict compliance with international law in dealing with
and resolving international disputes, we believe that all
options and means provided for in the United Nations
Charter, including, in particular, judicial remedies and
advisory opinions of judicial bodies, should be
available in situations where we are faced with illegal
faits accomplis.

21

A/ES-10/PV.23

As an acceding country to the European Union,
Cyprus has decided, however, to join in the common
position of the Union and abstain in the vote. We did so
in order to preserve the cohesion of the European
Union and the necessary strength of its role as a
member of the Quartet in the current efforts to push
forward the negotiation process and advance in the
direction of full implementation of the road map.
Cyprus, due to its own painful experience, has a
special sensitivity towards artificial dividing lines and
walls, which do not promote the necessary goodwill
and understanding among peoples destined by
geography to coexist. In this regard, we fully subscribe
to the substance of the statement made by Italy, on
behalf of the European Union. The position of Cyprus
coincides with the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report, particularly his
assessment that the construction of this illegal barrier
causes additional hardship to the Palestinian people
and violates their rights.
Mr. Matsuura (Japan): Japan abstained from the
vote on draft resolution A/ES-10/L.16. However, as we
have expressed repeatedly, Japan is opposed to the
construction of the wall that extends inside the Green
Line because it not only negatively impacts on the lives
of the Palestinians but also prejudges the final status of
the negotiations. Once again, Japan urges the Israeli
Government to terminate the construction.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): With regard to draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.16, Canada abstained. While
Canada agrees that there could be legal questions
regarding the construction of this extensive barrier
within the occupied Palestinian territories, on which
the International Court of Justice could usefully
provide guidance, we nevertheless question whether
this request for an advisory opinion is a useful step at
this time, in this highly charged environment.
In addition, the General Assembly has already
expressed its opposition to the construction of this
barrier and has called for construction to cease and for
the sections of its route in deviation from the armistice
line of 1949 to be reversed. This conflict needs to be
resolved through negotiation. A unilateral re-partition
of land through the establishment of this barrier will
not lead to lasting peace.
Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland is firmly opposed to the construction of the
separation wall undertaken by Israel. The wall, which

22

is illegal under international law and contrary to the
road map, is a clear obstacle to the peace process and
the realization of the vision of two States. Switzerland
has already expressed on 21 October its position in its
vote in support of the draft resolution contained in
document A/ES-10/L.13, which calls for Israel to halt
construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories. It reiterated its position when it made its
statement on the situation in the Middle East on 2
December in the plenary meeting of the General
Assembly.
Despite our commitment to international law,
Switzerland abstained in the vote on the draft resolution
seeking to submit the question of the consequences of the
wall to the International Criminal Court. We do not
judge it to be appropriate in the current circumstances
to bring before a legal body a subject in which highly
political implications predominate.
Mr. Tan (Singapore): Singapore consistently
votes in favour of the Palestinian position in the
General Assembly. During the Assembly’s fiftyseventh session, we voted in support of all 17
resolutions on this issue. And thus far, we have also
voted in favour of the Palestinian position on all
relevant resolutions at the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly and at the recent meetings of the
emergency special session, including on resolution
ES-10/13 concerning the wall.
We do not support the actions of Israel in
building the wall. However, we have reservations about
seeking an International Court of Justice (ICJ) advisory
opinion on the Israeli wall, as there are wider
implications that cause us concern. As a small State,
we rely on the integrity of international law, of which
the ICJ is one of the most important pillars. We do not
consider it appropriate to involve the ICJ in this dispute
in this way. The underlying dispute is one concerning
territorial boundaries. This should be settled by
negotiation among the parties concerned or by the
binding decision of an appropriate international
tribunal such as the ICJ. An advisory opinion would
have no binding effect on the parties to this dispute or
on the General Assembly.
The purpose of seeking the advisory opinion of
the ICJ must be to assist or facilitate the work of the
General Assembly. In operative paragraph 1 of
resolution ES-10/13, the General Assembly has itself
already made the determination that the construction of

A/ES-10/PV.23

the wall by Israel is “in departure of the Armistice Line
of 1949 and is in contradiction to relevant provisions of
international law”.
That assessment must necessarily have been made
based on consideration of the obligations incumbent on
Israel. The ICJ’s advisory opinion does not formally
bind either party since it is made pursuant to the
advisory jurisdiction of the Court. Nor does it enable
the General Assembly to take any action more binding
than what it has already done in resolution ES-10/13.
On the contrary, posing the question might create the
impression that the General Assembly is not very sure
about the correctness of its early determination on the
legality of its Israel’s actions in resolution ES-10/13.
For the above reasons, we have abstained from the vote
on this draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote. One representative
has requested to exercise the right of reply. May I
remind Members that statements in the exercise of the
right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and to 5 minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The statement by the Israeli delegation
contained many false claims about my country. Those
claims represent a desperate attempt to justify Israeli
terrorist policies, but we shall desist from being drawn
in by such a blatant attempt to waste the General
Assembly’s time with rhetoric that will smother the
issue at hand. The international community has already
sided with this just cause, as we have seen in the just
concluded vote. The Israeli statement is yet another
element in the overall misinformation campaign by the
Government of Israeli to try to make the just cause of
the Palestinians appear to be unjust. It is an attempt to
divert international public opinion from the main
problem in the Middle East: the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories and Israeli practices, such as building
settlements and an expansionist wall, killing
Palestinian children and destroying the homes and
properties of the Palestinian people by means of a
concerted and consistent policy.
The Israeli representative’s attack against the
General Assembly and the United Nations in general
and his description of them in the worst terms is yet

another reflection of the Government of Israel’s
position against this Organization and its resolutions,
which represent the conscience and aspirations of all
peace-loving peoples in the world to establish peace in
the Middle East. The Israeli representative should,
instead, listen to the voice of wisdom as represented in
the statements of many members of the international
community this morning, when we voted on a draft
resolution.
This resolution makes it abundantly clear that a
settlement of the situation in the region can only be
based on international legitimacy and on putting an end
to occupation, not on expanding settlements and
building separation walls, which further worsen the
living conditions of the Palestinian people. This takes
place against a background in which the international
community has declared that the only objective in the
region is to establish a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace. Will that representative and his Government
heed these calls?
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East can only be
achieved through Israel’s commitment to implement
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), based on the principle of land for peace and a
total respect for the Madrid framework. This choice has
already been made by Arab States through the Arab
initiative they launched at the Beirut summit.
The President: Another representative has
requested to exercise the right of reply. May I remind
Members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to ten minutes for the first
intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I call on the representative of Israel.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Two very symbolic
things happened in the last few minutes. First was what
we all welcomed with a great sigh of relief, the fact
that Libya, that great bastion of democracy and human
rights, has chosen to be a sponsor of this resolution.
And the second was that the only right of reply from
this Hall was given by a country that is one of the
world’s foremost perpetrators, harbourers, financers
and initiators of terror: Syria. For Syria to ask us — or
anyone in this Hall — to listen to words of wisdom is
an oxymoron in itself.

23

A/ES-10/PV.23

However, I wish to thank this General Assembly
for a very significant act, which took place here today.
If you look at the vote, you will all see that more than
half of the Member States of the United Nations did
not vote for this biased resolution. More than half have,
in one way or another, rejected it. And if we look at the
countries that voted for it and the countries that
abstained or voted against it, we see a very clear
division between, on the one hand, among those 90,
mostly tyrannical dictatorships, corrupt and human
rights-defying regimes and, on the other side, most of
the world’s enlightened democracies, who chose to not
support this resolution. Israel today regards this vote as
a moral victory, and so should this Hall. This is a moral
victory for the enlightened, civilized, democratic world
over the dark forces of tyranny and corruption.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for his second
intervention, which should not exceed five minutes.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Once again, I would like to reiterate to you
our sincere concern for this General Assembly’s time,
during which we listened to the representative of the
Israeli occupation defend Israel’s occupation of the
Palestinian territories and its construction of the
expansionist, racist wall. We listened also to the fact
that his Government has killed more than 3,000
Palestinians in more than two years, including
approximately 500 children. That occupation and those
massacres committed by Israel against innocent
civilians is terror personified, it is nothing else. This is
terror, this is expansionism and aggression.
By describing his country’s occupation of our
land and by accusing us of things that everyone knows
are false, the Israeli representative is defending his
country’s policies that have been condemned by more
than 600 General Assembly resolutions and have been
condemned by the Security Council over the past years
with more than 40 resolutions. I challenge him to
mention just one resolution adopted by the United
Nations against my country or the other countries that
he mentioned. These are lies and misleading statements
and the representative of Israel should be ashamed of
such lies and false statements. The General Assembly
resolution that we just adopted is another reaffirmation
of the fact that what we have heard from the
representative of Israel is nothing but lies. We have
also heard the views of the countries that have
abstained from voting, and they too have stressed that

24

they stand against the Israeli Government’s actions and
policies and against the construction of the separation
wall. Who is now telling the truth?
When we say it is Israel that rejects just and
lasting peace, we refer to Israeli policies. Once again,
we are advocates of peace and it is Israel that is doing
its utmost to bury the dream of peace in the Middle
East. In order to avoid further killing and bloodshed,
the military Government in Israel and its representative
should refrain from using such low means of trying to
mislead world public opinion that has exposed their
false and insidious policies.
The President: The representative of Israel has
requested the floor in right of reply for the second time,
which should not exceed five minutes.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): This Assembly has
listened once again to the voice of one of the most
tyrannical, corrupt, backward and terrorizing regimes
in the world. Syria is not only on the wrong side of the
vote today, Syria has been on the wrong side of the
fight against terrorism, by being one of the world’s
main perpetrators, harbourers, initiators and financers
of terrorism. Only a few days ago, as I mentioned in
my statement earlier, explicit orders from Damascus
sent two suicide bombers to blow themselves up in a
school in Yokne’am, near Haifa, the result of which
could have been devastating and would have killed
scores of children and youngsters, only because they
are Israeli and only because they are Jewish.
Syria has long lost, and in fact never had, the right
to speak on behalf of reason, on behalf of right and on
behalf of good. Syria stands for everything that is dark
and evil in our world. Therefore, the fact that Syria
finds itself, with so many other countries of its kind, on
one side of this vote, and Israel finds itself, with most
of the world’s great democracies, on the other, is the
greatest testament to the fact that the Arafat wall exists
to protect, while the other countries exist to destroy.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
would simply like to extend our sincere thanks and
appreciation to all the countries that have supported the
resolution that we have just adopted and which we
believe to be of historic importance.
Regrettably, the Israeli representative cannot
refrain from making disgusting remarks, and in order to
maintain decorum we will only describe them as
unbecoming and inappropriate for this venue.

A/ES-10/PV.23

The entire world stands against the expansionist
annexation wall that the Israelis are building on our
land. The entire world. It seems, however, that the
Israeli representative feels that is none of his concern.
And, may I ask, if this wall is the Arafat wall,
what, then, is the Sharon wall? For it is Sharon who
has not had any secret of his wish to annex land by
force. It is Sharon who had 13 reservations on the road
map, virtually nullifying it. It is Sharon who rejected
Security Council resolution 1515 (2003), which was
unanimously adopted. And it is Sharon who daily
threatens to take unilateral measures, by which he means
annexing large areas of the Palestinian territories. We
shall not delve here into Sharon’s shining record in the
area of human rights and war crimes. Without going
into further details and out of respect for your time, Mr.
President, we would only like to repeat that this wall is
a mark of disgrace of the twenty-first century and
should be immediately removed.
We did not quite understand the position of the
delegation that stated that the issue of the wall could
only be resolved through negotiations. That is a truly
lamentable position. The problem is not a problem of
borders, it is a problem of the annexation and acquisition
of territories by force, contrary to international law.
We wish to express our sincere thanks and
appreciation to all those that have supported resolution
ES-10/14. In our opinion, those 90 votes cast in favour
of the resolution are very valuable indeed. The 90 votes
were in favour of international law and of what is right.
Moreover, those votes were cast in spite of the
immense pressures and, to be frank, even threats, to
which the Member States were subjected.
We would also like to point out that the resolution
was adopted without political objections, with the
exception of Israel and the United States and their allies.
We cannot but disregard the Israeli representative’s
statements, which are truly laughable. The problem with
them, as we mentioned in our statement, is that they
demonstrate the total inability of the occupiers and
colonialists to see the facts as they are.
We put our trust in the highest legal authority in the
United Nations system. Those who do not trust that body
are the colonialist occupiers. We believe that an advisory
opinion by the International Court of Justice would
contribute significantly to the realization of our common
objective: putting an end to acts that violate international
law as a prelude to establishing peace in the region.

Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Unfortunately, the
Palestinian Observer has used his time to mislead us once
again, but he has also shed some light on what may be
one of the greatest problems of the Palestinian
Authority and its representative. He repeatedly said
that the Palestinian Authority does not understand what
other countries meant when they said that the conflict
should be resolved by negotiation. That is true. The
Palestinians fail to understand that conflicts must be
resolved through negotiation and cannot be resolved by
terror.
The Arafat wall is being built to prevent the most
evil and brutal terror of our century, a campaign that is
being waged by a people led by a corrupt leader down
a path of destruction, poverty and bloodshed — with no
other success except that which can be found in his
own bank accounts.
Furthermore, it reminds me that the Palestinians
did say in the Third Committee, when Israel presented
the draft resolution on the Israeli child, that they were
not “amused” by that draft resolution. I wish to remind
the Palestinian Observer that it is no delegation’s duty
to gratify the whims of the Palestinian delegation or to
entertain them — especially as we know that the only
thing that really entertains Palestinians and gives them
enjoyment is when Israelis are killed, when children
are butchered and when Americans are killed. When
the Twin Towers collapsed — that was when there was
dancing on the roofs of Ramallah, in Nablus and other
places. If that is the kind of amusement the Palestinians
seek, I do not believe that either Israel or any other
country can give them satisfaction.
The President: Another representative has
requested to exercise the right of reply. May I remind
members again that statements in the exercise of the
right of reply will be limited to ten minutes for the first
intervention and five minutes for the second intervention,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation does not wish to dignify the
statement made by the Israeli representative about my
country. It is no secret to anyone that that Zionist
regime commits the worst violations of human rights
and the rights of the Palestinian people, women,
children and the elderly. Its tanks and bulldozers
trample humans, even peace activists, and homes alike,
and they say it is all for peace. We should not be

25

A/ES-10/PV.23

listening to his advice, and I believe he should direct
his advice to himself instead.
The President: The Observer of Palestine has
requested the floor for a second intervention in right of
reply. May I remind members that the second
intervention should not exceed five minutes.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): With regard to the
substance of the matter before us, I shall refrain from
characterizing the most recent statement made by the
Israeli representative. We believe that representatives
have indeed been able to reach very clear conclusions
about that statement and previous statements as well.
I would make only one point of clarification,
because it seems that the Israeli representative is
unable to understand something said only once. The
Observer of Palestine did not say that the conflict
should not be solved through negotiations. The
Observer of Palestine said that he regrets the fact that
one delegation said that the issue of the wall could not
be solved except through negotiations. The difference
is huge. We indeed are committed to the road map, to
peaceful negotiations, and to all attempts aimed at
reaching a final settlement; however, building that wall
can only destroy the potential for any such settlement.
That cannot be, should not be, and shall not be subject
to negotiations.

26

The President: Another representative has
requested to exercise the right of reply, which should
be for ten minutes in the first instance, and five
minutes in the second.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): The hour
is quite late and so I will be very brief. Just now the
representative of Israel, in commenting on the vote on
draft resolution L.16, categorized the various votes —
those who voted in favour and those voted against or
abstained — and he made comments that I consider
unfortunate when he described all the countries that
voted in favour of the draft resolution as either antidemocratic countries or violators of human rights. I
wish to make it plain that Senegal is a democratic
country that respects human rights. I am convinced that
many of the countries that voted in favour of the draft
resolution share the same ideals and convictions as
Senegal, so I object to that characterization. I am
outraged by such a rude, simplistic and very unpleasant
comment.
The President: The tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is now adjourned, in
accordance with the terms of the draft decision that is
contained in document A/ES-10/L.17 and was just
adopted.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
