A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/127
7 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 158
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/733)]
49/127.

International migration and development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the continuing validity of the principles set forth in the
instruments regarding the international protection of human rights, in
particular in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/ the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 2/ the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 3/ the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4/ and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, 5/
Recalling its resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990, by which it adopted
and opened for signature, ratification and accession the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families, contained in the annex to that resolution,
Aware that, in spite of the existence of an already established body of
principles, there is a need to make further efforts to ensure the human rights

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

4/

Resolution 34/180, annex.

5/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

95-76339

/...

A/RES/49/127
Page 2

and dignity of all migrants and their families and that it is desirable to
improve the situation of all documented migrants and their families,
Having considered the report of the International Conference on
Population and Development, 6/ held at Cairo from 5 to 13 September 1994,
Bearing in mind that orderly international migration can have positive
impacts upon development and varied impacts upon both sending and receiving
countries,
Emphasizing the importance of the integration of documented migrants
into the host society, with due respect for their religious and cultural
background, and the need to extend to them the same social, economic and legal
rights as are enjoyed by citizens, in accordance with national legislation and
universally recognized human rights,
Recalling that, in accordance with article 10 of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and all other relevant universally recognized human rights
instruments, all Governments, particularly those of receiving countries, must
recognize the vital importance of family reunification and promote its
integration into their national legislation in order to ensure the protection
of the unity of the families of documented migrants,
Welcoming the adoption of the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, 7/ and noting the broad support for
the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and
development,
Recalling the recommendations with regard to international migration and
development contained in the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development,
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the International
Conference on Population and Development; 6/
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with
all States and relevant international and regional organizations, a report on
international migration and development, including aspects related to
objectives and modalities for the convening of a United Nations conference on
international migration and development, to be submitted to the Economic and
Social Council at its substantive session of 1995 for discussion;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
discussion held in the Economic and Social Council, to report on the subject
to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session for a decision, inter alia, on
the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and
development;

6/

A/CONF.171/13 and Add.1.

7/

Ibid., chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/127
Page 3

4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session an item entitled "International migration and development, including
the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and
development".
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
