S/PV.7953

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7953rd meeting

Friday, 26 May 2017, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bermúdez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Klein

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15113 (E)
*1715113*

S/PV.7953

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

of the humanitarian crisis that risks exploding into
another conflict, which can only begin to be resolved
by compromise, the implementation of intra-Palestinian
agreements and an ending of the closures.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give Mr. Mladenov the floor.
Mr. Mladenov: On the eve of the holy month of
Ramadan, allow me to extend my warmest greetings to
all our Muslims and wish them Ramadan Kareem.
This briefing unfortunately follows on the heels
of the despicable terrorist attacks in Minya and in
Manchester. I offer my deep condolences to the families
of the victims and to the Governments and the people of
Egypt and the United Kingdom. There is no justification
for terror. On his recent visit to the Middle East, while
United States President Trump pressed for a common
approach to addressing the scourge of extremism and
terrorism, he also made it very clear that resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is critical to combating this
threat and to achieving peace in the region. I welcome
his personal engagement and that of Arab, Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to advance this goal. However,
during the past month, the complex dynamics on the
ground have been creating an explosive environment.
In Gaza, we are walking into another crisis with our
eyes wide open. I am today warning the Security Council
that unless urgent measures are taken to de-escalate, the
crisis risks spiralling out of control, with devastating
consequences for Palestinians and Israelis alike. Since
Hamas established an administrative committee in
March, a parallel institution to run Governmental affairs
in Gaza, the intra-Palestinian political tug-of-war has
led to a significant deterioration in relations between
Fatah and Hamas. The result is a significant worsening
2/6

26/05/2017

In April, the Palestinian Government upheld
its decision to reduce salary allowances to nearly
60,000 public sector employees in Gaza. While the
Government needs to ensure its fiscal sustainability
under increasingly difficult economic conditions,
it is important that reforms or decisions to reduce
expenditures be fairly distributed and made with
consideration to the harsh conditions in Gaza.
Gaza is also in the midst of an unprecedented
energy crisis. The power plant that supplies 30 per cent
of Gaza’s electricity stopped functioning on 16 April,
due to a dispute between the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas over taxation on fuel. The lines supplying power
from Egypt into Gaza are often down for technical
reasons. This leaves Israeli power lines, which provide
some 60 per cent of Gaza’s electricity, as the only reliable
energy source. Meanwhile, the Palestinian Government
has decided to cap its purchase of electricity from Israel
for Gaza. If implemented, this decision would further
reduce electricity supply to Gaza from Israel by some
30 per cent, plunging its population into a spiral of a
humanitarian catastrophe.
Since April, the majority of Palestinians in Gaza
have been receiving about four hours of electricity
per day. How long do Council members think they
can survive if this is further reduced to two hours
of electricity per day? Who will pay the price of the
ensuing violence and escalation? It will not be those
who live a life of exemption and privilege. The price
will be paid by poor Palestinians — by women and
children, by people already traumatized by conflict,
who have been held hostage for a decade now. They
are the ones who will not have access to electricity, to
water, to health services and sanitation.
No one has any interest in another conflict in Gaza.
Everyone has a responsibility to avoid it. For months,
the United Nations has warned that without addressing
the structural problems of Gaza’s electricity supply we
would face a humanitarian crisis. Those warnings are
now a reality. Let me illustrate to the Council what that
reality looks like. Hospitals are now forced to postpone
elective surgeries and have already reduced 80 per cent
of cleaning, catering and sterilization services. Had it
not been for the timely United Nations humanitarian
17-15113

26/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

intervention on 27 April to provide emergency fuel for
generators, some 51 surgical and obstetric operation
theatres, five hemodialysis centres and a number of
emergency departments would have had to close. Since
mid-April, desalination plants have been functioning at
15 per cent of their capacity, and drinking water has
been supplied for a few hours every two to four days.
As we speak 100,000 cubic metres of raw sewage
are discharged into the Mediterranean Sea on a daily
basis. This is the equivalent of 40 Olympic-size
swimming pools of untreated sewage daily, which is an
environmental disaster in the making for Israel, Egypt
and Gaza.
Food prices are soaring as the price of water
for irrigation has gone up by some 65 per cent. The
manufacturing sector is grinding to a halt, and over half
of private industry workers have been suspended. The
United Nations is working determinedly to mitigate the
humanitarian impact of this crisis. A United Nationsmanaged emergency fuel operation is delivering fuel
to essential services for water, health and sanitation,
but our reserves will run out in the coming weeks. It
can only temporarily alleviate the suffering of the most
vulnerable, but is no substitute for a sustainable solution.
Defusing the current energy crisis will require
compromise on all sides, including tax concessions on
fuel for the power plant and a profound reform of how
energy is supplied in Gaza. The Palestinian Authority,
Hamas — which has controlled Gaza for a decade — and
Israel all have obligations for the welfare of Gaza’s
residents and must live up to their responsibilities to
address the crisis and overcome its political impasse.
Over the past weeks, I have engaged with the parties and
our international partners not only to find a solution to
the immediate electricity challenges, but also to address
the broader political challenge of returning Gaza to the
control of the legitimate Palestinian authorities.
With respect to another troubling development,
allow me to join the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in condemning yesterday’s executions
of three men in Gaza, in contravention of international
law. These executions bring to 28 the number of death
sentences carried out since the Hamas takeover in 2007,
with nine just in the past year.
Turning to the broader Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
in recent weeks we have seen more tragic examples
of the human toll that this conflict is inflicting, with
six Palestinians killed in various acts of violence. I am

S/PV.7953

also very concerned by the ongoing hunger strike of
Palestinian detainees protesting against their conditions
in Israeli jails, which, on the eve of Ramadan, has
now entered its fortieth day. According to reports, the
Israeli prison service has evacuated at least 60 hungerstriking prisoners to hospitals because their medical
condition had worsened, while another close to 600
prisoners have been moved to infirmaries set up in
the prisons. Reports of punitive measures against the
hunger strikers, including restricted access to lawyers
and the denial of family visits, are alarming. The right
of detainees to access a lawyer is a right that should
never be curtailed.
I call for a redoubling of efforts to end the strike
as soon as possible. The crisis must be resolved in line
with international humanitarian law and Israel’s human
rights obligations. All actors should exercise maximum
restraint and responsibility and take the necessary steps
to avoid escalating tensions.
On 4 May, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
met in Brussels to discuss the key socioeconomic
challenges faced by the Palestinian Authority.
Regrettably, a number of key issues remain unresolved
between the parties on access and movement, energy,
water and fiscal sustainability. While many of the
solutions are technical, ultimately the decisions to
implement them are political. I am encouraged by the
fact that in recent weeks, the Israeli and Palestinian
Ministers of Finance have come together in an effort to
move these issues forward. Their fruitful consultations,
the first meeting of the Joint Water Committee in seven
years and the progress in the implementation of last
year’s landmark electricity agreement are positive steps
that need to be encouraged and supported.
I also take note of recently announced Israeli
measures designed to help the Palestinian economy
in the West Bank. These steps reportedly include the
proposed zoning of land in Area C, adjacent to several
Palestinian cities, for their residential, industrial and
agricultural use; the development of industrial zones
in Tarkumiya and Hebron; and expanding the hours
of operation of the Allenby Bridge crossing. These are
positive steps that will also need to be substantially
expanded if they are to achieve the desired effect.
Before closing, let me turn very briefly to Lebanon
and the Golan. Regrettably, the Lebanese Parliament has
not yet reconvened following its one-month adjournment

17-151133/6

S/PV.7953

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of 12 April. Agreement on an electoral law remains
elusive, less than a month before Parliament’s tenure
ends on 20 June. I continue to hope that negotiations
can be finalized in time to avoid institutional instability
and to allow for the holding of elections, in accordance
with the Constitution.
In the Golan, the ceasefire between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic has been maintained, albeit in
a volatile environment attributable to the ongoing
conflict in Syria and against the backdrop of continued
military activity across the ceasefire line. This activity
has included incidents of spillover and retaliatory fire,
as well as Israeli air strikes in Syria targeting Hizbullah.
Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated
their continued commitment to the separation of forces
agreement and their support for the full return of United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force to the area of
separation, conditions permitting.
In closing, allow me to say a few words on efforts
to advance the prospects for peace. As the conflict has
ebbed and flowed, the key messages to both sides from
the United Nations, including through its role in the
Quartet and the broader international community, have
remained clear, consistent and firm. Above all, Israel’s
almost 50-year occupation and settlement enterprise are
untenable and must end through meaningful negotiations
that address the final status issues. Their perpetuation is
sending an unmistakable message to another generation
of Palestinians that their dream of statehood is destined
to remain just that — a dream — and to Israelis that
their desire for peace, security and regional recognition
also remains unattainable.
Still, much can and must be done. Israel can
undertake transformative steps to improve the daily
lives of Palestinians, to empower the Palestinian
leadership and to move meaningfully towards a
negotiated resolution of the conflict, in accordance with
international law and Security Council resolutions.
Palestinians, too, should heed the repeated calls to
combat violence and incitement. Internally, they
must also rise to the challenge of forging a genuine
reconciliation, which is critical to advancing peace and
fulfilling their national aspirations.
This summer will mark 10 years since Hamas’
violent 2007 takeover of the Gaza Strip. The past
decade has seen Gaza’s infrastructure, its basic
services and its private sector gradually debilitated, its
economy weakened, with real gross domestic product
4/6

26/05/2017

per capita and employment decreasing, and the gender
gap continuing to grow. Gaza faces a downward spiral
of de-development. The widening socioeconomic gap
between Gaza and the West Bank further highlights the
need to end the drivers of this inhumane and volatile
situation. Deteriorating conditions only fuel anger
and instability, strengthen extremists and undermine
chances for a serious political process.
If Israelis and Palestinians hope to extract
themselves from the immeasurable burden this conflict
has wrought, they must be willing to take the painful
steps that will ultimately lead to peace. Neither side can
afford another missed opportunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to take the floor.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to express
our solidarity with and condolences to our brothers and
sisters in Egypt following the tragic criminal attack in
that country. Our thoughts and our prayers are with the
victims of this tragic terrorist act and the Government
and the people of Egypt.
I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. He
has given us a very alarming picture of the situation
in the region, especially in Gaza. We hope that this
briefing will serve as a stimulus for the Security
Council to meet its obligations in that regard.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms its
support for the self-determination of the Palestinian
people and its right to a free, sovereign and independent
State within the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
As always, we came to this meeting hoping to
receive encouraging information about the situation of
the Palestinian people and its legitimate aspirations to
self-determination and the creation of an independent,
sovereign State. We hoped that Israel, the occupying
Power, would acknowledge the illegality of its
colonizing activities and halt its construction of illegal
settlement in the occupied Palestinian territories as a
gesture of political goodwill in order to achieve the
two-State solution. However, as on previous occasions,
the reality is completely different from our expectation.
17-15113

26/05/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Once again, we must express our frustration over the
fact that the situation remains essentially unchanged,
or has even deteriorated, since the previous briefing in
April (see S/PV.7929).
We are just a few days away from marking the
fiftieth anniversary of the occupation by Israel of the
Palestinian territories, which led to the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967), of 22 November 1967, which
expressly mentions, as one of the key principles for
achieving peace in the Middle East, the withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces from the territories they have
occupied during the conflict. Almost 50 years have
passed since the adoption of that resolution, and
Israeli forces continue to intimidate and terrorize the
inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian territories. My
Mission is struck by the fact that 50 years have passed,
which is long enough for the international community
to have been able to reach a definitive solution to the
tragic situation of the Palestinian people.
In his most recent report, dated 13 April 2017
(A/HRC/34/70), the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967 notes that the Israeli forces persist
in carrying out actions that represent human rights
violations, including the excessive use of force, forced
displacements and restrictions on the free movement
of the Palestinian people. The report also condemns
the fact that as of late January 2017, a total of 105
demolitions had been recorded in Area C and 14 in East
Jerusalem. It also states that in 2016 there were 1,093
demolitions in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
the highest number recorded since the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs began collecting
the data in 2009.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that on 23 December
2016 the Security Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), which calls on Israel once again to put an end
once and for all to all settlement activities in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the
Government of Israel has done absolutely nothing to
rectify its colonizing practices. Rather, in February,
the Israeli Parliament passed the so-called regulation
law, through which the occupying Power intended to
retroactively legalize more than 5,500 settlements
on lands belonging to Palestinians. The bill is still
awaiting passage.
Bolivia calls on the Government of Israel to
immediately cease all settlement activities and

S/PV.7953

related construction, as well as demolitions of
Palestinian homes, especially when these are home
to Palestinian families, as they represent grave acts
of physical and psychological violence against the
Palestinian population.
I would like also to draw the attention of the
Council to the report of the mission that visited
Palestine, as contained in its letter dated 24 May 2017,
which sought to publicize the situation of the more than
1,500 Palestinian prisoners who as of today are on the
fortieth day of their hunger strike, an extreme measure
taken in order to achieve the release by the Government
of Israel of more than 6,500 Palestinian prisoners and
detainees. That measure has given rise to reprisals by
the Israeli authorities.
Finally, we wish to reiterate our request that
the quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) appear in
writing, so that we can see a detailed report of the
progress made, or the lack thereof, as well as current
maps of all occupied Palestinian territories in which
Israel has established settlements. Bolivia reaffirms its
firm commitment to resolution 2334 (2016) and urges
all Council members to pool their efforts to ensure
its implementation without further delay. We believe
that all resolutions adopted by the Council must be
implemented with due rigor and commitment, with the
single goal of ensuring international peace and security.
We highlight the importance of all contributions by
the international community, including the steps taken
by the United States of America, that would make it
possible to achieve a peaceful solution to the situation
of the Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
briefing and reiterate once again that Uruguay fully
supports his work.
The Middle East region continues to be the
epicentre of multiple armed conflicts, which are
promoted by various causes and interests and by a
multitude of stakeholders who participate in them in
one way or another.
Despite the complexity of the current situations in
Syria, Yemen and Iraq, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,

17-151135/6

S/PV.7953

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

because of its duration and its spillover towards the
rest of the region, remains the most prominent of all
of the situations affecting the Middle East. For that
reason, Uruguay reaffirms once again, as it has done
unwaveringly since 1947, its unwavering support for
the right of Israel and of Palestine to live in peace,
within secure and recognized borders, in a framework
of renewed cooperation, free from any threat or action
that breaches the peace.
Over these past seven decades, while Israel has
become consolidated as a fully modern State and a
full Member of the Organization, Palestine continues
to face serious difficulties in terms of its development,
its international integration and the consolidation of
its territory, which has led to grave consequences for
its population and heightened tensions throughout the
whole region.
Uruguay, together with almost all members of the
international community, firmly strongly supports the
solution of two independent States, convinced that it is
the only option that will make it possible for Israel and
Palestine to coexist peacefully.
We reiterate that there can be no just and lasting
peace in the absence of a two-State solution, which in
turn cannot become a reality if the parties do not create
the conditions for a peaceful, negotiated and mutually
satisfactory way out of the conflict that puts an end to
all pending issues of this protracted conflict.
In this vein, we call on the parties to relaunch
direct bilateral negotiations as quickly as possible,
without preconditions, as an essential path to that goal.
To that end, it is key to reverse the current trends on
the ground identified in the most recent Quartet report;
failing that, it will be extremely difficult for Palestine
to consolidate itself as a State.
It is also imperative that the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities comply in good faith with their obligations
under international law and with the resolutions of the
Council; send clear political signs aimed at breaking
the vicious circle of mutual distrust; and refrain from
adopting unilateral decisions that hinder dialogue. As
we are far from seeing such signs, we urge the parties to
carefully consider their next steps and prevent the most
extremist sectors of their respective Governments from
prevailing over those that are truly committed to peace.
The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) barely
five months ago was a clear demonstration of the

6/6

26/05/2017

importance that the international community attaches
to the peaceful, successful conclusion of this process.
However, Israel from that point on intensified
announcements of its continuing policy of establishing
settlements on Palestinian territory, which violates
the provisions of that resolution as well as those of
resolution 242 (1967), which affirms the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force.
Furthermore, Uruguay reiterates its vigorous
condemnation of the continued episodes of violence and
terrorist attacks and expresses its complete rejection of
the incitement to and glorification of such acts by the
Palestinian authorities. There is no place for complicit
silence on this front.
All of the aforementioned in no way helps to make
progress towards peace and jeopardizes the possibility
of reaching a two-State solution. Uruguay welcomes
all international, regional and unilateral initiatives that
would make it possible to move forward in the quest
for solutions in the Middle East peace process, in order
to achieve a peaceful, just, negotiated, lasting way out
of the situation that, in accordance with international
law, takes account of the legitimate aspirations of both
parties. We are pleased at the stated intention of the
President of the United States to work so as to finally
achieve peace between Israeland Palestine. Such
commitments will be fundamental to bringing the
parties together and to achieving a two-State solution
in which both States coexist in peace and security.
In conclusion, we reiterate to the key actors in this
process that moderation is essential to avoid unilateral
announcements and actions that may seriously harm
the future of the peace negotiations and the two-State
solution. At the political level, it is crucial to seek new
channels for dialogue and to keep those channels open.
We cherish the hope that some day, which we hope comes
sooner rather than later, both parties will prioritize the
immense potential of their region and move forward
sustainably on the path of bilateral economic, historical
and cultural cooperation. I reiterate that both parties
have an enormous shared heritage. They can count on
Uruguay to help strengthen this dialogue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-15113
