S/PV.9034

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9034th meeting

Tuesday, 17 May 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hunter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Gallagher
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2022/366)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2576
(2021) (S/2022/368)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35210 (E)
*2235210*

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-fourth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2022/366)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2576 (2021)
(S/2022/368)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special
Representative
of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, and Ms. Hanaa
Edwar, co-Founder and Chairperson of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/366, which contains the thirtyfourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013),
and to document S/2022/368, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2576 (2021).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: Our briefing today will
hit many all-too-familiar notes, as notorious aspects
of Iraqi political life are repeating themselves in a
seemingly incessant loop of zero-sum politics. But
before delving into that, I would like to share some
impressions of the recent and ongoing wave of massive
dust- and sandstorms hitting Iraq.
While a dust- or sandstorm as such is not a new
phenomenon for the country, the current wave far
exceeds Iraq’s experiences in recent years. Briefing the
Security Council in February (see S/PV.8975), I spoke
2/20

17/05/2022

about the dangers of climate change and its effects,
with desertification as a central concern. Ever since,
Iraq has been battered by intense dust- and sandstorms,
which obscure the sky and send people running for
shelter, even resulting in sickness and death. Such
storms are expected only to become more frequent. In
other words, continued inaction, also here, comes at
enormous costs.
Having said that, those storms are not the only
concern for the people in Iraq. Iraqis continue to wait for
a political class that, instead of being content with stale
power battles, will roll up its sleeves to make headway
on Iraq’s long list of outstanding domestic priorities. As
the Council knows, national elections took place well
over seven months ago, and multiple deadlines for the
formation of a Government have been missed.
It is true that Iraq is not the only country facing
a protracted Government formation process. But Iraq’s
political leaders would do well not to hide behind that
argument. It distracts from what is at stake.
It excuses a political deadlock while non-State
armed groups fire rockets with apparent freedom and
impunity. It excuses a political stalemate while ordinary
people suffer. It excuses a political impasse while
simmering public anger can boil over at any moment.
My question therefore is: what will it take to realize
that this situation is completely untenable?
To date, political leaders subscribe to the notion
of dialogue or another round of negotiations, but the
necessary willingness to compromise is painfully
absent. If one visits any market, Iraqis will say that the
national interest is yet again taking a back seat to shortsighted considerations of control over resources and
power play.
It is therefore high time — and, yes, I am repeating
myself — to return the spotlight on where it must be,
namely, the people of Iraq and a programme of action
that provides adequate service delivery to all citizens;
an end to pervasive corruption, factionalism and the
pillaging of State institutions; the implementation
of desperately needed reforms; the diversification
of the economy; predictable governance instead of
constant crisis management; an end to impunity,
with accountability as a key feature of the State; and,
of course, reining in non-State armed actors while
asserting the State’s authority.
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

Over the past three years, the Council has heard
me make these points numerous times, and one thing
remains clear: the neglect of the population’s most
basic needs has gone on for far too long. Iraqi political
inaction once again comes at a huge price, not in the
short term for those in power, but for those desperately
trying to make ends meet on a daily basis.
I will make a few more specific observations,
beginning with relations between Baghdad and Erbil.
The sorry pattern of ad hoc negotiations continues
to prevail instead of what is critically needed: an
institutionalized, predictable mechanism for the
comprehensive, holistic and durable resolution of all
outstanding issues. While that is evidently necessary,
such a mechanism continues to be plainly missing, and
that deficiency is sadly coupled with internal rivalries
on both sides as well.
As I said previously (see S/PV.8975), a spirit of
partnership and cooperation can and must guide all
stakeholders, including with regard to the recent Federal
Supreme Court ruling on the Kurdistan Regional
Government oil and gas law. Having engaged with both
sides on the matter, I am convinced that there is a way
out. However — and there is no denying it — events
in the past have gravely eroded mutual trust. It will
therefore prove essential to build confidence, including
by pledging to refrain from politically motivated,
unilateral actions in future.
I will now zoom in on the political situation within
the Kurdistan Region. In May 2021, I participated in an
event at the University of Kurdistan, a promising event
with all Kurdistan Region political parties present. In
my remarks, I outlined the toxicity of political infighting
and factionalism. I emphasized the importance of unity,
not to be confused with uniformity. I spoke candidly
about the need to move away from the yellow and
green divide and the responsibility of leaders to guide
outreach and to bring together opposing interests to
focus on solutions that represent the interests of all
peoples living in the Kurdistan Region, be it Erbil,
Dohuk or Sulaymaniyah.
However, one year later, that promising event
seems to have gained zero traction. On the contrary,
divisions have deepened, with adverse effects on the
peoples of the Kurdistan Region. Without repeating
my remarks of more than a year ago — but it must be
clear — the Kurdistan Region has a choice. With the
Kurdistan Region elections scheduled for 1 October

S/PV.9034

later this year, it is of the utmost importance to level the
electoral playing field, with all political actors, big or
small, enjoying equal opportunities, while promoting a
conducive electoral environment.
Additionally, I can only underline that geography
does not always play to the Kurdistan Region’s
advantage. In other words, its unique geopolitical
circumstances alone should be enough to give its
leaders pause. Of course, that goes for the whole of
Iraq as well. As I have said on countless occasions,
whether we like it or not, a weak domestic home front
only creates a welcoming environment for continued
external interference.
On a related note, let me also comment on incoming
missiles and rockets, which are disturbing, disruptive
and dangerous. With the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps (IRGC) claiming responsibility for up to 12
short-range ballistic missiles launched in the early
hours of Sunday, 13 March, another worrisome chapter
was opened. While the IRGC described the targeted
location in Erbil as “the strategic centre for conspiracy
and evil acts of the Zionists”, no evidence for such
claims was found. The targeted site is known as a
civilian area and a private compound.
Although both sides — Iraq and Iran — are currently
engaged in dialogue and do not wish to escalate the
issue, Iraq rightfully rejects the notion that it can be
treated as the region’s backyard, with routine violations
of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Another case in point is the ongoing Turkish and
Iranian shelling activities in the north. What are we
therefore looking at — cross-border shelling and missiles
as the new normal for Iraq? That is a very risky way to
advance interests, which further weakens the State of
Iraq. Needless to say, any country or actor seeking to
settle a dispute has established diplomatic instruments,
including our good offices, at their disposal.
With regard to Iraq’s very own armed actors
operating outside State control, the reckless firing of
rockets, including at an oil refinery in Erbil some two
weeks ago, remains alarming and unjustifiable. Those
attacks seek to undermine Iraq’s security and stability
within an already extremely volatile politically charged
post-electoral environment. The fact is that messaging
by rockets and missile diplomacy are reckless acts
with potentially devastating consequences. Let me
also emphasize that Iraq does not need self-proclaimed
armed arbiters. I once again underline the great

22-352103/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

importance of asserting the State’s authority. If the
perpetrators are known, call them out. That is essential
to upholding the rule of law.
Concerning the ever-pressing question of Sinjar,
as we know all too well, Sinjar’s recent history has
witnessed horrific ordeals culminating in the heinous
crimes committed by Da’esh. Today, while locals
urgently need to rebuild their lives, they continue to
face unconscionable obstacles owing to discord on
security arrangements, public service provisions and a
unified Administration. The Sinjar Agreement, signed
by Baghdad and Erbil in October 2020, was seen by
many as a glimmer of hope — a very first but important
step in the right direction.
At the time, I expressed hope that the agreement
would lead to a new chapter for Sinjar in which the needs
of the Sinjari people would come first; that it would help
displaced people return to their homes; and that it would
accelerate reconstruction and improve public service
delivery. But for that to happen, stable governance and
security structures are, of course, prerequisites. Ever
since the agreement was signed, I have called for its
speedy implementation. Well, clearly, the opposite is
true. To date, there is no agreement on the selection
of a new independent mayor, and funds for a new
local security force remain blocked, possibly owing to
interference into unclear recruitment procedures.
Concerning the recruitment procedures, I once
again emphasize the importance of pragmatism and
realism. Not all people who joined other forces in the
past can simply be painted with the same brush. It must
be understood that some of them, absent the authority
of the State, simply opted for a safety net, an identity
and an income to provide for their families.
We have also called on both Baghdad and Erbil
to reach out to the people of Sinjar and open their
arms to all Sinjaris. Meanwhile, critics of the Sinjar
Agreement have continued emphasizing the lack of
consultations with local communities. While no one
dismisses good advice — and certainly not the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq — I have to say
that local consultations have taken place and continue
to take place.
At the same time, it is true that both Baghdad and
Erbil could and should step up their outreach at the
grass-roots level. The implementation of any agreement,
in particular this one, in winning hearts and minds is
hard work. A piece of paper alone will not do the job.
4/20

17/05/2022

One needs to be on top of it 24/7, own it, constantly
and proactively engage with the communities on the
ground, provide explanations and clarify why a decision
has been made and why it benefits the Sinjaris in the
medium to long term.
With that being said, significant divides and the
fragmentation of local communities are also a fact of
life in Sinjar, making things even more challenging.
And within that context, it is also important to note that
Sinjar has increasingly turned into an arena for external
and domestic spoilers.
While some of that can be traced back to 2014 as
Da’esh kicked off its atrocities, eight years later, it is
time to acknowledge that, yes, mistakes have been
made in the past, but Sinjar is part of the State of Iraq.
By giving room to external and domestic spoilers,
the situation will not get any better. And by now,
all stakeholders would do well to acknowledge that
fact, notwithstanding their gratitude for the help and
assistance received in the past.
As Council members know, nobody said that
the establishment of stable security and governance
structures would be an easy ride. But there is no denying
it: the lack of clear-cut coordination and implementation
mechanisms, the dominance of partisan interests and
the ongoing presence of spoilers significantly hamper
meaningful progress. I have to say international
observers have been deployed for less.
Clashes have again erupted in recent weeks. That
sadly made Sinjari families pack their belongings again
and find their way back to the Kurdistan region to seek
shelter. So let me reiterate: Sinjaris’ safety and security
should be front and centre at all times. They deserve
peace under the authority of the State. Domestic and
external spoilers have no place in Sinjar. Baghdad and
Erbil must assume their responsibility and urgently
work together with only one objective: to improve the
lives of people on the ground and promote the voluntary,
dignified return of displaced persons to their homes.
I would like to say a few words on the issue of
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives. In recent months, the Iraqi Ministry of
Defence has stepped up efforts to reach new witnesses
through broadcasts, the media and consular and
diplomatic channels worldwide. As a result, at least
two potential new witnesses have come forward during
this period, confirming that broadcasts with a wide
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

geographic reach can be helpful in eliciting information.
That demonstrates that investing efforts in obtaining
new witness information and insisting on acquiring
satellite-imagery analysis from relevant Member States
are essential to bringing this crucial and sensitive file
to a close.
I will conclude my remarks by underlining once
more the importance of overcoming the political
stalemate. Significant domestic vulnerabilities are being
compounded by the ongoing effects of the pandemic
and global geopolitical tensions. A sincere, collective
and urgent will to resolve political differences must
now prevail for the country to move forward and meet
the needs of its citizens.
The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Edwar.
Ms. Edwar (spoke in Arabic): In my capacity
as a human rights defender and civil society activist
in Iraq for many years, I have worked tirelessly with
my colleagues since 2003 to rebuild social awareness
on the values and principles of human rights and
gender justice. We, as a civil society movement, have
accomplished tangible successes in advocacy campaigns
with regard to legislation, policies and programmes, as
well as enhancing the demands for rights among youth,
women, minorities and vulnerable communities. These
successes have been reflected in the peaceful protests
since 2011 and reached their peak during the popular
uprising from October 2019 to 2020.
We acknowledge that the process of change towards
building a democratic system and good governance
requires diligence, hard work and immense patience.
Now, after nearly 20 years, the indicators circulated
by United Nations agencies and international research
centres show a dramatic decline in the economic, social,
cultural, health and environmental sectors in Iraq under
the current political system, which is based on sectarian
and ethnic quotas and does not have any constitutional
or legal foundations. It is controlled by political blocs
that lack national vision to run the country. Moreover,
these blocs have shown a lack of trust within their own
parties and among the various parties and governing
authorities and institutions. They have plundered the
State’s resources and budgets for their narrow and
personal factional interests and spread corruption and
decay throughout the State’s institutions. Even their
reform campaigns and their fight against corruption

S/PV.9034

have been marred with massive corruption. The
country’s sovereignty has been violated by continuous
foreign military and security interventions.
In my country, the rule of law has been replaced
by the proliferation of arms within the hands of tribes
and armed groups. Impunity is a prominent feature of
our justice system. Therefore, citizens resort to tribal
councils to resolve their disputes, rather than the courts
of law. We are also witnessing the politicization of the
justice system, whereby harsh rulings are issued against
human rights defenders, journalists and peaceful
protesters on the basis of malicious claims, including
the application of the death penalty. Moreover, no
investigation results have been published with regard
to the pattern of assassinations and violent attacks
against them; these attacks have merely been attributed
to unknown armed elements. The fate of many detained
and kidnapped activists and journalists, not to mention
thousands of victims of forced disappearances, remains
unknown, and the justice system has not taken any
steps towards resolving their cases or bringing justice
to their families. Meanwhile, those accused of serious
crimes related to drugs and corruption are given
light sentences, declared innocent or even granted
special pardons.
Democracy in Iraq has been reduced to five
general elections that have developed non-democratic
situations where there is ongoing harmony among the
ruling political parties, but which has led to a political
stagnation. The current Government is meant to facilitate
daily life, but its institutions are not performing their
services because of the lack of a budget. The Parliament
is also not functioning despite the fact that the Federal
Supreme Court ratified the results of the election five
months ago. Unfortunately, even the Federal Supreme
Court, whose role is to interpret the Constitution,
has in its recent decisions only solidified the political
standstill, rather than contributing to resolving it for
the benefit of the public.
The crisis of the people’s mistrust of the ruling
class and public institutions has deepened. Even in
the October 2021 elections, the turnout did not exceed
35 per cent at most. Calls for reform and change
launched by political decision makers are met with
the old Iraqi saying that says that he who has proven
himself cannot be tested.
In the face of the bitter and precarious reality in
which we are living, reform and change have become an

22-352105/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

urgent need to achieve stability, security and peaceful
coexistence among Iraqis, in accordance with a new
social contract that guarantees equal citizenship and
embraces diversity, social justice and a peaceful transfer
of power within the framework of a civil State. I appeal
to the international community, before it is too late,
to take a well-considered initiative within a specific
time frame to put pressure on the Iraqi authorities and
political decision makers to work seriously towards
ending the political standstill and the divisions among
them, put the interests of the Iraqi people before their
own narrow interests, and respect their commitment
to international human rights conventions. It is also
important to include civil society organizations in that
initiative to activate their role in the defence of human
rights, public freedoms and the rule of law, force an
end to impunity and promote peaceful coexistence,
transparency, accountability, good governance and
sustainable development.
The President: I thank Ms. Edwar for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for
her valuable briefing and efforts. I also thank Ms. Hanaa
Edwar for her briefing to the Council. I welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Iraq,
Mr. Mohammed Bahr Aluloom, in today’s meeting.
Seven months after the successful parliamentary
elections in Iraq, the United Arab Emirates stresses
the need for the completion of the process of forming
the new Government in accordance with the Iraqi
Constitution. That is an important step for Iraq to take
in order to fulfil its duties to its citizens and manage
its affairs of State. The necessary reforms should also
be conducted in all vital sectors upon which the Iraqi
people depend, as their interests must transcend all
other considerations.
The United Arab Emirates looks forward to the
new Iraqi Government, once formed, to build on the
6/20

17/05/2022

achievements made by Iraq in the past few years in
the fields of development, security, reconstruction,
strengthening cooperation and regional dialogue. We
also urge the upcoming Government to build on Iraq’s
recent efforts to promote its effective engagement
with its Arab surroundings to which Iraq belongs,
and to play a positive role in the region. Those efforts
included Iraq’s participation in the Aqaba summit,
held in March with the United Arab Emirates, Jordan,
Egypt and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, during which
several regional issues of importance were discussed,
including the mitigation of the impact of the global
economic crisis on the region, especially in the sectors
of energy and food security.
Among the most prominent challenges the upcoming
Government will face is the continued activities by the
remnants of the terrorist Da’esh organization and its
attempts to regain influence. Da’esh carried out nearly
69 attacks during the reporting period covered by the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/368). The United
Arab Emirates strongly condemns those terrorist acts
and commends the achievements of the Iraqi forces
in combating terrorism. We emphasize our continued
support for those efforts to establish security and
enforce the rule of law in all areas.
The United Arab Emirates also condemns Iran’s
attacks on Erbil, in the Kurdistan region, in March and,
most recently, on 11 May. We reiterate our categorical
rejection of regional interference in Iraq’s internal
affairs, under any pretext, and stress the importance of
other countries respecting Iraq’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity, as well as the need to abide by the
principle of good-neighbourliness, in accordance with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations. We warn that the recurrence of such attacks
could inflame the situation and undermine regional and
international peace and security.
Achieving long-term stability in Iraq requires
further promoting economic development and
rebuilding vital sectors, including the health, education
and energy sectors. Despite the relative improvement
in the humanitarian situation since 2017, Iraq still
needs international support to meet the needs of its
people. The United Arab Emirates has supported
Iraq in various fields, including through facilitating
the return of displaced persons to Mosul, providing
medical equipment to address the coronavirus disease
pandemic and rebuilding areas liberated from Da’esh. I
would like to highlight the rebuilding of a mosque and
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

two churches in Mosul as part of a joint project that
started in March between the United Arab Emirates and
UNESCO in the framework of the “Revive the spirit of
Mosul” initiative.
Regarding the issue of missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals, we support the continued efforts
to achieve further progress on that important dossier,
as well as on the issue of missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation looks
forward to working with colleagues on the Council over
the coming days with a view to renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq so
that it can continue to perform its important duties, in
close coordination with the Iraqi Government. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the efforts
of the Deputy Special Representative, Ms. Ingibjörg
Sólrún Gísladóttir, and to wish her every success in
her future endeavours. We stress our continued support
for the Iraqi Government and people and our solidarity
with the Iraqi Government and the measures it takes to
maintain the security and stability of this country.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing and welcomes the Permanent Representative
of Iraq to today’s meeting. I also listened carefully to
the statement delivered by Ms. Edwar.
For a period of time, all parties in Iraq have
maintained close communication on the formation of
the Government. The Iraqi Government continues
to effectively perform its duties, and we hope that
all parties in Iraq will expedite consultations on its
formation so that substantive progress can be made
as soon as possible and lay a political foundation for
the realization of long-term stability. The international
community should create a favourable environment
towards that end. We support dialogue between the
Iraqi central Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government on all standing issues in order to jointly
find sustainable solutions and further improve relations.
The security situation in Iraq remains dire.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/368), remnants of terrorist groups are still
carrying out asymmetric attacks. The international
community should continue to support Iraq in its fight
against terrorism, root out the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and other extremist terrorist forces,

S/PV.9034

prevent the return and spread of terrorist activities and
consolidate the hard-won results of counter-terrorism.
China commends Iraq for bringing back a large
number of its own citizens from the Al-Hol camp
in Syria, and calls on relevant countries to assume
responsibility, as Iraq did, and move forward as soon as
possible on the identification and repatriation of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families in Iraq.
Peace in Iraq and stability in its neighbouring area
are inextricably linked. China welcomes that Iraq has
been fostering friendly relations with countries of the
region. It is worth highlighting that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq should be respected.
Iraq faces multiple challenges, such as food
insecurity, rising prices, shortages of basic services
and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The country faces the heavy burden of rebuilding and
improving its economy. The international community
should continue to help Iraq develop its economy
and improve people’s livelihoods and encourage the
country to explore a development path suited to its
national conditions.
Iraq also faces the important task of tackling
climate change. China supports the efforts of the United
Nations to provide assistance to Iraq, particularly with
regard to the necessary clean-energy technologies. In
that regard, the United Nations country team should
play its full role on the basis of the existing division of
labour among the United Nations agencies.
China has always closely followed the advancement
of peace and development in Iraq and provided
assistance to the country according to our capacity.
During the period when the security situation in
Iraq was most precarious, Chinese enterprises
remained in the country, thus helping to ensure the
recovery of the national economy and the security of
people’s livelihoods.
After the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic,
China took the lead in dispatching a team of pandemic
experts to Iraq and providing the country with multiple
batches of supplies and equipment, as well as in
supplying the country with COVID-19 vaccines, thus
lending robust support to Iraqi people and the pandemic
response. China will continue to work with the rest
of the international community in order to help Iraq
achieve lasting peace and sustainable development at
an early date.

22-352107/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative and Ms. Edwar for
their briefings.
The United Kingdom commends the continued
work of the Special Representative and the whole
mission in Iraq. They have our full support.
The United Kingdom urges Iraq’s political leaders
to work together swiftly and peacefully to form a
Government that delivers in earnest for the Iraqi
people, a Government that can address and tackle the
considerable challenges that Iraq faces, including on
security, climate change and economic reform.
On security, the United Kingdom reiterates in
particular its condemnation of the Iranian ballistic
missile attack on Erbil on 13 March. Our support
for the security and stability of the State of Iraq
remains steadfast.
On climate change, we welcome the efforts of the
Government of Iraq to mitigate the worst effects of
climate change as we have heard about today, including
the recent creation of a committee to oversee the
preparation of national strategies. We thank United
Nations agencies for their continued support on climate
change and urged regional neighbours to engage with
the Government in Iraq on water security.
On economic reform, Iraq’s economy faces
significant structural risks. Urgent reform is necessary
so that Iraq is able to provide livelihoods and essential
services for the next generation of Iraqis. A new
Government would be able to accelerate and implement
Iraq’s ambitious economic reform agenda and prioritize
improving Iraq’s business environment.
We also remain concerned at the continued
displacement of approximately 1.2 million Iraqis.
We urge a new Government to work closely with
the Humanitarian Coordinator to prioritize the
reintegration of Iraq’s remaining internally displaced
persons, including ensuring civil documentation for all
displaced persons so that they can access their rights
and services.
We welcome the first meeting between the federal
Ministry of Oil and the Kurdistan Regional Government
following the Federal Supreme Court’s oil and gas
ruling. We encourage continued dialogue on this issue
to find a sustainable solution.
8/20

17/05/2022

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative for her update on missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property.
That is an important issue, and we commend the Special
Representative for maintaining a focus on it.
All the challenges that we have heard about today
require the formation of a stable Government in
Iraq, and so I would like to finish by reiterating the
importance of rapid progress in this.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert and Ms. Edwar for their briefings.
I should also like to welcome the delegation of Iraq to
the Council.
This afternoon I will address three issues relating
to the situation in Iraq: security, the strengthening
of institutions and economic recovery, and the
humanitarian dimension.
First, the almost 70 attacks recorded between
February and April attributed to the Islamic State
are a source of great concern. We acknowledge the
efforts of the members of the global coalition against
the Islamic State in support of Iraq and would recall
that counter-terrorism activities must always be
carried out in keeping with the norms of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Mexico would also note its concern at the misuse of
the invocation of Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations in the context of combating terrorism.
Echoing other speakers, my country condemns
the 13 March attack on Erbil, and we await the early
publication of the results of the investigations. Another
cause for concern is the security situation in Sinjar. We
call for the full implementation of the 2020 agreements.
The people of that region have been the victims of
numerous attacks, and it is therefore necessary to
strengthen coordination between Baghdad and Erbil so
as to put an end to the violence in that area and foster
social and economic recovery.
Turning to the political track, it is regrettable
that more than seven months after the elections there
is still no Government in place. Mexico urges the
political forces to come to an agreement that would
make it possible to establish an inclusive Government.
A united and responsible leadership is vital to making
progress in strengthening institutional capacity and the
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

reforms that the country needs. We also take note of the
participation of women in the elections, and we hope
that that will also be reflected in the distribution of the
ministerial portfolios.
We also commend the good offices of the Special
Representative in post-electoral dialogues and between
the federal and regional Governments of Kurdistan.
Along those lines, we call on both Baghdad and Erbil
to resolve, in the constitutional framework, their
differences and address the dispute resulting from the
legislation on oil and gas management.

S/PV.9034

in Iraq. In that context, we call on the international
community to support Baghdad’s efforts to stabilize
the situation in the country, including through ensuring
the rule of law and working towards social, financial
and humanitarian sector recovery in the country. We
deem it unacceptable that the country be turned into an
arena for settling scores and for regional confrontation.

My delegation recognizes the improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Iraq; however, challenges
remain. It is pivotal to increase the Government’s
investment in quality basic services, especially given
the current circumstances, in which international
financing is becoming scarce and the risk of food
insecurity is increasing.

Despite the fact that the results of the early elections
to Iraq’s Council of Representatives were endorsed
in December last year and that the presidency of the
Council was re-elected in January, we note with regret
that members of Parliament still have not managed to
finish forming the highest bodies of State authority. We
hope that the parties in Parliament will soon be able to
agree on the appointment of a president and the makeup
of a new Government, one that enjoys the support of
all major political, ethnic and sectarian groups in the
country.

Turning to other matters, it is our hope that other
States will follow Iraq’s example in the repatriation
and relocation of families from the Al-Hol camp. The
assistance of United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations, working in coordination with the Iraqi
Government, is key to finding long-term solutions for
those families and for internally displaced persons,
especially with regard to expediting identification
documents.

We welcome the resumption in April of the dialogue
between the federal authorities in Baghdad and the
Kurdish autonomous region on addressing existing
areas of disagreement, first and foremost in the oil and
gas sphere. We are convinced that further addressing
this issue will also help address existing ethnic and
sectarian problems and allow the economic potential to
be more effectively leveraged for the benefit of the Iraqi
people as a whole.

Mexico commends Iraq’s diplomatic activism
aimed at tightening regional cooperation in water
management. We also take note of the progress made
in terms of cases of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals.

Despite Baghdad’s achievements on the counterterrorism front, the security situation in the country
remains volatile, including as a result of the recent
increased activity of clandestine terrorist groups.
According to the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (see S/2022/368), in various provinces of
the country, attacks by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) fighters, including suicide bombers,
are continuing. They destabilize the already turbulent
atmosphere in the area of regional security.

Finally, we reiterate our delegation’s readiness to
work constructively to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
briefing on the situation in Iraq. We also listened very
carefully to Ms. Hanaa Edwar.
We remain concerned over the internal political
situation in Iraq, which is compounded by the difficult
socioeconomic situation.

Once again, we would underscore that that challenge
can be effectively tackled through the broadest possible
coordination of counter-terrorism efforts. We believe it
necessary to ensure that all parties involved in the fight
against terrorism in Iraq respect its State sovereignty
and coordinate their efforts with those of the country’s
official authorities.

We cannot fail to notice that the attempts by certain
external actors seeking to derive benefit from Iraq’s
domestic disputes are preventing a lasting normalization

In that context, we note the activities of the
Baghdad Quadripartite Information Centre, with the
participation of representatives of Russia, Iraq, Iran

22-352109/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

and Syria. The Centre does important work in terms of
coordinating counter-terrorism measures in the region.
For our part, we intend to continue to assist in
building the capacity of Iraq’s security forces, first and
foremost by promoting bilateral military and technical
cooperation, particularly since Moscow and
Baghdad have long cooperated closely in fighting ISIL
and other terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her, as
always, informative updates on the situation in Iraq, as
well as on the question of missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property. I would
also like to thank Ms. Edwar for her important briefing
and to acknowledge the presence of our Iraqi colleague.
It has been more than seven months since Iraqis cast
their ballots in the October parliamentary elections. Yet,
as we heard today, disagreements and division — the
loop of zero-sum politics, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General called it — continue to
obstruct the election of a President and the formation of
a new Government.
In October 2019, Iraqis took to the streets to
demand reforms. Their demands remain unanswered.
We have recently seen fresh demonstrations against
the ongoing political deadlock. We urge the relevant
actors to resolve their differences and swiftly form a
Government that responds to the legitimate needs and
aspirations of all Iraqi people. That is all the more
important at a time when Iraqis, like others, face the
spectre of growing food insecurity. Iraqi women must
be full participants in all aspects of Government
formation, while the aspirations of Iraq’s young people
must also be addressed.
The security situation in Iraq continues to be a
cause for concern. Ireland unequivocally condemns
the 13 March missile attacks on Erbil, claimed by
Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. There is
no justification for such an act of violence against the
territory of a sovereign country.
We are also concerned by a recent uptick in attacks
attributed to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
Those attacks regrettably remind us of the enduring
threat posed by the group to Iraq and elsewhere.
As we heard, the situation in Sinjar is deeply
troubling. We call on Baghdad and Erbil to implement
10/20

17/05/2022

security arrangements, in close consultation with
Yazidis and other communities living in Sinjar, who
have suffered for too long from a lack of security.
Reports of as many as 10,000 individuals fleeing
violence in Sinjar in recent weeks are deeply concerning.
We call on all actors to exercise restraint, engage in
dialogue and respect Iraq’s territorial integrity.
Iraqis have waited too long for accountability for
human rights violations in their country, including
those committed against demonstrators, activists,
journalists, human rights defenders and women who
are targeted for their participation in the public sphere.
I again thank Ms. Edwar for her important testimony on
behalf of civil society today.
Today is the International Day against Homophobia,
Transphobia and Biphobia. I am extremely troubled
by recent reports of killings, abductions, torture and
sexual violence perpetrated against lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender persons by armed groups in
Iraq. Such persecution is intolerable and unacceptable.
I call on the authorities to end the culture of impunity
that emboldens perpetrators and denies victims and
survivors their right to justice.
As the fifth most climate-vulnerable country
in the world, Iraq faces myriad problems, including
water scarcity, extreme temperatures, desertification,
drought, a lack of clean energy sources and, as we
heard from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral today, dust- and sandstorms.
Tensions within communities over water resources
and migration from drought-ridden rural areas to illequipped urban ones are just two examples of the risks
and challenges that can contribute to the humanitarian
situation and instability in Iraq.
We welcome Iraq’s pioneering of a green paper,
and we encourage further efforts, including by the
new Government, once formed, to enshrine climate
mitigation and adaptation into policy and to prioritize a
much-needed green transition.
Efforts to address such risks should consider the
disproportionate impact that the fallout of climate
change has on women and girls. We commend the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in that space, including the recent
engagement with community-based initiatives aimed
at raising awareness about gender equality and the
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

leadership role of women in addressing the adverse
effects of climate change.
Finally, we note that Iraq continues to play a
commendable and constructive role in regional
cooperation and mediation at a critical time. We look
forward to the renewal of UNAMI’s mandate at the
end of this month, and we offer our full support to the
Mission and its leadership.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special
Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the close
cooperation of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq with the Government of Iraq in providing the
necessary assistance sought by it to tackle the multiple
challenges being faced by Iraq. I thank Ms. Hanaa
Edwar for her insights. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to this meeting.
We take note of the discussions among various
political parties in Iraq towards the formation of a
new Government. I reiterate India’s support for the
democratic process in Iraq and encourage all political
parties to work together for the early formation of
a new Government that can take measures to fulfil
the aspirations of the Iraqi people, especially women
and young people, and promote inclusiveness and
reconciliation.
We also note with appreciation the positive steps
taken by Iraq to implement the national counterterrorism strategy. Only through such efforts can we
eliminate the threats posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups in Iraq.
We welcome the continued cooperation of Iraq with the
Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Despite the success of the ongoing counterterrorism efforts by the Iraqi security forces, ISIL
remains active in the country, as acknowledged by the
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/63).
ISIL’s ability to launch attacks at a steady rate, including
through hit-and-run operations and ambushes, is deeply
concerning. The focus of the Security Council should
be to eliminate every threat posed by ISIL and other
terror groups in Iraq and elsewhere in the world. We
support the continued international efforts to assist Iraq
in combating terrorism, including through the training
of Iraqi security forces.
Military actions inside Iraqi territory by Iraq’s
neighbours are a clear violation of Iraq’s sovereignty.

S/PV.9034

Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must be
fully respected. Similarly, the continued possession of
arms and weapons by non-State groups in Iraq outside
State control is also a matter of great concern. Armed
groups in Iraq should disarm and show commitment to
democratic principles.
We applaud the Government of Iraq’s concerted
efforts to maintain friendly and cordial ties with all its
neighbours and to facilitate dialogue between countries
of the region. We also welcome the ongoing cooperation
between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to achieve
an early amicable solution on the issue of missing
Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals, as well as
the return of Kuwaiti property.
India’s friendship with Iraq is steeped in history.
Our people-to-people ties and multifaceted bilateral
relations are very strong. India has always responded
to the urgent needs of Iraq. There are more than 1,700
Iraqi students pursuing higher studies in educational
institutions in India and around 15,000 Iraqi citizens
visit India every year for medical treatment in various
hospitals in India.
India remains steadfast in its support for Iraq’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We hope to continue our partnership with the new
Government, as soon as it is formed, in furthering Iraq’s
endeavours towards peace, stability and prosperity for
its people.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Ms. Edwar for their briefings. France commends the
Special Representative’s outstanding work in Iraq in
a very difficult context. I would also like to welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq
among us today.
In October 2021, Iraqis went to the polls to elect
their parliamentary representatives. They have now
been waiting seven months for the appointment of a
prime minister and the formation of a Government. It
is therefore urgent that the political actors make the
compromises necessary for reaching an agreement.
The same applies to the appointment of a president
of the Republic. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the importance of the participation of Iraqi women
in the political life of their country, and, in that
regard, I welcome the fact that there are more women
parliamentary representatives than ever before.

22-3521011/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

Many issues await the next Government’s attention.
I am thinking in particular about issues concerning
security. In that regard, we strongly condemn Iran’s
ballistic-missile attack of 13 March. It is an unacceptable
attack against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq.
Our concern about the threat posed by Da’esh
remains undiminished. In that regard, I would like to
express our gratitude for all the work carried out by the
Iraqi security forces and the Global Coalition against
Da’esh. Together with the Iraqis, France will remain
committed to combating terrorism.
France also accords special attention to the Sinjar
situation. The efforts of the Iraqi Government at the
highest level to implement the Sinjar Agreement on the
security, governance and reconstruction of the district
enjoy our full support. The ceasefire between the
Iraqi armed forces and certain armed groups must be
sustainable and, above all, allow for the return of the
more than 4,000 families that were forced to leave the
district following the escalation that occurred between
late April and early May. Moreover, we stand ready
to fully provide assistance in attending to the needs
caused by those internal displacements.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral said, constructive cooperation between the
federal Government and the autonomous Kurdistan
Region is imperative. Accordingly, we call on Baghdad
and Erbil to institutionalize their dialogue on all
relevant issues, including political, economic, energy
and security issues. We are extremely grateful for the
good offices of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) in that regard.
I would also like to mention the regional context,
which has direct consequences for the situation in Iraq.
France welcomes the Prime Minister’s commitment to
promote regional security and stability. I also recall the
importance of the dialogue between Iraq and Kuwait,
with regard to the missing Kuwaitis and third-country
nationals. We welcome the progress mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/366) and
encourage both States to pursue their cooperation.
As the Special Representative recalled at the
beginning of her briefing, Iraq has experienced
substantial sandstorms in recent days, resulting in
numerous hospitalizations and the upheaval of daily life
of the country. The frequency of such storms has only
increased in recent years. That is a visible consequence
12/20

17/05/2022

of global warming and desertification. In that regard, I
would like to express France’s full solidarity with Iraq,
which joined the Paris Agreement last year.
As the negotiations to renew UNAMI’s mandate
approach, I would like to draw the attention of every
member of the Security Council to the importance of
environmental and climate issues in Iraq. Our support
for the Iraqi authorities and people in the fight against
climate change will be unconditional.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), Ghana, Kenya
and my country, Gabon. We thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for her informative briefing on the most
recent developments in Iraq and on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We also thank Ms. Hanaa Edwar for her briefing. And,
of course, we welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq at this meeting.
On 27 May 2021, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2576 (2021), which extended the
mandate of UNAMI to 27 May 2022. As we are only
a few days from its expiration, now is the time to
legitimately take stock of the Mission’s implementation
of its mandate and the situation in Iraq. To that end, we
will structure our statement along three main lines: the
political, security and humanitarian dimensions.
The peaceful holding of the 10 October 2021
parliamentary elections has been a source of hope for
many Iraqis, although the announcement of the results
was marred by tensions that resulted in an electoral
dispute. The willingness of all political actors to abide
by the provisions of the Constitution has demonstrated
their commitment to the political stability of Iraq and
given the Iraqi people a reason for optimism.
Unfortunately, the persistent disagreements have
continued to have a negative impact on the political
environment in Iraq. The inability of the Council of
Representatives to reach a consensus on proceeding
with presidential nominations has put the country at
an impasse, with implications for the constitutional
timeline that highlight the fragility of the political
process under way. The persistent lack of unity among
political actors is creating an additional obstacle to
achieving the reforms that are imperative for the
functioning of the country.
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

The rapid formation of a new Government is
therefore crucial. It will meet the aspirations of the
Iraqi people for stability and socioeconomic progress.
In that regard, the A3 urges the various political parties
to overcome their differences in a spirit of compromise
and engage in an inclusive political dialogue, with
a view to reaching a lasting agreement that will lead
to the implementation of political and socioeconomic
reforms and counter the adverse effects of climate
change, characterized by extreme weather conditions.
The establishment of institutionalized and periodic
dialogue between the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government is also crucial. We
therefore underscore the urgency of a structured and
institutionalized dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil
so that the Iraqi people can reap the dividends of peace,
democracy and prosperity. In the light of that, we take
note of the fact that the President of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq signed a decree establishing the holding
of the sixth parliamentary elections for the Region on
1 October 2022.
The A3 welcomes the continued support of UNAMI
for post-electoral activities, including its support for the
Independent High Electoral Commission. In particular,
we underscore post-electoral review activities that will
enable the Commission to use the lessons learned from
previous elections to strengthen institutions to ensure
the soundness of future elections in Iraq. We also
commend the Commission on its efforts to that end.
Iraqi women have demonstrated their readiness
to become part of the political fabric in winning a
number of parliamentary seats, exceeding the quota
established by the Constitution, thereby showing that
they are not only willing but also ready to play more
important leadership roles, including in the political
arena. We therefore urge the new Government to take
into account those results, including with regard to the
appointment of women to posts requiring leadership
and responsibility.
The security situation remains volatile and
worrisome. The large number of asymmetrical attacks
carried out by Da’esh and unidentified armed groups
targeting the Iraqi security forces and the use of
explosive devices and ballistic missiles have continued
to maim innocent civilians, including women and
children. The escalation in violence is likely to hamper
efforts to maintain the peace and stability that were
hard won in Iraq.

S/PV.9034

We also note with concern the remaining tensions
in relation to security between the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government. We call on
all parties concerned to exercise restraint and avoid
any action that could undermine the security and
stability of the country and the region. We commend
the commitment made by the Iraqi Government to
continue dialogue with the international community on
major issues, such as security and counter-terrorism,
as well as its collaboration with the United Nations to
provide them with the necessary security support for
their operations, especially with regard to granting
them access to areas that remain affected by restrictions
related to countering the coronavirus disease.
The A3 condemns the military operations led by
external actors and reaffirms that Iraq must not become
an international arena where States and non-State actors
can settle their disputes to the detriment of the security,
political stability and socioeconomic progress of the
people and the country. In that regard, we encourage
Iraq to continue its initiatives aimed at strengthening
its resilience and promoting regional stability.
Despite the improvement in the humanitarian
situation in Iraq seen since the end of large-scale
military operations against Da’esh in 2017, there are still
considerable needs in that area, and the most vulnerable
people are the main victims of the current situation.
The A3 is pleased with the assistance that the United
Nations, in coordination with the Iraqi Government,
continues to provide to displaced and repatriated
persons and refugees, despite the dramatic decrease
in financing for humanitarian assistance. We welcome
the continued commitment of the Iraqi Government in
favour of the repatriation of Iraqi families from Al-Hol
camp, in the Syrian Arab Republic. We encourage
the repatriation of refugees in dignity in a secure
environment and on a voluntary basis so that they can
go back to a normal life.
We are especially pleased with the commitment
undertaken by the United Nations, alongside the regional
office of Kurdistan, to strengthen the implementation
of mandatory reporting of gender-based violence in
partnership with a local non-governmental organization
and to inaugurate a one-stop service centre of assistance
in Mosul for women who are victims of violence.
The climate crisis in Iraq is also a source of concern.
The violent sandstorm of 5 May, which affected seven
Iraqi governorates, including the capital, Baghdad,

22-3521013/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

demonstrate that. It caused the loss of one human life
and the hospitalization of more than 5,000 other people
for respiratory problems.
Water is also a significant challenge in Iraq.
According to the Iraqi authorities, water reserves have
been reduced by half, in comparison with 2021. Water
scarcity, which is exacerbated by increasingly severe
droughts and a decrease in rainfall, is a major challenge
for the 40 million inhabitants of Iraq. That will have a
direct impact on harvests and is a threat to food security
for the whole country.
For that reason, the A3 is pleased that the Iraqi
Government prioritized the development of climate
resilience and fighting the continuing exacerbation of
the effects of the climate crisis and its corollaries. We
call on the Secretary-General to involve all regional
actors to commit constructively to a constructive
dialogue on water-sharing, the scarcity of which is often
a source of conflict among neighbouring countries.
We cannot conclude without mentioning the
issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.
The A3 recognizes the increased efforts of the Iraqi
Government to find new witnesses who might provide
relevant information with regard to the locations of
potential burial sites. We hope that there will be other
positive developments in the search for missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives.
We would like to reaffirm the full support of the
A3 for UNAMI’s efforts in implementing resolution
2576 (2021), including with regard to the assistance it
provides to the Iraqi Government.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert for her useful briefing and Ms. Edwar
for emphasizing the important issues of human rights
defenders and women’s roles and political participation.
I will address four core issues today: the formation of
a new Government, security, climate and human rights.
First, seven months ago, the Iraqi people came
together to vote in parliamentary elections. It is
unfortunate that since then no progress has been made
on the formation of a new Government. The political
stalemate must end. An interim Government is not in a
position to fully address the multiple challenges facing
Iraq. It is vital that all Iraqi political actors take the
steps necessary to form a Government expeditiously,
14/20

17/05/2022

and work together towards a more peaceful and
prosperous Iraq.
The elections saw historic participation by
women — both as candidates and voters. We hope that
participation is reflected in the new Government.
We also urge the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government to further develop
their dialogue and resolve outstanding issues to find
long-term solutions for increased cooperation.
Secondly, with regard to security, we have heard
again today that the security situation remains fragile.
We call on all parties to exercise restraint and avoid
escalation. We would like to commend the sustained
diplomacy by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi aimed at
building regional dialogue. Yet we are alarmed by
the recent escalation of tensions and clashes in Sinjar,
which have deeply affected the local community,
primarily the Yazidi community. Those clashes have
resulted in the displacement of thousands of civilians,
increased protection concerns and made the difficult
work of reintegrating internally displaced persons
and returnees harder. We welcome the increased
effort by the Iraqi authorities in cooperation with the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to reintegrate displaced Iraqi families in their home
communities. That work is demanding, yet one of the
most important for establishing lasting stability in Iraq.
Thirdly, Norway commends the Iraqi authorities
for their prioritization of climate action. As President
Salih said last week, Iraq’s water scarcity is a matter
of national security. We fully support the continued
provision of technical assistance from UNAMI in
supporting the Government’s priorities on climate
action, and we encourage sustained efforts towards
regional cooperation on water management. Now is the
time to invest in a renewable future. Such efforts will
be strengthened by, and therefore should include, civilsociety organizations.
Finally, sustained efforts to advance human
rights, justice, accountability and the rule of law are
needed to end the cycles of violence that drive conflict
in Iraq. We are concerned by the limited progress in
investigations related to the 2019 protests and the
delays in the appointment of a board of commissioners
for the Iraqi High Commission for Human Rights, and
we recommend that sufficient budgets be allocated
towards the full implementation of the Yazidi Female
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.9034

Survivors Law, to ensure that survivors are able to
access all relevant benefits.

come at the expense of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing. I welcome the delegation of Iraq to the
meeting. We listened carefully to Ms. Edwar.

Regrettably, some recent events in the region are at
odds with the principles of good-neighbourliness, the
Charter of the United Nations and the authority of the
Security Council.

Brazil acknowledges the importance of the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). We commend once again UNAMI’s
assistance to the parliamentary elections held in
Iraq last October, as well as UNAMI’s efforts to
build capacity and strengthen people’s trust in Iraq’s
democracy. The Embassy of Brazil in Baghdad was
among the observers, on election day and throughout,
and bears witness to its success.

We express our satisfaction with the improvement
of the situation of children in Iraq, as reported by the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We commend the Iraqi Government
for its ongoing commitment to the repatriation of Iraqi
families from refugee camps. We hope that political
differences in Iraq, within and between regions
and the federal Government, can be settled through
dialogue and in accordance with the rule of law. Most
urgently, we hope that Iraq will very soon overcome the
current political stalemate in the formation of the new
Government. Far too long has passed.

As we approach the expiration of UNAMI’s
mandate and consider its renewal, it is important to
have clearly in mind a few of the Mission’s overarching
objectives. Those are, most notably, self-Government in
Iraq, the restoration of the rule of law, political stability
and the sustainability of the Iraqi democracy, as well as
the strengthening of Iraqi institutions.
As reported to us by the Secretary-General
periodically, despite improvements in the humanitarian
situation on the ground, meeting the basic needs of
the Iraqi population is still very much dependent
on international assistance. We acknowledge that
UNAMI and other United Nations agencies perform
a critical role in responding to those humanitarian
needs, in coordination with the Iraqi Government. In
the reports of the Secretary-General, however, we read
some warning signs. Humanitarian assistance should
not become a long-term substitute for the delivery of
public services by the Iraqi Government. We therefore
stress the importance of increasing the Government’s
ownership with respect to the protection of its citizens.
The mandate of UNAMI extends far beyond
humanitarian assistance. We should therefore also be
watchful of any warning signs concerning the other
activities of UNAMI’s extensive portfolio. Let the Iraqi
Government not miss the opportunities for increased
ownership that the recovery of the Iraqi economy is
now offering.
International support in the area of security should
be strictly based on either Security Council resolutions
or the consent of the Iraqi Government. The fight
against terrorism — and any other threat — should not

Before I conclude, I would like to ask a question
related to the link between climate change and
sandstorms. Since the Special Representative
mentioned this issue today, I would like to ask what
specific, conceptual and scientific evidence there is to
corroborate the information she provided about the link
between sandstorms and climate change, as opposed to
the former being merely localized climatological events.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing on recent
developments in Iraq and for her efforts in that regard.
We also appreciate the briefing by Ms. Hanaa Edwar
and welcome the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
this meeting.
Iraq has gone through enormous challenges in recent
years and has still managed to make a lot of progress.
However, there is need for more. We are concerned
about the Government formation process in Iraq, which
remains deadlocked in the aftermath of the 10 October
parliamentary election. Although negotiations on the
process have progressed, we see a division among
Iraq’s political parties, which, regrettably, have been
unable to reach agreement regarding the next step in the
process — the election of the president by Parliament,
which was due to be completed by 8 February.
We see an urgent need for a new Iraqi Government
to tackle the challenges ahead. We urge all parties to
reach out to each other put the common interests of the

22-3521015/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

17/05/2022

Iraqi people above all. A Government that is inclusive
and united, with the meaningful participation of
women, will be in a strong position to respond to the
aspirations of the Iraqi people.

politicians has focused on which political party gets
what, rather than on forming a Government that respects
human rights and aspires to improve governance and
deliver services to the Iraqi people.

We are also worried about the security situation in
Iraq, bearing in mind the latest attacks and the threat
posed by Da’esh. We commend the achievements of the
Iraqi forces in that regard and in trying to enforce the
rule of law. We also welcome information about relations
between Baghdad and Erbil after the 15 February
judgment, and we hope that their differences will
be addressed.

The next Government of Iraq will need to account
for the impending wind-down of humanitarian,
stabilization and development assistance from the
international community. It will need to chart a course
for development and will need to answer to calls from
the people of Iraq to root out corruption and abandon
the politicization of democratic institutions and
administrative processes. These two roadblocks have
hindered the pursuit of prosperity for all Iraqis.

Iraq has many challenges ahead, but it can rely on
the support of many countries and organizations like the
United Nations. The United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) has plaid a vital role in supporting
Iraq’s democratic transition. We commend its work and
genuine cooperation with the Iraqi Government. We
appreciate the work UNAMI is doing on the impact
of climate change in Iraq, considering that Iraq is
considered the fifth-most vulnerable country to the
effects of climate change. We look forward to renewing
and strengthening the mandate of UNAMI so that it
can better adapt and respond to the needs of the Iraqi
people, working in synergy with them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for her briefing and her leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
plays an important and respected role in Iraq. I also
thank Ms. Hanaa Edwar for her informative and timely
briefing, as well as for her relentless efforts to promote
the rights of women in Iraq.
Today I want to highlight the need for Iraq’s leaders
to quickly form a Government that reflects the will of
the voters, and then I will turn to the many challenges
that the new Government will face.
First, Iraq deserves considerable credit for the wellmanaged and peaceful parliamentary elections held in
October 2021 and certified by the Federal Supreme
Court in December. However, seven months after those
elections, Iraq remains without a new Government.
Let us not forget — the elections were called early
in response to a groundswell of discontent among Iraqis
over the dysfunction of their Government. We are
therefore concerned that the stalled debate among Iraqi
16/20

The new Government will also need to hold
accountable those who committed abuses against the
protesters of the October 2019 Tishreen movement,
leaving hundreds dead and thousands wounded. And
the Government will need to better protect freedom of
expression and improve the treatment and prosecution
of detainees and prisoners. But the challenges ahead do
not end there.
The next Government will also need to create
and implement a plan to help the remaining displaced
persons, including Iraqi families and orphans in the
Al-Hol camp, in north-eastern Syria, acquire essential
legal documents and rehabilitate and reintegrate
into their communities — safely, voluntarily and
with dignity.
It will also need to fully implement and provide
a budget for the Yazidi Female Survivors Law to aid
in the recovery of the Yazidi community in Sinjar,
the dire situation of which was laid out clearly by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General today.
And there are pressing economic and climate matters
at hand as well. The Iraqi Government will need to
bolster electricity delivery, promote entrepreneurship
and private-sector development that supports job
growth and empower all Iraqis economically. And let
me be clear — a key piece of that agenda must be the
removal of all legal and cultural barriers to women’s
full participation in the workforce.
Finally, the climate crisis is already impacting
Iraq — just look at the disappearance of Sawa Lake
and the increased number and intensity of dust storms,
as was laid out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General today. This crisis disproportionately
impacts women and girls and, if left unaddressed, will
compound instability and lead to further insecurity.
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

We welcome Iraq becoming a party to the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and Iraq’s partnership
with the United Nations system in mitigating and
adapting to climate change through sustainable
development, water management and the use of
renewable energy. And we look forward to seeing
UNAMI continue its critical assistance in strengthening
Iraq’s capacity to tackle climate change.
Let me conclude by making clear that, in all this
work, UNAMI is a critical partner to the Iraqi people,
and it is the duty of the Security Council to equip
UNAMI with a strong mandate to continue to assist
the Government and the people of Iraq as they take on
these challenges.
As the UNAMI penholder, the United States
looks forward to engaging with our Security Council
colleagues towards the adoption and renewal of
UNAMI’s mandate later this month. The United States
is eager to continue our partnership with Iraq and to
work with the new Government once it is formed. For
the sake of the prosperity and security of the Iraqi
people, we hope that that day comes soon.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to congratulate the United
States of America on its presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should also like to thank
Dame Barbara Woodward, Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, for her efforts at the helm of the
Council last month, and Her Excellency Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing.
In addition, I thank Ms. Hanaa Edwar for her briefing.
The political parties in Iraq are continuing their
efforts to reach understandings and solutions to
address the political deadlock in order to form a new
Government that meets the needs of the Iraqi people
within the constitutional time frame and the relevant
laws, one that reflects the interests of the Iraqi people
and guarantees a balanced representation thereof.
In addition, in line with resolution 2576 (2021)
and following the successful holding of elections
in October 2021 and the assistance provided to the
Kurdistan Region during the parliamentary elections

S/PV.9034

held in September 2018, Iraq, in its letter addressed to
the President of the Security Council dated 23 March,
asked UNAMI to provide assistance to the Kurdistan
Region. We asked for technical assistance and advice
and support for the parliamentary elections planned for
October in the Kurdistan Region.
Allow me also to provide the Council with a brief
overview of the most important developments in Iraq
following the elections.
On the security front, the Government and the
people of Iraq would like to thank the Security Council
for the solidarity and ongoing support that it has shown
to Iraq in its fight against terrorism. In April, Iraqi
forces launched a major offensive for hunting down
the remnants of Da’esh in various provinces. Iraq is
committed to repatriating Iraqi nationals detained in the
Al-Hol camp in Syria. The Government has repatriated
almost 1,900 foreign terrorist fighters and 550 families,
that is, 2,249 people, mainly women and children.
Iraq attaches priority to repatriation efforts as well
as to rehabilitation and accountability. We urge the
Member States concerned to repatriate their nationals
from Iraq and Syria. Iraq reiterates its commitment
to continuing cooperation with the international
community to fight terrorism. We reiterate our appeal
to not use our territories for settling scores or for
implementing political objectives under the pretext of
fighting terrorism. We also underscore the importance
of respecting the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations.
Concerning violations involving Turkey and Iran,
the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs delivered to the
Ambassador of Turkey to Iraq a note of protestation
strongly condemning the ongoing violations by the
Turkish army in the north of Iraq. The Iraqi Government
reiterated its appeal for the full withdrawal of Turkish
forces from Iraqi territories, in a demonstration of
binding respect for national sovereignty. Iraq also notes
that the use of Article 51 of the Charter in the acts of
aggression carried out by Turkish forces is without legal
basis. That Article does not authorize undermining an
independent country’s sovereignty.
We would recall in that connection that the presence
of the majority of the elements of the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) in the north of Iraq is the result
of an agreement between the Turkish Government and
the PKK, which Iraq opposed.

22-3521017/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

The Iranian bombing of the city of Erbil with
12 ballistic missiles on 13 April led to great losses
of civilian property. Iraq calls for solid relations and
dialogue between the two countries in order to address
pending issues by peaceful means and not through the
use of force and unfounded allegations.
Concerning support for the liberated areas,
ongoing efforts and coordination with the international
community have contributed to re-establishing stability
in the liberated areas and enabled us to implement
infrastructure, health-care, electricity and bridge and
road construction projects, which has allowed many
people to return to their regions and for the camps to
be closed. The Government, in cooperation with the
United Nations Mine Action Service, is continuing
demining and awareness-raising efforts as regards the
danger of mines.
In terms of the provision of basic services and
the efforts made to that end through the relevant
Government programme, we are continuing our efforts
to provide emergency support in terms of food security
and development and to implement urgent actions to
address water scarcity. We are working with the United
Nations Development Programme to strengthen the
relevant bodies, ensure the socioeconomic well-being
of remote communities, work for education, create job
opportunities, promote strength and resilience, provide
greater means for coexistence, improve orphans’
standard of living, provide loans for small, mediumsized and large enterprises, and address strategic
objectives relating to national economic growth.
Our Government is also continuing its efforts to
establish a clear budget for a general transformation
project in Iraq and for rehabilitating post offices to
provide electronic services through a Government
services portal.
On women’s empowerment, the Government’s
efforts are ongoing as part of the follow-up plan for
resolution 1325 (2000). We are assessing what has been
done in the context of our second national plan for the
implementation of that resolution in Iraq as well as the
results achieved with international support. We have
also set up a female mediators for peace committee,
which is working to implement a national strategy to
strengthen women’s active participation in resolving
conflict and peacemaking.
We have also modified our code of conduct for
the internal security forces and the code of conduct
18/20

17/05/2022

for the information and communication office to meet
gender requirements. We have also created a tribunal
of inquiry and a criminal tribunal to address cases
of domestic violence in each province. The process
for divorced women to receive alimonies from the
Ministry of Justice has been automated for facilitating
follow-ups. Further, we have implemented genderfocused performance-assessment programmes in all
Government institutions, and we have modernized the
curricula related to human rights by adding university
courses pertaining to women’s rights and peaceful
coexistence. In addition, we launched a second national
plan on women’s economic empowerment for the
2022-2023 period to promote capacity-building and
provide loans.
In terms of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Iraq, my Government is very eager to honour
its international and national commitments to prevent
violations against children during the fight against
terrorism. A meeting between our national commission
for monitoring and reporting and the United Nations
country task force on monitoring and reporting was
held on the subject of banning the recruitment and use
of children. We have already agreed on a draft work
plan waiting to be signed pending a final response from
the United Nations.
Through Iraqi media networks, we have also been
discussing how to best disseminate human rights
culture in such areas as women, children, people with
special needs and minorities. We have also identified
effective measures for managing prisons, strengthening
and monitoring human rights in displaced persons
camps and following up on social, familial, economic
and electricity-related issues. Furthermore, a group of
people injured during the October protests received
foreign medical treatment in recognition of their
sacrifice for reform.
In terms of the fight against the coronavirus
disease, the Government is following the most recent
developments and measures undertaken to fight the
pandemic. It is also following up on the Governmental
measures to promote control, prevention and awarenessraising to limit the spread of the virus and to take up
a comprehensive national review of ways to address
urgent health issues with a view to guaranteeing
health coverage. In addition, we are continuing to raise
awareness through the media and all public institutions
while encouraging people to get vaccinated as early as
possible at the nearest vaccination site.
22-35210

17/05/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

Pertaining to the fight against desertification and
climate change, on 7 February, Baghdad hosted the
meetings of the thirty-sixth session of the Near East
Regional Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations. Iraq raised
the issues of water, agriculture and sustainable
development. Furthermore, from 5 to 7 March, we
hosted the second Baghdad Conference on Water, under
the slogan “Water and Climate Change”.
For its part, the Ministry for the Environment
continues to support clean energy and nature-based
solutions and ecosystem services. The Ministry
continues to protect biodiversity and is working to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, so that
we can shift to a green and sustainable economy. The
Ministry for the Environment is also facilitating the
use of eco-friendly cars, specifically, electric vehicles
and hybrid vehicles that use mixed types of energy. We
have obtained the necessary permits to exempt these
vehicles of customs duties and registration costs, which
is in line with Iraq’s commitments to the provisions of
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Iraq has suffered from sandstorms because of
desertification and water scarcity. We are therefore
asking UNAMI and the international community to
provide us with assistance to fight desertification and
to facilitate discussions on this issue with neighbouring
countries, in which we could address the equitable
distribution of water.
As for Iraq’s relationship with the brotherly
State of Kuwait, it has been getting stronger since
the diplomatic relations between our two countries
were resumed 18 years ago. Iraq’s foreign policy has
managed to tighten this relationship. It has attached
particular importance to the dossiers of missing people,
maritime boundaries and property. Iraq has honoured
its commitments, paid all compensation due and turned
the page on these issues.
The Foreign Affairs Ministry continues to collect
books, microfilms and other media in libraries and
universities in Iraq to consolidate them and then
officially return them through diplomatic channels.
Through the media and diplomatic and consular
missions around the world, Iraq is continuing to extend
a humanitarian appeal in Arabic and in English for
Iraqi citizens or anyone else who has information in
relation to missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
or anyone who has information on Kuwaiti property,

S/PV.9034

including Kuwaiti archives. Iraq is continuing its
cooperation with Kuwait with respect to the information
that was received by the Iraqi Embassy in Kuwait from
a witness who claims to have information about two
burial sites in Kuwait.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his firm support for Iraq. He has always
focused on respect for its sovereignty and territorial
unity. I very much appreciate the ongoing support
from the international community to Iraq so that we
are able to achieve prosperity and stability for the Iraqi
people. On behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Iraq, I also very much appreciate the efforts made
by UNAMI and its Head of Mission to support Iraq in
different fields, particularly on the humanitarian and
development levels, during the period covered by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/368).
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert to respond to the question raised.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: In addition to what has
been clearly explained by the Permanent Representative
of Iraq, I would just like to refer to my briefing in
February (see S/PV.8975). In that briefing I spoke
about water scarcity in the region, not just as a threat
on the horizon, but as a present danger. In that briefing,
I mentioned the immediate threats of the salinization of
water and soils and desertification and disappearance
of arable lands. In my briefing today I again underlined
desertification as a central concern.
In February, I added that much of the scarcity of
water can be explained by climate change, but not only
climate change. I also explained that water flows are
actively being reduced by neighbouring countries, and
I added that potable water and irrigation infrastructure
and maintenance are significantly lagging behind in
Iraq. Once again, I underlined that desertification is
a central concern, that dust and sandstorms are really
massive, and what we will need to see in Iraq, as well
as in the region, is a national regional programme of
action to understand and tackle the root causes, monitor,
protect, prepare, establish early warning, and so on.
But we cannot deny that there is desertification. It
is a fact of life, and lately I have experienced it on a
weekly basis.
The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
the clarification that she has provided.

22-3521019/20

S/PV.9034

The situation concerning Iraq

17/05/2022

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): It is just to clarify
one point I agree with everything that was said by
the Special Representative. There was no denial of
desertification as a problem.

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: It is not at all my intention
to disappoint any member of the Security Council. I was
trying to say that desertification is a central concern.
Desertification is a consequence of climate change,
but not only climate change. It is also a consequence
of reduced water flows and insufficient infrastructure.

The question, and I repeat it, is what is the specific
conceptual and scientific evidence that she has that
enables her to say that sandstorms are a consequence
of climate change and not an isolated climatological
event? That is to say, how does she separate climate
change from a local event?

If I am now asked to give the footnotes on the
scientific evidence, I will have to get back to the
Council member, but I am also happy to invite him to
Baghdad and to come with me to the Ministry, because
it will be able to provide a very thorough presentation
with all the evidence that there is.

She also said that more storms are to come. How
does she know that?

The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
the clarifications she has provided and for the offer of
further information, should it be needed.

The representative of Brazil has requested the floor
to make a further statement.

For the record, therefore, I would register my
disappointment with the reply that was just given.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. HennisPlasschaert to further respond to the question raised.

20/20

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

22-35210
