UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

24%

YEAR

MEETING:

1 JUNE 1983

NEW,YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/245 1) ....................................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ............................

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...........

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.245 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2451st MEETING
Held
President:

Mr.

Elleck

in New York on Wednesday,

Kufakunesu
(Zimbabwe).

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

MASHINGAIDZE

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

1 June 1983, at 10.30 a.m.

(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Councii (S/15761)

agenda (S/Agenda/2451)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2439th to 2444th. and 2446th to 2450th meetings], I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan,
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Jamaica, Japan,. Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique,
the Niger, Nigeria, Panama,
Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia
and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
The meeting was called to order at 11.25 am.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
It gives me great pleasure, at this
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
June, to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr.
Kamanda wa Kamanda, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International
Co-operation of Zaire, and to Mr.
Umba di Lutete, Permanent Representative of Zaire to the
United Nations, for their services as President of the Security Council during the month of May. Both guided the
work of the Council with great diplomatic skill during a
particularly demanding period and I am sure that I speak
for all members in expressing to them our deep
appreciation.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauritius)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Zanf (Afghanistan).
Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angala), Mr.
Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr. Woolcott (Australia). Mr. Hashim
(Bangladesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr. A&bade
(Benin), Mr. Mogwe (Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Trucco (Chile). Mr. Albtin Holg&n (Colombia), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Khahl (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia),
Mr. Davin (Gabon), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. Gbeho (Ghana), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr.
Kaba (Guinea), Mr. R&z (Hungary), Mr. Rao (India), Mr.
Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia), Mr. Serajzadeh (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda
(Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait),
Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Tan Sri Zainal Abidin (Malaysia), Mr. Traore
(Mali), Mr. Mutloz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Erdenechtduun

2. On behalf of the delegation of Zimbabwe, I wish to
say how happy and grateful we are to succeed our Zairian
brothers, and to share with them the stewardship of the
Council in its consideration of the situation in Namibia.
We are greatly inspired by the exemplary manner in which
they guided the work of the Council during the month of
May.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
1

(Mongolia), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Chissano
(Mozambique),
Mr. Oumarou (Niger). Mr. Bolokor
(Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera (Panama), Mr, Jamal (Qatar), Mr.
Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal). Ms, Gonthier
(Seychelles). Mr. Stevens (Sierra Leone); Mr. Adan (Somalia). Mr. von Schimding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Mr. EI-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. SIim
(Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Owiny (Uganda). Mr.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper
Volta), Mr. Chaderton-Matos (Venezuela), Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma
(Zambia) took the pIaces reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.

12. Recently two important meetings were held, the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, at New Delhi in March, and the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence, in Paris in April. We
endorse the views which were put forward at those meetings and support the appeals for a speedy settlement of
the problem of the independence of Namibia.

4. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and the delegation
of the Council to take places at the Security Council table.

13. In the face of South African usurpation, we affirm
the right of the people of Namibia to self-determination,
freedom, democracy, territorial integrity and national
independence.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

14. These rights of the Namibian ueoule can be exercised by effective implementation
of Council resolution
435 (1978). That is the sole basis for the peaceful settlement of the problem of Namibia within the framework of
the United Nations.

it has been a very active member of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, whose important work in support
of independence for Namibia we have long supported
under the efficient leadership of Mr. Paul Lusaka.

5. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Sam Nujoma,
President of the South West Africa People’s Organisation
(SWAPO), to take a place at the Council table.

15. South Africa’s stubbornness. the nlunderinc! of the
natural resources of Namibia by the Pretoria racists, the
constant acts of aggression by their military forces against
the front-line countries and other independent African
countries constitute a serious threat to regional and world
peace and must be stopped.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.
6. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

16. We cannot sit idly by and witness the failure of the
many efforts made over the past years for the independence of Namibia. Instead of being discouraged, we find
even more reason, even more encouragement to support
the Namibian people in their struggle for independence.

7. Mr. CHADERTON
MATOS (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Sir, we are pleased to see you assuming
the presidency of the Council this month. Your qualities
as a diplomat and your long international experience as
the representative of Zimbabwe guarantee positive leadership during these meetings.

17. We wish to emphasize and pay a tribute to the effectiveness and usefulness of the necessary steps taken by the
Secretary-General in this direction, with his moral authority, to promote a peaceful settlement to this conflict which
calls for responsibility and serious thought on the part of
the parties concerned. We must pledge our full s!~upport to
him in the exercise of his special responsibility.

8. We wish to congratulate the President of the Council
for the month of May on his skilfui leadership of the
Council which led to the adoption of resolution 532
(1983).

18;,/ This is a good time to remind the Council of the
recent background to the problems of southern Africa
which constitute a threat to international peace and
security.

9. My country wishes to thank you, Sir, and the
members of the Council for giving us this opportunity to
participate in the debate.
10. Once again, the United Nations is faced with the
efforts of the South African racist r&ime to maintain its
unlawful occupation of Namibia in disregard of the decisions of the Organisation and in open rebellion against
the international community.

19. Zimbabwe is an ideal example of an intelligent and
realistic solution to a serious problem arising from colonialism and illegality. This solution led to independence
and democracy for that fraternal African nation. The
spirit of Lancaster House is a positive precedent. If the
political wisdom and pragmatism that underlay that spirit
had been used to resolve other contlicts, there would be
fewer tragedies in the world today. If political wisdom
and pragmatism were to inspire all the parties concerned
in the Namibian problem, then we could find a peaceful
solution in keeping with resolution 435 (1978).

11, We Venezuelans feel very particularly committed to
the cause of the Namibian people. Venezuela is a traditionally democratic anti-racist and anti-colonialist country. It was a member of the Security Council when
resolution 435 (1978) was adopted. For a number of years
2

20. The presence of outside factors subsequent to resolution 435 (1978) is not conducive to the effo-rts to create an
independent democratic State in Namibia. We note that
the introduction of outside factors, far from neutralizing
local or international extremist options as happened in
earlier cases, may well strengthen these extremist options
and increase their number to the detriment of the altematives of peace and restraint, without which there can be no
really independent, sovereign and democratic future for
Namibia,.
21. The United Nations vocation to further the independence of Namibia must be successfully fulfilled. Our
inability to solve the problem has allowed the South African dictatorship to continue its unlawful occupation of
Namibia, to oppress the people, exploit their resources
and attack neighbouring countries, as has been shown by
the recent military aggression against Mozambique.
22. There can be no peace on the African continent so
long as the Namibian people are subject to these opprobrious policies. The independence of Namibia is necessary
if there is to be a just and lasting peace in the region.
Venezuela is deeply concerned about this deplorable
situation. For this reason we support the efforts that have
been made in good faith to solve the problem. We also
support SWAPO, the authentic and legitimate representative of the people of Namibia, in its efforts to achieve
independence, freedom and a democratic State that guarantees human rights and whose presence and influence
are needed by the African community and the entire international community.
23. We hope that the resolution adopted yesterday will
not be a dead letter but a great stride forward.
24. Before concluding I should like to read out a message sent yesterday by the President of Venezuela, Mr.
Luis Herrera Camplns, to the President of the Council for
the month of May.
[rite speaker read out the text quoted in document
S/15807.]
The next speaker is the represen25. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Grenada, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
26. Mr. TAYLOR (Grenada): Sir, first of all I wish to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of June. Perhaps I am fortunate that I am addressing the Council at this point,
because it gives me an opportunity, immediately after the
representative of Venezuela, to say a word of welcome to
you. Our countries, Zimbabwe and Grenada, share a
great deal. We have a common history of struggle, but
perhaps more important to us at this time is the fact that,
existentially, we are in the same boat. Therefore we are
convinced that the work that was started and was effectively undertaken by the representative of Zaire, will be
continued under your guidance.

27. The Council is meeting as a result of the virtually
universal demand of the international community for decisive action towards independence for. the Namibian
people. These meetings are perhaps a good omen. Lamentably, however, these meetings of the Council cannot in
themselves diminish our anger and frustration, which
have come about as a result of four decades of fine oratory and well-intentioned
resolutions but virtually no
action. Here in the Council and also in the General
Assembly we have produced a great deal of sometimes
frightening thunder, but the political drought on the question of Namibia continues. We cannot lose sight of the
fact that these meetings have been convened 17 years after
the historic General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of
27 October 1966, terminating South Africa’s Mandate
over Namibia, 12 years after the equally historic advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice,’ which vindicated the General Assembly decision and further stated
that South Africa’s occupation of Namibia was illegal,
and five years after the adoption of resolution 435 (1978).
28. After all these years and after all these and other
truly historic decisions, the racist South African Govemment, aided and abetted by its patrons and benefactors,
continues, without compunction, to flout the will of the
international community.
29. Over these years we have witnessed the savagery
and ferocity of the racist apartheid monster as thousands
of our brothers and sisters have been brutally and coldbloodedly murdered in Namibia and in South Africa.
After all these years we know the apartheidmonster
and
we know its ruthlessness and its propensity to procrastinate and prevaricate. However, we are alarmed at the
fact that others, including a permanent member of this
body, are prepared to support and defend South Africa’s policies of genocide.
30. It is a well-known fact that Namibia is held hostage
because the United States insists, by virtue of its policy of
linkage, that Cuban internationalist forces must be withdrawn from the sister Republic of Angola before Namibia
becomes independent. We utterly reject this so-called linkage policy because it makes the racist Pretoria regime
more arrogant, intransigent and callous. It entices South
Africa to continue its heinous crimes against humanity.
Moreover, independence for our oppressed and exploited
brothers and sisters of Namibia cannot be predicated
upon a diminution of Angolan sovereignty. South Africa
and whoever supports its crimes cannot be given the right
to establish the price of Namibian independence; that
price the Namibians are paying in blood. The front-line
and other African States support the genuine aspirations
of our heroic Namibian brothers and sisters at great economic cost and at the cost of the lives of innocent citizens.
31. Indeed, only a few days ago, the Pretoria Fascists
mounted another of their self-styled punitive air raids
against the sister republic of Mozambique at the very
moment the Council was commencing these deliberations. South Africa’s baseless theories of racial superiority
make it as irrational and mindless as such theories made
its ideological mentors-Hitler’s
Nazi gangs-more than

four decades ago. Appeasement enticed the Nazis into
making greater and more and more ludicrous demands.
Pampering would certainly make the racist monster more
pig-headed.

38. In this dual capacity, my delegation calls on the
Security Council to take the action-necessary to bring
about strict compliance with its resolution 435 (1978),
which approved the independence plan for Namibia. My
country considers that the Council must shoulder its full
responsibility and must therefore define the specific objectives, in terms of deadlines, so that the independence process can finally be brought to fruition. Having heard the
statements ‘of the various Powers, we believe that the
necessary awareness and political will exist so that the
Council can act accordingly.

32. We welcome, as we have always done, every effort to
bring Namibia’s enslavement, this very sad chapter in
Africa’s history, to an end peacefully. However, we harbour no illusions. Only the intensification of the armed
struggle will force South Africa to let Namibia go, and
that is why we are convinced that the struggle in Namibia
is clear-cut. In that struggle there is no neutrality, no middle ground, because, as things are at the moment, if we
talk about equitableness in a struggle between the oppressor and the oppressed we are quite deliberately talking
about hypocrisy. Today the struggle is clear-cut. One can
be either on the side of the oppressed Namibian people or
on the side of their racist oppressors. Those that choose to
protect and defend South Africa must cease to lecture us
on questions of justice and democracy.

39. The Secretary-General too has inspired hope in us.
Since he ‘began his term more than a year ago he has
devoted himself with fervour, patience, intelligence and
realism to devising a way of bringing about an agreement.
At the Paris Conference his dedication inspired us to seek
and obtain full support for his efforts. We are convinced
that, with the concerted support of the Council, the
Secretary-General is the best person to speed the fulfilment of the aspirations of the Namibian people for
freedom.

33. In conclusion, I wish to state, in the name of the
Government and people of Grenada, that we commend
the front-line States for the unstinting support that they
continue to give to the liberation struggles in southern
Africa. We commend also the efforts made by the
Secretary-General to resolve the issues around Namibia
peacefully. I also take this opportunity to reaffhm Grenada’s solidarity with and eternal support for our brothers
and sisters in Namibia in their struggle for independence
under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic
leaders.

40. We believe that there is reason for optimism. The
Secretary-General himself, in his report on the present
situation [S/Z5776j, has told us that the sole outstanding
questions concern the choice of an electoral system and
the settling of some problems relating to the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and its
composition. The Secretary-General concludes that the
process is in an advanced stage and that consultations and
negotiations have gone far enough to guarantee the
achievement of a just, peaceful and final settlement of the
question of Namibia.

34. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.

41. Colombia considers that this could be the Council’s
last chance to provide the support for which the
Secretary-General is calling and which he is fully entitled
to expect. A further round of negotiations, without any
snags, excuses or delays, could lead us to a tinal
agreement.

35. Mr. ALBAN HOLGUf N (Colombia) (interpretationfrom Spanish): I should like first of all to express to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Council my appreciation for this opportunity to take part
in this important debate. I am also very pleased to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are certain and confident that
with your fine qualities you will be able effectively to
guide the Council’s work.

42. SWAP0 has called on the Council to compel South
Africa to sign a cease-tire agreement, as set out in the
United Nations plan, to open the way to a final settlement
of the conflict. In the dramatic words of the President of
SWAPO: “The Namibian people have already suffered
for too long . . .” [2439th meeting, para. 15U.] We all
agree with him. It is time for violence, selfishness and the
lack of self-restraint to come to an end and for us to give
common sense a chance.

36. The presence here of some 40 Foreign Ministers
from Africa, Asia and Latin America testifies to the magnitude of the problem of Namibia. These meetings,
together with two great international conferences-the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, at New Delhi, and the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence;
in Paris,-are
an
indication of the great international interest in this question and of the need for a speedy solution to it.

43. The unjust existence of this final bastion of colonialism in Africa has been responsible for the world Organization’s great efforts being committed to and channelled
towards its solution, when they could have been dedicated
to the full development of those great and invaluable
human, technical, natural and financial resources of Namibia and of southern Africa in general.

37. At both of those international conferences my country joined in supporting the cause of the Namibianpeople
as it has been doing for 15 years in its capacity as a
member of the United Nations Council for Namibia.

44. Namibia must, without delay, gain the independence
to which it is entitled and for which it yearns. Every day
that passes without freedom for that country is a day of
4

mourning for countries that cherish such freedom and a
source of shame for the international community and of
discredit for the United Nations itself. No people, no
nation, can in the future be proud of any victory in the
field of human rights so long as the Namibian people
continue to be downtrodden as they are now. No political, economic or military consideration can be invoked to
the detriment of the sacred fundamental rights and freedoms of the Namibians. All the members of the Council
know this. We place our hope and our trust in their
action.

Nations resolutions, aggravates the already
situation in southern Africa.

explosive

52. South Africa, regrettably, continues to organ& and
further elaborate its machinery of repression against the
Namibian people, denying them their most fundamental
rights and freedoms. Furthermore, South Africa continually increases its military presence in Namibia, thus reinforcing its illegal occupation of the Territory and the
exploitation and plunder of the rich natural resources of
Namibia, in violation of Decree No. 1 for the Protection
of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted in 1974 by
the United Nations Council for Namibia.z

45. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

53. In order to consolidate and prolong its illegal occupation of Namibia, South Africa constantly expands its
aggressive policies throughout
the southern African
region. Once again, Cyprus expresses its vehement and
unequivocal condemnation of the large-scale incursions
of South African forces into neighbouring front-line
States, as manifested in its most recent air raid against
Mozambique, its invasion and occupation of the southern
part of Angola and its destabilization policy in the neighbouring States.

46. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): It is with special
warmth that I congratulate you, Sir, the representative of
a country with which we have the friendliest ties, on your
assumption of the presidency. of the Council for the
month of June. I feel certain that, under your able guidance and with your. great diplomatic skills, the deliberations of the Council will ‘be successfully concluded.
47. I should like also to congratulate the retiring President of the Council. During part of May, the presidency
was assumed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire,
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, to whom also we pay a tribute on the excellent manner in which he conducted the
work of the Council.

54. It therefore becomes increasingly imperative that we
act as a matter of urgency. The United Nations, with the
exception of imposing the arms embargo, has so far concentrated on exerting moral pressure on South Africa
through its resolutions. However, no concrete results have
so far been produced and the Pretoria regime continues to
cause frustration and disappointment
to the Namibian
people and the world at large.

48. The question of Namibia is a clear case of colonialism, illegal foreign occupation and racism persisting in
blatant violation of the rights of the Namibian people and
in defiance of the very authority of the United Nations
under whose direct responsibility the Territory of Namibia was placed 15 years ago.

55. As a result of this constantly deteriorating situation,
suffering, exploitation and oppression continue to be the
painful everyday characteristics of lie for the Namibians.
But despite the bitterness and frustration it creates, this
situation gives rise to strengthened solidarity, determination and unity among the people of Namibia,and among
the international community, which consistently supports
their struggle, as recently declared by the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence, held in Paris.

49. The United Nations has set itself the noble task of
leading the Namibians to independence and it has a duty
and an obligation to fulfil its responsibilities with regard
to that task On this, I am sure, we all agree; yet Namibia
remains illegally occupied by South Africa and its people
are denied their right to selfdetermination.
Our convictions must now, more than ever before, be matched by
our deeds.

56. Cyprus,- for its part, itself struggling under conditions of gross injustice to safeguard its own independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and non-aligned
status, will, as it has consistently done in the past, continue to support the noble cause of the people of Namibia.

50. Cyprus would like to stress once again in this very
important body its commitment to and strong support for
the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, which provides the only peaceful procedure for a
negotiated settlement of this major international problem.
We stand firmly by the plan and demand its early implementation without any modification,
qualification
or
delay. As I indicated earlier, the question of Namibia is a
clear case of decolonization. It should not therefore be
linked to other extraneous issues in the region.

57. As one of the members of the United Nations Council for Namibia, Cyprus joins all those that are. in the
vanguard of the struggle for the liberation’of Namibia and
in the fight at the international level.
58. We firmly recognize SWAPO, whose President, Mr.
Sam Nujoma, we warmly welcome here, as the sole
authentic representative of the Namibian people. We trust
that their hard and painful struggle will soon produce the
desired result: an independent and united Namibia, with
territorial integrity, including Walvis Bay and the offshore
islands.

51. The current situation in Namibia poses a serious
threat to international peace and security. The constantly
provocative and arrogant attitude of South Africa in
flouting the repeated appeals of the international community, together with the failure to implement United
5

59. We know from our own experience that resolutions
alone cannot lead to the desired goal; it is their effective
implementation
that is of paramount importance. The
implementation
of the United Nations plan is long
overdue. It is the duty of the United Nations, and especially the Council, to take the necessary steps and measures to ensure the expeditious implementation
of Council
resolution 435 (1978). The Council therefore correctly
decided yesterday, through resolution 532 (1983), to indicate a time-frame for the implementation
of the resolution, to keep the matter under active review and to
enhance the role of the Secretary-General.

66. The continued subjugation of the people of Namibia
under the oppressive and racist colonial regime of apartheid South Africa constitutes one of the gravest threats to
world peace. Recent events in that Territory and the
actions of the Pretoria regime in southern Africa generally
deepen the threat. It is because of that serious threat that
we have called into question the handling of the issue by
the Western contact group, in which so much hope for a
peaceful solution had in vain been invested by many of us
in Africa.
67. The people and Government of Ghana have been
particularly frustrated and disappointed by the continually elusive search for independence for the Territory
because Namibia represents one of the major obstacles to
the attainment of our historic commitment to the achievement of the total liberation of the African continent from
all vestiges of colonialism and racist ‘imperialism. Apartheid South Africa’s continued occupation and control of
Namibia in defence of repeated requests by the United
Nations to grant freedom and independence to the longsuffering people of that Territory are not only an obdurate and hopeless attempt to stem the tide of history but
also an affront to the dignity of the Afican continent and
the international community as a whole. To Ghana, in
particular, it is a painful and most distressing situation.

60. The Secretary-General, in these most turbulent
times, is being increasingly accorded active roles in various situations around the world. This can be attributed
to his excellent personal and diplomatic qualities and to
the confidence and trust he enjoys from the international
community. We express our deep appreciation of his tireless efforts and dedication to the cause of Namibia.
61. Should South Africa again fail to comply with the
Council decisions, the Council should be prepared to act
under Chapter VII of the Charter, otherwise a heavy blow
will be dealt to the aspirations not only of the Namibian
people but of humanity as a whole, which aspires to a
world of freedom and justice.

68. It is indeed painful to realize that the racist and
abhorrent r&me of South Africa is emboldened and sustained in its continued intransigence and defiance with
regard to Namibia by the support it enjoys from some of
the most powerful countries that are in a position to bring
it to heel and, worse still, have, been entrusted by the
world community with the responsibility of seeking a
peaceful solution to the Namibian independence dispute.

62. Cyprus stands firmly and unswervingly by the side
of Namibia in the midst of its own tragedy and tribulations. With its independence and territorial integrity shattered by a foreign army of occupation, Cyprus continues
its peaceful efforts in the quest for freedom, justice and
vindication.
63. Although it appears the world over that those who
demolish principles cannot easily be converted into adherents of justice, I should like to express the hope that,
through international solidarity and pressure, the people
of Namibia, together with all others who are’wronged,
oppressed or downtrodden in this turbulent world, will
ultimately be vindicated.

69. What, indeed, have we seen-especially
over the
past two years-if not a serious retrogression in the prospects for a peaceful transition to independence in Namibia? Instead of rapid progress, as we had all hoped and
of independence
expected, towards the attainment
through the exercise of the inalienable right of the people
of that Territory to elect their own government and rulers,
South Africa and its powerful friends have employed
every subterfuge to frustrate the restoration of freedom
and justice to the people of Namibia.

The next speaker is the represen64. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Ghana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

70. These tactics have been amply documented in the
relevant United Nations reports on Namibia and I need
not go into them at any length, as representatives are well
aware of and have access to them. Suffice it to highlight
two main elements in the most recent attempts to undermine and frustrate the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978).

65. Mr.. GBEHO (Ghana): I should like to begin my
statement, Sir, by congratulating you most warmly on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. It is an honour richly deserved by reason of your
personal qualities as an outstanding diplomat and distinguished representative of your country. You have already
given ample proof of these qualities in your participation
in the deliberations of the Council, and of course I am
confident that you will preside over the Council’s consideration of the all-important question of Namibia with the
same objectivity, the same skill and the same tact and,
above all, a commitment to the furtherance of the aims
and objectives of the Council and the United Nations as a
whole in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

71. First, an attempt had been made by South Africa
and its supporters to block the inevitable attainment by
SWAP0 of constitutional power through the ballot box
by the proposal of a most ridiculous and disingenuous
electoral arrangement, which would have resulted in the
establishment of a socalled combination system for Namibia-a
most peculiar voting aberration, unheard of
anywhere else in the world. It took the firm opposition of
6

SWAPO, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the Non-Aligned Movement to put a stop-a final stop,
we hope-to this particular electoral machination and act
of mischief-making by South Africa.

these important negotiations. It is therefore obvious that
the delaying tactics adopted by South Africa and its sup
porters have the more sinister purpose of creating a
smoke-screen for the continued control of Namibia by the
apartheid regime through its attempts to establish fresh
internal constitutional arrangements for the Territory.

72. Secondly-and
this is perhaps the more serious and
irrelevant subterfuge, which has brought the Namibia
issue to its present impasse-there has been an attempt
made to link the independence of Namibia with the withdrawal of Cuban .troops from Angola. Again, this has
been unanimously opposed at every turn, not only by
SWAP0 but also by the front-line States, the OAU, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the overwhelming majority
of countries in the international community.

76. Meanwhile, under cover of that same smoke-screen,
the rape of Namibia, the ruthless exploitation of the mineral wealth of that hapless Territory, continues unabated
and at an accelerated pace. Indeed, it looks as if South
Africa and its allies are determined to bleed Namibia dry
and take every ounce of its wealth before they consent to
hand over the Territory to its rightful and ‘legitimate
inhabitants, if they ever do so. Since such activities are
clearly in violation of the letter and spirit of the decrees of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, my Government wishes to re-emphasize that those involved in the
shameless exploitation of Namibia will have to accept the
penalties for such anti-Namibian
activities at the appropriate time.

73. It is South Africa and a handful of its powerful supporters alone that have persisted, against all reason, in
dictating to the Government and people of Angola which
troops they may allow on their soil in the exercise of their
sovereign right to defend their territorial integrity. The most
surprising aspect of this peculiar line of argument is that
nothing is said about the South African invasion forces still
occupying parts of Angolan territory. It is convenient for
the proponents of the linkage of Cuban troop withdrawal
with the Namibia independence issue not only tqforget that
the Namibia question has nothing to do with the Angolan
Government’s defence of its territorial integrity, but also to
pretend that Angola itself faces no threat of further aggression and invasion from South Africa. Besides, what may we
ask, are the South African-backed and armed UNITA
[National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] bandits doing inside Angola? Whom are they working for, ifnot
international capitalism and imperialism, which are hand in
glove with racist South Africa? No one except South Africa
and its mentors has seen any wisdom in the, linkage theory,
and it is our hope that this debate will see the last of that
fraudulent demand.

77. Five years of prevarication and delay with regard to
the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) on Namibia
is long enough, and we could not agree more with the
Secretary-General’s conclusion in his latest report on the
Territory [S/15776J that the independence of Namibia is
the essential and primary issue which we must now face
up to without further delay. In this connection, the
Government of Ghana wishes to reaffirm its total support
for the Paris Declaration on Namibia adopted at the
International
Conference last month.’
78. We wish also to express our support for resolution
532 (1983), which has just been adopted by the Council,
because it articulates the international community’s dissatisfaction with the present impasse in the negotiations on
Namibia’s independence. Furthermore, we see this resolution as the Council’s first step towards ensuring the full
implementation
of resolution 43’5 (1978).

74. One cannot, indeed, escape the overwhelming impression that there have been consistent, deliberate and increasing attempts on the. part of international capitalism to
frustrate and impede progress towards Namibia’s independence for as long as possible. The centre-piece of this
scheme has been apartheid South Africa’s acts of aggression
against and destabilization of neighbouring countries in the
region. Yet the international mass media, controlled by the
multinationals that are busily exploiting the wealth of Namibia, would have us believe that South Africa is a paragon
of sweet reasonableness, willing to reach an agreement in
the Namibian negotiations. The evidence, however, is that
negotiations over Namibia have .been scuttled each time
they have been on the point of agreement by South Africa’s
introduction of extraneous and irrelevant issues that have
nothing to do with Council resolution 435 (1978). South
Africa has equally consistently received support in its dilatory tactics from the very countries that have vested economic interests in Namibia.

79. We wish for our part to reiterate our commitment to
the full implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) without
any deviation or dilution, and we hope that the momentum just regenerated by the Council .by the adoption of
resolution 532 (1983) can be lsustained with a view to
establishing UNTAG in Namibia this autumn.
80. Ghana is totally opposed to any attempts now or in
the future to link the independence of Namibia with the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. The presence
of Cuban troops in Angola is a matter for the Cuban and
Angoian Governments alone to decide in the exercise of
their sovereign rights. We trust that the absence of this
demand in the Council’s resolution to which I have just
referred has disposed of the matter once and for all.
81. I should like to conclude my remarks by reaffirming
Ghana’s continued commitment to and support for the.
Namibian
people’s struggle, under the leadership of
SWAPO, for the total liberation and independence of
their motherland. We shall continue to support the people
of Namibia in every way possible through the OAU and

75. In fact, so enthusiastic and consistent has been that
support that many countries wonder how we came to
elect the five North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries, which have significant economic interests in Namibia and South Africa, to serve as honest brokers in
7

the United Nations to bring freedom and independence to
the Territory.

race, colour or creed, is a source of strength to our movement and our noble cause.

82. We wish in particular to place on record our appreciation of the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General in his
search for a peaceful solution to the Namibia independence
dispute and to urge the Council to give him its fullest and
most immediate support in the fresh St&we have just made
in bringing Namibia rapidly to freedom and independence
in strict accordance with Council resolution 435 (1978) and
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations. My
Government is ready to give the Secretary-General any
assistance within oui means to enable him to carry out the
onerous duties now entrusted to him in translating resolution 435 (1978) into reality.

89. We must not fail to express our appreciation to the
representatives they have replaced. Their teamwork with
ail the other countries that are equally committed to the
African liberation cause helped us to reach important political milestones.

83. Ghana remains committed to the total liberation of
the African continent and to the maintenance of world
peace and security. Therefore, it cannot and will not shirk
its responsibility towards the people of Namibia., We hope
that the Council also will continue to shoulder its responsibility in the matter.
84. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Johnstone F. Makatini, representative of the African National
Congress of South Africa (ANC), to whom the Council
extended an invitation at its 2447th meeting. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
85. Mr. MARATINI:
Mr. President, I thank you most
sincerely for giving me the opportunity to express, on
behalf of the oppressed and struggling people of South
Africa, the views and position of ANC on the burning
issue before the Council. Our thanks also go to all the
other members of the Council for making this possible.
86. Your country’s and your own personal commitment
to the struggle for the total liberation of the African continent is well known, Sir. It is therefore with a deep sense
of satisfaction that we see you presiding over the deliberations of the Council when. it is discussing the Namibian
problem.
87. The ANC delegation wishes to pay a welldeserved
tribute to the States members of both the OAU and the
Non-Aligned Movement for their initiative in having so
many Ministers for Foreign Affairs come to New York to
express their common concern with .clarity and firmness
at this crucial period in the struggle of the Namibian
people.
88. Since this is the first time we have appeared before
the Council this year and this month, I should like first of
all to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption, of the high office of President of the
Council during the month of June, and :the representatives of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and
Zimbabwe, the new members of the Council. That all
their Governments and ‘they themselves fully share the
paramount objective of ANC of a non-racial, democratic
society for ail the South African people, regardless of

90. May I also be excused for singling out the delegation
of Zimbabwe so as to salute, even in his absence, a dear
friend and comrade-in-arms,
the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. This is not simply because we feel singularly
inspired and encouraged at seeing former fellow freedom
fighters-with
whom we shared the socalled terrorist
label that rightfully belonged to Ian Smith-now
seated
as representatives in the Council. I salute you, Mr. President, and your Minister for Foreign Affairs and express
the,admiration of ANC for the able manner in which your
Government and Comrade Robert Mugabe continue successfully to detect and defuse the numerous time-bombs
deliberately set by the erstwhile Pretoria-Salisbury axis
and its partners in the anti-African alliances.
91. The exhaustive catalogue of betrayals of the Namibian people’s just and heroic struggle so eloquently
cited by several Ministers for Foreign Affairs and many
representatives of non-aligned and other countries committed to the African liberation cause revealed the continuing conspiracy not only to delay but also to derail the
progress towards genuine independence of Namibia.
92. We shall refrain from repeating what has been so .
effectively stated to demonstrate the endless maze of
double-talk,
prevarications
and other impediments
designed to delay and prevent the independence of Namibia, under the leadership of SWAPO, the sole authentic
and far-sighted representative of the Namibian people.
.93. I should like at this juncture to pay a glowing tribute
to the brother people of Namibia, our comrade-in-arms,
SWAPO, and the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia
for the outstanding heroism, perseverance and fortitude
that they have displayed not only in shattering racist
South Africa’s muchivaunted military might but also in
facing up to the endless conspiracies. The task of Comrade Sam Nujoma, the President of SW-APO, has not
been an easy one.
94. The hopes raised by the emergence in 1978 of the
Western contact group have been dashed to the ground
by its refusal to exert the promised collective diplomatic
and economic leverage on the intransigent racist regime.
95. ‘However, it would not be proper or fair to say that
the present state of affairs fully vindicates the fears that
were entertained by some silent but doubting Thomases
who strongly questioned the intentions of the contact
group, comprising as it does countries that have earned
international notoriety for the collaboration they continue to enjoy with the illegal occuper of Namibia.

96. In their favour it can be argued that they succeeded
in bringing the Pretoria r&me, albeit screaming and kicking, to the negotiating table at the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva in January 1981. The fact that these
were countries that throughout had pursued a policy of
duplicity, if not of outright support for the apartheid
rkgime, raised sharp questions and doubts.
97. Even though mindful of the fact that this initiative
could have been motivated by the contact group’s attempt
to delay the’struggle with a view to imposing a fictitious
neo-colonialist solution, the self-confidence, maturity and
good faith of SWAP0 and the front-line States were
proved by their co-operation and agreement to make
concessions.
98. The co-overation and readiness of SWAP0 to facilitate the settlement were demonstrated unequivocally
when Comrade Sam Nujoma stood up at the Geneva
meeting and declared his readiness to sign a cease-fire and
agree to the immediate implementation
of the United
Nations plan. It will be recalled that the so-called South
African Administrator-General
announced on 13 January 1981-a week before the inauguration of the new
United Nations Administration-that
South Africa was
not prepared to proceed with implementing the United
Nations plan. Torpedoed by the apartheid rbgime-which
was obviously jubilant over the demise of the Jimmy Carter Administration
and its policy of recognizing the indigenous character of the struggle for decolonization in
Namibia and a non-racial, democratic society in South
Africa-the
pre-implementation
meeting broke up.
99. What followed those developments is of vital and
fundamental importance for the settlement of the Namibia question, the elimination of the apartheid system
and the solution of the problems of peace, stability and
security in southern Africa. It is vital to the Council,
whose raison d’&re is the settlement of disputes and the
maintenance of peace.
100. President Ronald Reagan’s public embrace of the
Pretoria r&me as a friend and ally elicited surprise, consternation and shock, embarrassed the American people,
friends and allies, angered the African people, and caused
jubilation in Pretoria. He went further by assuring that
rdgime that the United States would not leave it in the
lurch, that the Administration
would pursue a policy of
constructive engagement aimed at removing the polecat
status imposed on the racist regime by the international
community and would set a pm-condition linking the
withdrawal of the Cuban internationalist forces with Namibia’s independence; that the Administration
would
reward the African countries that befriended the r@ime
and punish and even topple those that assisted ANC and
SWAPO; and that the settlement of the Namibian question must take into account the South African r&ime*s
“legitimate security concerns”.
101. Those and several other statements of solidarity
with the self-confessed Nazi supporters, whose system of
apartheid stands universally condemned as a crime against
humanity and a threat to world peace, led to the unholy

alliance that continues to grow. That alliance has been
further strengthened by secret visits by the regime’s military intelligence officials, the training of racist South Africa’s coast guards in the United States, the visit to South
Africa by William Casey, Chief of the United States Central Intelligence Agency, for discussions on the problem
of Namibia and apartheid, and constant attacks against
ANC and SWAP0 as terrorist organizations.
102. There could have been no greater solidarity for a
rigime which for decades has been an international
pariah. This encouraged and emboldened the r&hue to
show greater intransigence, practise more brutal repression inside South Africa, step up assassinations of ANC
leaders in the country and the neighbouring States, undertake more brazen acts of destabilization and aggression
against the front-line, Indian Ocean and neighbouring
countries. We have no doubt that the United Nations plan
has been the biggest casualty of the Washington-Pretoria
axis.
103. As a direct consequence of the United States giving
comfort and succour to its strategic ally, the apartheid
regime, we find that the present South African representative can make the outrageous claim that its presence in
Namibia is legal.
104. In a statement before the Council the other day, the
Pretoria regime’s representative declared:
“The time has come to remind the United Nations
that South Africa has never accepted the United
Nations view that South Africa’s presence in the Territory is illegal; nor has the International Court of Justice ever delivered a binding judgement to the effect
that South Africa’s right to administer the Territory
has been terminated. As far as South Africa is concerned, it continues to administer the Territory legally
and in conformity with the spirit of the lapsed Mandate
from the League of Nations.” [244&h meeting, para.
71.1
This defiant, categorical and unequivocal statement goes
to the root of the whole problem and flatly negates the
oft-repeated assurances by the contact group that the
negotiations have reached a crucial stage and the independence of Namibia is around the comer.
105. In his statement before the Council at its 2439th
meeting, Comrade Sam Nujoma,
the President of
SWAPO, helpfully reminded us of the ruling given on 21
June 1971 by the International Court of Justice, in paragraph 133 of its advisory opinion, where it states that:
“the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia
being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its administration
from Namibia immediately
and thus put an end to its occupation of the
Territory”.’
106. In the light of its position in the negotiation process for the independence of Namibia, it is abundantly

clear that the role of the United States cannot be considered that of an honest broker.

stated by the rbgime’s own Minister of Defence, Magnus
Malan, who has said, according to the South African
newspapers, that ANC is not waging an area war but a
psychological war.

107. That the Namibian people, SWAPO, the front-line
States and the United Nations have been deceived is selfevident. The question before us is whether the South African regime has been deceiving the contact group as well,
or whether the rigime undertook this deceptive exercise
jointly with, and with the conscious collusion of, the contact group. This question must be answered by the contact group in the interest of its own credibility, not just in
words but through action. If the contact group has been
deceived by the apartheid rCgime we. believe that, in
defence of their compromised
moral integrity, its
members must now take the lead in calling for the imposition of sanctions against the South African rCgime.
108. In his closing remarks,
repeated:

Comrade

113. It is clear that the South African regime, unable to
contain the rising tide of resistance in South Africa, has
resorted to using the front-line States and Lesotho as
scapegoats in order to placate the panic-stricken white
constituents who are beginning to wonder if the r&me is
capable of defending them should ANC respond in kind
and do what the r&me has been doing since the advent of
settler colonialism in South Africa.
114. The institutional&d
racism, exploitation
and
plunder, bolstered by the legislative mechanism of the
exclusively white Parliament, judiciary and provincial
councils, are justified by South Africa on the basis of the
white supremacy doctrine preached from the pulpit and
taught in the classroom. Its agents are covered with the
blood of innocent blacks, killed in prison, assassinated by
hit squads inside the country or in neighbouring States, or
massacred at Sharpeville, Soweto, Langa, Maseru or Matola. The regime’s hangman is the busiest in the world,
since that rdgime holds the world record for hangings.

Sam Nujoma

“ . . . unless this august body acts decisively to secure
the withdrawal of South Africa from the international
Territory of Namibia, we shall have no alternative but
to continue the armed struggle with greater intensity**.
[See 2439th meeting, para. 153.1
This statement is a serious indictment of the international
community in general and the contact group in particular.

115. The 23 million Africans are not only denied the
right to vote by this rkgime, considered in some circles in
the West as a member of the so-called free world, but are
today being made foreigners in the land of their birth.
They are daily being uprooted in their millions and
herded off to the vast concentration camps for displaced
persons in the bantustans-the so-called national independent States-where they either starve and die or sell their
labour cheap in the urban areas where they can remain
legally only for so long as they minister to the needs of the
whites. Since 1976, a total of 8 million people have been
forcibly removed and have lost their citizenship in South
Africa.

109. For our part, we seize this opportunity to reaffirm
our revolutionary solidarity with our comrades-in-arms,
of SWAPO, the sole authentic representative of the
people of Namibia. We pay a glowing tribute to its armed
combatants, the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia,
and assure them that, now that the situation is ripe inside
South Africa and ANC has joined them in the trenches,
we shall fight side by side until final victory.
110. The Pretoria rdgime’s illegal rule does not begin
and end in Namibia. In South Africa itself, as a product
of colonial conquest, the regime keeps the 23 million
blacks under subjugation at the point of the gun and govems without the consent of the governed.

116. These disabilities and a million others, including
the expropriation of land, have been the lot of the blacks
in South Africa since the advent of settler colonialism,
when, after almost 200 years of fighting, our people’s
resistance was subdued, thanks to the superiority of the
gun to the spear. Two years after the formation of the
so-called Union of South Africa, ANC was formed in
1912. The 50 years of non-violent methods of struggle
achieved little other than total dispossession, disenfranchisement and super-exploitation.

111. We raise this point because a few days ago’there a
lot was said and written about the situation in South
Africa. On 23 May, South African war planes attacked
Mozambique, bombing civilian targets, including private
houses, a factory and a c&he, killing five adults and a
child. This was boastfully reported by the apartheid
regime as an act of retaliation for what took place in
Pretoria on 20 May when the armed combatants of the
Umkhonto we Sizwe MK attacked the South African Air
Force headquarters.

117. The heightened militancy and spirit of protests,
which coincided with the wind of change in other parts of
Africa, resulted in the increase of mass arrests, banishments, hangings and massacres, climaxed by the 1960
Sharpeville massacre in South Africa. The Soweto, Gogolito, Langa and Sharpeville massacres, and many others,
resulted in the wanton murder of innocent black men,
women and children, gunned down by racist police using
Western weapons and carrying out their masters’ standing
orders to “shoot first and ask questions later”.

112. We should like to make it quite clear that the
alleged ANC bases that were supposedly attacked in
Mozambique
do not exist. This is well known to the
South African rt!gime thanks to its intelligence service.
We should also like to make it clear that, contrary to the
claims made by the regime, not only does ANC have no
bases in Mozambique, but this is the case in all the neighbouring countries. And this point has been repeatedly
!

10

absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to
throw off such Government, and to provide new
Guards for their future security.”

118. It will be recalled that even ,after the Sharpeville
massacre, ANC and its sister organizations, concerned
over the then imminent proclamation of a Fascist Republic following the rdgime’s world-wide condemnation and
forced withdrawal from the Commonwealth, called for a
national convention to discuss the future of the country.
The letters addressed to the racist Prime Minister of the
day by Nelson Mandela, acting on behalf of the already
outlawed ANC, were not even accorded the courtesy of
acknowledgement. Thus the last attempt by ANC to keep
open the avenues for dialogue met with failure.

122. The rapidly deteriorating situation in southern
Africa has been further aggravated by the regime’s continued destabilization of Lesotho. Three days ago, following a bomb blast in Bloemfontein, carried out by one of
the agents of the regime, later followed by an announcement from Maseru addressed to the South African Broadcasting Corporation, purporting to come from ANC and
claiming responsibility for the bomb attack in Bloemfontein, the border with Lesotho was closed, causing the prevention of the passage of supplies of essential goods such as
foodstuffs, medical supplies and petrol. This showed
clearly that this attempt by the regime to discredit ANC
was intended also to prepare the ground for stepping up
the destabilization of Lesotho, if not the overthrowing of
its legitimate Government and the replacing of it by South
Africa’s puppet, the leader of a counter-revolutionary
group which is armed, equipped, financed and deployed
by the South African &ime.

119. The’ last straw was the rdgime’s use of its entire
police force and army to crush a national strike, called by
NeIson Mandela in the name of ANC in order to protest
against the Fascist Republic. Yesterday’s celebration of
the proclamation was made less festive by the crisis of
confidence which has hit the white community.
120. It was amid armed attacks against installations connected with ‘the policy of apartheid, that Umkhonto we
Sizwe (MK)-the
spear of the nation-announced
its formation on 16 December 1961 through its manifesto:

123. We close by appealing to Member States to give
this problem immediate attention, for Lesotho is the victim of aggression because it stands firm on the implementation of United Nations resolutions.

“The Government policy of force, repression and
violence will no longer be met with non-violence only.
The choice is not ours. It has been made by the Nationalist Government which has rejected every peaceful
demand by our people for rights and freedom and answered every such demand with force and yet more
force. We of MK have always sought-as the liberation movement has sought-to achieve liberation without bloodshed and civil clash. We do so still. We hope,
even at this late hour, that our fmt actions will awaken
everyone to the realization of the disastrous situation
to which the Nationalist policy is leading.‘*

124. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr..Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, to whom the Council
extended an invitation at its 2443rd meeting. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
125. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Mr. President, I should like to
express to you, and through you to the Council, the appreciation of the League of Arab States for the opportunity
to make a statement here, in which we should like to
reaffirm our traditional and continued support for the
struggle of the people of Namibia, for the representative
of the Namibian people, SWAPO, and for the President
of SWAPO, who has addressed the Council.

121. This situation and the historic decision taken by
ANC in 1961 and continuing to this day is not unique. A
large number of States, including Zimbabwe and the
United States, were at some stage of their people’s struggle for emancipation from colonial, alien or dictatorial
regimes, forced to take the same position. A good number
of States Members of the United Nations, including
members of the Security Council, fall into this category.
Indeed, it includes the United States, whose Declaration
of Independence states that:

126. I should like to take this opportunity to express to
you, Sir, both in your personal capacity and as the representative ‘of your great, struggling country, Zimbabwe,
our warm friendship and solidarity with your people,
whose struggle has given inspiration to the peoples of
Africa and the Arab world in their efforts to achieve their
liberation objectives.

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men
are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable Rights, that among these
are Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness.-That
to secure these rights, Governments are instituted
among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed,-That
whenever any Form of
Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the
Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to
institute a new Government ; . . organizing its powers
in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to affect
their Safety and Happiness. . . . But when a long train
of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the
same Object evinces a design to reduce them under

127. In the last few days we have witnessed an array of
statesmen, Ministers for Foreign Affairs, ambassadors
and representatives of liberation struggles addressing the
Council in a debate that resulted in Council resolution
532 (1983), which seeks to revitalize the commitment of
the international community to the anchorage that the
United Nations represents for the peoples of Africa and of
the world.
128. During the debate we have all heard the details of
the various aspects of the policy of apartheid, and the
11

techniques used to avoid the implementation
of United
Nations resolutions. We have seen how the apartheid
regime of South Africa, believing as it does in institutionalizing apartheid and racism and manifesting its exclusionary racial policy, seeks to circumvent the will of the
international community and the rights of the people of
Namibia and southern Africa and to buy time and procrastinate with regard to the implementation
of the various Council resolutions, more particularly resolution 435
(1978).

dilute this right, whether by introducing extraneous reasons, or linkages, or talk of “reasonable negotiating positions” are aimed at facing the Council and the struggling
people of Namibia with an impossible option.
134. This impossible option is as follows: if the Security
Council adopts resolutions whereby it assumes total
responsibility under the Charter for world peace and
order and international security and plays the role of
deterring the aggressor and the violator of the legal,
national and human rights of the people of Namibia by
resorting to sanctions, it will not be possible to implement
these resolutions. So the world community is cautioned in
its deliberations that the resolutions it adopts should not
reach their logical conclusion, that the United Nations
should not assume its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations lest the assumption of responsibility
for deterring the aggressor and violator and for setting in
motion the corrective process in those areas should
become a further excuse for South Africa-or,
as in earlier cases, for Israel-to
avoid compliance with United
Nations resolutions, particularly Council resolutions. It is
this technique of lessening the impact of the Council and
of the United Nations as a whole that has led to disaffection, in many instances, on the part of the peoples of the
world who have looked forward to the Council’s process
of policy-making, that is, not only setting policies but also
implementing
them.

129. The struggle of the people of Namibia is well
known. The League of Arab States and the Arab people
support unequivocally
the struggle to expedite the
achievement of independence by the people of Namibia.
The Arab nation as a whole realizes that what has taken
place in the southern part of Africa is part of their own
national struggle.
130. Nine member Arab countries belong to the OAU,
our sister organization, and we share not only the problems of Namibia but problems throughout the third
world, with which we share not only a common commitment but a common destiny. Therefore, in the struggle
that SWAPO, ANC and the other liberation movements
have undertaken, they have committed themselves to having recourse to the United Nations and to exploring all
political options in order to ensure the preeminence of
non-violence as a technique of struggle. Yet, when their
rights have been consistently violated, violence has been
systematically imposed. Violence is inherent in the colonial apartheid plan.

135. The need is not so much for Council resolutions,
although we welcome the latest resolution. The need is for
an apparatus which sets in motion the implementation
of
these resolutions. The need is to restore the effectiveness
of this body, the confidence of the world community and
the credibility of these resolutions, and, if I may say so, in
the light of the Charter and the expectations of mankind,
the sanctity of these resolutions.

131. Much of the Western media and some Western
countries have sought to focus on the reaction to violence
and have claimed that it is a form of terrorism. This is a
technique that was applied to the struggle of your country, Mr. President. This is a technique that has been applied to the struggle of the Namibian people. This is a
technique that is applied today to the struggle of the Palestinian people.
132. It is a technique whereby apartheid-or
Zionism,
for that matter, or any form of settler colonialism-seeks
to arrogate to itself a God-given right to exclude people
from enjoying equality, to deprive them of their freedom,
dignity and independence,. and to do so without being
challenged. Therefore, any form of challenge to racism,
apartheid or settler colonialism is considered to be a challenge to law and order or a challenge to stability. Some in
their arrogance have even gone so far as to say that it is a
challenge to the so-called free world.

136. We say so because we in the Arab Statesespecially in the month of June last year, when Lebanon,
my own country, was invaded by Israel-have often come
to the Council pleading, sometimes begging, for justice
with regard to limited objectives. We all remember how
often, during the raid on and the siege of Beirut, the
Council pleaded for the release of water supplies for the
people of Beirut. In the same way, resolutions were
unanimously adopted here. All the members know resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), although they may not
necessarily remember them vividly. Has Council resolution 435 (1978) suffered the same fate as Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982)?

133. It was magnificent to see and hear the large number
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and statesmen from
throughout the non-aligned countries and the African
world who came here to bear witness to the need to provide the Council with the moral impetus to retrieve its
own credibility and effectiveness. It was necessary to
focus on the fact that the moral priority in the world
community today is to guarantee the right to freedom and
independence of the people of Namibia and ail peoples
throughout the world; and on the fact that all attempts to

137. Let it be said that the unanimous adoution of resolution 532 (1983) despite the various interpietations and
circumstances, was intended to reinforce the mechanism
of implementation
and as an opportunity for implementing resolution 435 (1978). Otherwise we should find
countries-super-Powers-voting
for resolutions and
then behaving in a manner that circumvents them. We
should, as it were, be depriving the resolutions of their
substance, of their meaning. Then there might be a time
when the people of Namibia, the people of Africa, the
12

people of Palestine, of Lebanon and of the whole Arab
nation would say: “Why do we have recourse to the Security Council when its resolutions cannot be implemented?”
138. There is, of course, an attempt by the two mmaining colonial settlements in the third world, those of Israel
and South Africa, to make all the peoples of the world, in
their commitment to the United Nations, realize the help
lessness of the Organization and the hopelessness of our
peoples as regards achieving their legitimate, internationally recognized and inalienable rights to freedom and
independence through recourse to and the exhaustion of
diplomatic and political means. Both South Africa and
Israel believe that their anachronistic, medieval ideologies, backed by the most modern military and nuclear
equipment, can confound the world’s conscience and consensus and restore to their own regimes and systems the
ability to continue making Security Council resolutions
totally irrelevant to conditions on the ground, whether in
southern Lebanon, on the West Bank or in Namibia and
southern Africa.

140. The contact group of Western countries must real:
ize that the confidence that might have been placed in
their ability to defuse the critical nature of the situation
and lessen the possibility of confrontation is not a green
light for them to help, directly or indirectly, in subverting
the legitimate national rights and aspirations of the
people of Namibia.
141. The many similarities that exist between what is
taking place in the Israeli-Arab conflict and what is taking
place in the conflict between the African people, in particular the Namibian people, and the apartheid r&me of
South Africa, make it necessary for the League of Arab
States and OAU to cross-fertilize by means of their respective experience in order to expedite their respective freedom struggles.
142.. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 pm

139. We wish to make’ an appeal on behalf of the
League of Arab States, and I am sure that this appeal is
shared by our sister organizations and their member
States, as was manifested by the resolution of the nonaligned countries and that of the OAU. We appeal to the
States of the contact group, in their approach to the problems of South Africa, not to consider our betting on their
initiative and on their contacts as a way of becoming
.hostage to that group. The same applies to what is taking
place in the Middle East: betting on United States initiatives is fundamentallv distinct from becoming hostage to
its unilateral crisis management.

Noms
1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Aftica in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Secwity Cot@1
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
2 See Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirt~Jfth Session,
SuppIement No. 24, vol. I, annex II.
’ See Report of the IntemationaI Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983.
(AKONF.
120/13), part three.

idl

i&l

2

I+.6 +I

rJWl

.L*i

A+

fl$

r j+l

J , i JJrF
1

&I

,pj

;L;uI

J $1

eJ

Im+ImWGE4H~Ei6iIm
B9~~~~lfPtAB~.B~~~~~~~~~~~~
a+qa#B.,
HOW

TO OBTAIN

aI>+

;A l d!
. id!

&

,k’
-9,

J,madI

4’;-

a

&

: J! 4’

;

,&

,A

.+a -1-1;.

+$

~h#~~wa5l~f~f~!~~B~~~~

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK
IlOJIYYMTb
Msnarfsr
Oprana3auns

M3~AHMFI
OP~AHM3AUMM
06aenmtetiubix
Hauutt

H areHTcTaax
ao Bcex pailoHax
MHpa.
HaBonme
Mara3HHe
HnW nwtltwTe
ttq altpecy:
OpraHH3aWa
nponante
HmaHtiR,
Hbto-kloprc
HOW ‘HCetieBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

UNIES
agences

‘d+ositsires

a : sation\

Uniex.

OfFbEAMHEHHblX

HAUMti

MO~CHO Xynmb
a XHttxiiHbtX
cnpaaw
06 tmtattstnx
a Bawev
06SentiHeHHblX
Hauttfi,

5iara3ttHax
KHKKHOU
CeWWt
tT0

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de ias Naciones Unidas estdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
t&as panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. SecciBn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.
