General Aasembly-Twenty-sixth Session

40

( b) The liberation of all persons imprisoned or
detained for their opposition to apartheid;
( c) The removal of orders against those banned
or banished for their opposition to apartheid;
3. Appeals to national and international associations of jurists to take all appropriate steps in support
of the purposes of the present resolution;
4. Urges all religious organizations . t~ c~mtinue
and intensify their efforts for the ebmmatlon of
apartheid and racial discrimination;
5. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid to
prepare a special report on all known cases of maltreatment and torture of prisoners in South Africa, together
with any other information pertinent to those cases;
6. Invites all organizations and individuals that may
have knowledge of such cases to provide all available
information to the Special Committee on Apartheid;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To bring the present resolution to the attention
of Governments national and international organizations and anti-apartheid movements, including religious
organizations and associations of jurists;
(b) To publicize, through the Unit on Apartheid
and the Office of Public Information, all available
information on the maltreatment and torture of prisoners and detainees in South Africa and the persecution
of opponents of apartheid, including religious leaders;
( c) To provide necessary services and assistance
to the Special Committee on Apartheid in the preparation of the report requested in paragraph 5 above and
to publicize the report as widely as possible.
1981st plenary meeting,
9 November 1971.

3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue
its work, including its co-ordinating activities, to increase
knowledge of levels and effects of atomic radiation
from all sources;
4. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committee
to hold its twenty-second session in March 1972;
5. Expresses its appreciation for the valuable response to the Scientific Committee's request for data
on releases of radio-activity into the environment from
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and radio-isotopes;
6. Draws attention to the Scientific Committee's
statement that further information of the same nature,
if received before the end of the year, would be of great
value in the preparation of its report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;4
7. Welcomes the continuing collaboration between
the Scientific Committee and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the specialized agencies and the nongovernmental organizations concerned, which is essential to the Committee's work;
8. Commends the Scientific Committee for its contribution to the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, takes note of the basic paper
that on its behalf has been prepared for, and submitted to, the secretariat of the Conferenc.e,6 and recommends that the relevant experience of the Committee
should be fully utilized in the further preparations for
the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and for the
dissemination of its findings to the public.
1997th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.

2773 (XXVI). Effects of atomic radiation

277 4 (XXVI). United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December
1955 which established the United Nations Scientific
Co~ittee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and
its subsequent resolutions,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling information about atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
Noting the intention of the Scientific Committee to
include in its report to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-seventh session, the subjects of genetic effects
of radiation, induction of cancer by radiation, effects
of radiation on the immune response, population doses
from medical and occupational exposure and environmental radiation,
1. Notes with appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its twenty-first session;3
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the
valuable contributions it has made since its inception
to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels
and effects of atomic radiation;
3 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document A/8334.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2671 E (XXV) of 8 December 1970 concerning the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 6 to which is annexed the report of
the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust
Fund for South Africa,
Conscious of the continuing need for humanitarian
assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation in South Africa, as well as
in Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, and to their
families,
Concerned at the actions of the South African Government in persecuting persons engaged in providing
humanitarian assistance to victims of apartheid,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Again appeals to all States, to governmental or
non-governmental organizations and to individuals for
generous contributions to the Trust Fund in order to
enable it to meet the increasing needs;
3. Further appeals for generous direct contributions
to voluntary organizations engaged in providing relief
4 Ibid.,

para. 4.
6.

5 / bid .. para.
6 A/8468.

Rei!olutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

and assistance to persons persecuted under repressive
and discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia
and Southern Rhodesia;
4. Authorizes the Committee of Trustees of the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa to send
a representative away from Headquarters to hold
informative discussions, as necessary, with the voluntary organizations concerned, particularly those receiving grants from the Trust Fund;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate steps to intensify the dissemination of information on the need for relief and assistance to persons
persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia.
1997th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.

2775 (XXVI). The policies of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa
A
ARMS EMBARGO

The General Assembly,

Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
on Apartheid1 and the letter dated 6 October 1971
from the Chairman of the Special Committee to the
President of the General Assembly, 8
Recalling its resolution 2624 (XXV) of 13 October
1970 calling upon all States to take immediate steps
to implement fully the provisions of Security Council
resolution 282 (1970) of 23 July 1970 to strengthen
the arms embargo against South Africa,
Gravely concerned at the continued build-up of the
South African military and police forces,
Noting that South Africa continues to receive military equipment, and technical and other assistance for
the manufacture of such equipment, from certain Member States in contravention of the arms embargo,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2624 (XXV);
2. Declares that the arms embargo against South
Africa makes no distinction between arms for external
defence and arms for internal repression;
3. Deplores the actions of those Governments which
in contravention of the arms embargo, have provided
or have allowed companies registered in their countries
to provide assistance for the build-up of the military
and police forces in South Africa;
4. Calls upon all Governments to implement fully
the arms embargo against South Africa;

5. Urgently appeals to all national and international
organizations to discourage and denounce all military
collaboration with South Africa and to ensure the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
the arms embargo against South Africa;
6. Invites the Security Council to consider the
situation in the light of the reports and communications
1 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8422/Rev.1).
8 A/SPC/145. For the printed text of this document see
Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1971
document S/10354.
'

41

addressed to it by the Special Committee on Apartheid'
and of the present resolution, with a view to securing
the full implementation by all States of Council resolution 282 (1970);
1. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid
to undertake a comprehensive study of the military
collaboration with, and military assistance to, South
Africa by Governments and private enterprises and to
submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at
its twenty-seventh session.
1997th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.
B
EDUCATIONAL MATERIAL ON apartheid

The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Year for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination should be
the occasion to add new emphasis to efforts to enlighten
the international community about the evils of apartheid
and racial discrimination in South Africa and about
the role of the United Nations in this cause,
Convinced of the special role that education should
play in international efforts to eliminate apartheid and
other forms of racial discrimination,
Considering the important role of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
such a cause,
Commending the activities of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
disseminating information on apartheid, with special
reference to its effects on education, science and culture,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
on Apartheid, 10 in particular the account of its consultations with anti-apartheid movements and with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization concerning the need for the preparation
of an educational kit on southern Africa,
Noting with satisfaction the growing interest among
educational and other institutions in educational material
to enlighten their students on the evils of apartheid and
racial discrimination,
1. Commends the proposal for the preparation of
an educational kit on racial discrimination and apartheid
in southern Africa;
2. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to prepare such an
educational kit for possible adaptation by national
commissions of that organization and for distribution
to institutions of learning;
3. Further requests the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization to consider th~
production of films and audio-visual material on
apartheid, with special reference to its adverse effects
on education, science and culture;
4. Invites all concerned to lend their full co-operation to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
9 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year. Supplement for April, May and June 1971, documents
S/10190 and S/10201: ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1971, document S/ 10354; and Official
Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8422/Rev.1 ).
10 Official Records of the General Assembly
Twentv-sixrh
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8422/Rev.1 ). ·'
-
