S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4506

th meeting
Thursday, 4 April 2002, 7 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Rivas
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Fall
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Bhuckory
Mr. Aguilar Zínser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/336)
Letter dated 2 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/342)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-31733 (E)

*0231733*

S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)

The meeting resumed at 7 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): Members of
the Council have before them document S/2002/347,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, Mr. President, to express our great
appreciation for all the efforts that you and the other
members of the Council have made to unify the voice
of the Council before the challenges faced by our
region. The Council has acted, in view of the escalation
of the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people
and Israel’s occupation of the cities of Ramallah,
Tulkarm, Qalqilyah, Bethlehem, Nablus and Jenin. In
view of Israel’s violation of humanitarian law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the position we shall be
adopting by supporting the draft resolution before us is
an expression of our firm support and our constant call
for the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
When the Arab Group submitted the draft
resolution, its objective was to call upon the
international community to understand the trials and
sufferings of the Palestinian people, the oppression
they are suffering at the hands of the Israeli occupation
forces. Syria’s position in supporting the draft
resolution reflects our genuine desire to see the
Security Council assume its role effectively, and once
again affirms the importance of unity in the work of the
Council and of unanimous action to address anything
that would endanger international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor, and I
call upon him now.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to express my profound gratitude for the presence of
His Excellency Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
highly significant contribution to the proceedings of
the Security Council in its recent discussions.
Today’s draft resolution comes after this
morning’s important statement by President Bush, in
which he announced that Secretary of State Powell
would be travelling to the region to work for the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). For its part,
Israel is willing, in full cooperation with General Zinni
and now with Secretary Powell, to engage in steps,
together with reciprocal Palestinian actions, to achieve

2

an immediate and meaningful ceasefire, the withdrawal
of the Israeli troops, the implementation of Tenet and
Mitchell and an end to all acts of terrorism and
incitement, in accordance with resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002).
In President Bush’s highly valuable statement
today, he again articulated his vision for peace in the
Middle East, including the end of terrorism and
incitement, the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security, with Israel.
The President indicated to both sides what steps should
be taken to bring about meaningful and peaceful
coexistence, including dignity and hope for all.
Israel is giving President Bush’s statement the
careful attention it is due. We will reassess the situation
in the light of its major operative parts, concerning
“an immediate and meaningful ceasefire; an
end to terror and violence and incitement;
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah; implementation of the
already agreed upon Tenet and Mitchell plans”.
We further support the forthcoming mission of
Secretary Powell to the region. The presence of
Secretary Powell is a powerful demonstration of the
American commitment to ending the violence and
bringing peace to the region. Israel pledges to spare no
effort to cooperate fully with Secretary Powell to make
his mission a success, and to bring about a genuine and
meaningful ceasefire that will pave the way for a return
to the negotiating process.
I do not believe that anything must be added to
the President’s statement with regard to the Palestinian
terrorism and to the Palestinian leader, Chairman
Arafat. I do wish, however, to add to President Bush’s
expressed concern regarding the continuing assaults by
Hizbullah along Israel’s northern border. Hizbullah’s
actions are a clear and unambiguous violation of the
Blue Line, international law and the will of the
Security Council. That fact has been brought to the
Council’s attention repeatedly in letters I have
addressed to the Secretary-General, in numerous
reports of the Secretary-General and in his most recent
briefing to the Council just a few days ago.
In this regard, I would like to refer briefly to the
statement delivered yesterday by the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. Although

S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)

we do not always agree with the statements of the
Syrian representative, either in their form or in their
essence, we were, of course, attentive to the message
he delivered yesterday.
I will not respond here to those aspects of his
statement that were filled with hatred and distortions.
But one aspect of the statement deserves to be
addressed at this time of rising tensions along the Blue
Line. That is the Syrian representative’s allegation of
Israeli contempt for United Nations resolutions. I feel
obligated to recall that despite Israel’s full and
confirmed implementation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), in full accordance with the will
of the Council, Syria continues to exhibit total
disregard for that resolution. Through its overwhelming
control of Lebanon and its continued support for
Hizbullah, violations of the Blue Line now occur on a
regular basis in direct violation of resolution 425
(1978) and subsequent resolutions.
Today, these dangerous and illegitimate attacks
continued for the sixth consecutive day, with the firing
of anti-tank, anti-aircraft and Katyusha rockets at
civilian and military targets in northern Israel. In
addition, three unarmed United Nations observers and
two peacekeepers were injured by Hizbullah forces in
southern Lebanon. The observers, citizens of Ireland,
Norway and France, were beaten up by Hizbullah
gunmen and had to be evacuated to hospitals in
northern Israel.
Ironically, it is a member of the Security Council
that is defying the consensus reflected in resolution
425 (1978) with impunity and is enabling such
reprehensible attacks to occur. In this respect, we are
obliged to deplore not only the violations of the Blue
Line and of resolution 425 (1978), which continue even
as we speak, but even more the fact that a State
Member of the United Nations that is also a member of
the Security Council is deliberately thwarting the
implementation of a resolution of a body of which it
itself is a member. Yes, Israel realizes that Member
States should respect Security Council resolutions, but
I do not believe it is superfluous to remind the Syrian
representative that this applies to Syria as well.
The situation along the Blue Line poses the threat
of regional stability being undermined, owing to
Hizbullah’s clear intent to escalate current hostilities
into a broader confrontation. It is imperative that the
Council act immediately to force the Governments of

Iran, Syria and Lebanon to halt the illegal terrorist
activities of Hizbullah.
We are at a crucial moment for our region, but
once again, because of the resolve and the leadership of
the President of the United States and the contribution
of the international community, we again have cause
for hope.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked for the
floor, and I call on him now.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts. Our thanks go also to all the other members of
the Council. I also wish to reiterate our heartfelt thanks
and appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for his constant, tireless efforts to put an end to
the tragedy in the Middle East.
The Council is about to adopt yet another very
important draft resolution by consensus. I would like to
say here that we appreciate very much the position of
our sister country, Syria, reflected in its willingness to
support the draft resolution and to cooperate with all
international efforts for the reasons set out a few
moments ago by the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The Security Council has important assets,
embodied in resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1397 (2002)
and in today’s draft resolution. Let us benefit from
those assets in order to help the peace efforts in the
region. Let us start with the first step called for in the
draft resolution: the implementation of resolution 1402
(2002) without delay.
I also wish to refer to the important statement
made by President Bush today, which is now being
studied by President Arafat and the rest of the
Palestinian leadership, who are experiencing difficult
circumstances, of which I am sure all members are
aware. Of course, we greatly value what the statement
reflects in terms of the readiness of the United States to
be deeply involved in the peace efforts at the highest
level. We also fully appreciate the new step in response
to the political and security situation.
We have noted that the statement calls on Israel to
put an end to military operations and to withdraw from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. We have also
noted that the statement calls for an immediate
ceasefire and for the implementation of the Tenet plan

3

S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)

and the Mitchell recommendations as they stand. We
have also noted the call to put an end to the settlements
and to combat terrorism, including the infrastructure of
terrorism networks.
We have also taken note of the call for an end to
the occupation and for Israel’s withdrawal to the
borders in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This is based
on a vision of two States, Israel and a politically and
economically viable Palestine.
All of that is definitely positive. It goes without
saying that we have reservations concerning the
unjustified criticism addressed to President Arafat, the
elected President of the Palestinians and the symbol of
Palestinian identity.
We believe that we need to overcome the
legitimate fears of the Palestinian side so that we can
all move forward as rapidly as possible towards the
implementation of agreements and can put an end to
the ongoing tragedy in order to establish a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Whatever the circumstances, we, of course, welcome
the visit of Mr. Powell to the region. I can assure the
Council that President Arafat is entirely willing to
cooperate with Mr. Powell to ensure the success of his
mission in order to put an end to the ongoing tragedy
and to return to the path of peace.
I thank all friendly countries, our Arab brothers,
the Non-Aligned Movement, the members of the
Security Council and particularly the States that have
sent special envoys to the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his kind words
addressed to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are moments away from the Council’s
adoption of a very important draft resolution. We shall
vote in favour of the draft resolution for reasons of
unanimity and the unity of the Council. We are doing
this with a view to halting Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people.
We have no intention whatever of transforming
this meeting into an occasion to indulge in rhetoric, as
the Israeli representative would wish. The Syrian
record is well known to all members of the Council and
of the Organization, and that record is an honourable
one. When Syria succeeded in being elected to the

4

Security Council it was with a majority vote of 160
Members. The members of the Council are well aware
of the considerable contributions made by Syria in
dealing with the various problems before the Council
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. I have no need to respond to the allegations
and false claims made by the Israeli representative, and
I do not intend to turn this meeting into a competition
in polemics.
Resolution 425 (1978) has not been implemented
in full. The implementation that has taken place
occurred with resistance. Yet even now there are daily
aerial violations aimed at terrifying the citizens of
Lebanon. When there is resistance to that, everything is
topsy-turvy. We are not here this evening to repeat that
Israel has not implemented all relevant resolutions —
particularly those of the Security Council. We are here
to adopt another draft resolution because Israel has not
implemented the two most recently adopted
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I welcome the
presence among us of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, and I give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: The situation in the
Middle East — between Israel and Palestine and across
the Blue Line — continues to deteriorate. All parties
risk making serious miscalculations about the effect
that their actions will have on one another. Such
miscalculations can all too easily draw the region into
greater and greater danger, whether intended or not.
My purpose in addressing the Security Council
today is to call on all members of the international
community to consider urgently how best to intercede
with the parties to persuade them to draw back from
their present course.
In the Palestinian-Israeli arena, Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002) provides the elements needed to
begin to de-escalate the present crisis, and resolution
1397 (2002) provides the framework for a permanent
settlement. We all need to intensify our efforts to see
that those resolutions are implemented without further
delay.
Israeli actions since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002) do not bode well for
stabilizing the situation and renewing political talks.
On the contrary, the Government of Israel appears to be
moving in the opposite direction to that prescribed by

S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)

resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) — a sure path
to further escalation. Israel has justified its acts as selfdefence and counter-terrorist measures. However, we
need to be very clear that self-defence is not a blank
cheque. It is important to understand that responding to
terrorism does not in any way free Israel from its
obligations under international law; nor does it justify
creating a human rights and humanitarian crisis within
the occupied Palestinian territory. There is an urgent
need to comply with all provisions of international law,
particularly those that ban indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force as well as the humiliating
treatment of a civilian population.
Forcing Chairman Arafat into exile would be
reckless. He is the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and his exile would only lead to
even more violence and chaos. Deportation is
specifically prohibited by the Fourth Geneva
Convention. It would be a miscalculation of
monumental proportions to believe that removing
Chairman Arafat from the political scene and
dismantling the Palestinian Authority would create
conditions where Israel can achieve security for itself.
I understand the bitterness, anger and disillusion
felt by Israelis. But, the military route taken by the
Government of Israel will not pacify the Palestinians.
Nor do I see how this approach can bring peace and
security to Israel. Only a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement can do so. If we have
learned anything from history, it is that it is a grave
mistake for the more powerful party to believe that
power alone will ultimately subdue the weaker party. In
fact, what we are witnessing is an increase in the
resolve and unity of the Palestinians, as well as
increasing public anger across the Arab and Islamic
world and beyond.
I am not arguing that the spiralling violence is to
be blamed on one party alone. The Palestinian
Authority seems to believe that failing to act against
terrorism and inducing turmoil, chaos and instability
will cause the Government and people of Israel to
buckle. They will not. As we are seeing, this approach
is only spurring on the Israeli Government in its
present course; it also unites the Israeli public behind
the military option. We should not forget that it was not
so long ago that this same Israeli public was supportive
of peace efforts by a large majority.

Under direct assault from the Israeli military,
Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian security services
are seriously limited in their ability to contain
terrorism. However, even now, Chairman Arafat has
the capacity to exercise political leadership — to set
the course for the future of his people. Terrorism is
never justified. The Palestinian leadership must
acknowledge this and the Palestinian public must
accept this.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on the
Government of Israel to give the “quartet” full access
to the compound of Chairman Arafat and to the
Chairman himself. Together with General Zinni’s
mission, the “quartet” arrangement could be used as an
effective instrument to pursue implementation of 1402
(2002).
There have been persistent reports about
limitations placed on access by humanitarian and
medical workers to those Palestinians in urgent need of
assistance. It is imperative that humanitarian workers
and agencies such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the Red Crescent Society and the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East be granted full access to
persons in those affected areas.
There is plenty of reason for pessimism. But there
is at least one recent positive development. The
promise represented by the Arab League’s Beirut
Summit marked a significant turning point. We need to
ensure that the Saudi initiative, endorsed by the Arab
League, does not founder. Let us hold onto and nourish
that vision amid the encircling gloom and the worrying
rise in regional tension.
Here, I would like to express very serious
concern over events along the Blue Line. I recalled in
the Council recently that Israel’s withdrawal from
Lebanon was in compliance with resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978), and was recognized as such by
the Council itself. We must make sure that all sides
respect the Blue Line. Escalation along the Blue Line
could have serious consequences for peace and security
in the region — beyond Israel and Lebanon — as we
know from the past. There seem to be efforts coming
from Lebanese territory to deliberately create
instability along the Blue Line.
In addition to recent attacks by Hizbullah across
the Blue Line, this morning Hizbullah elements

5

S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)

assaulted a patrol of military observers from the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
It needs to be made clear to Hizbullah and others
who may be involved that attacks across the Blue
Line — whether into northern Israel or into occupied
Syrian territory — are violations of Security Council
resolutions, and are not acceptable. I strongly urge
those with influence to ensure adherence to the Council
resolutions on this subject. The Government of
Lebanon will be aware that it is responsible for any
hostile actions undertaken from its territory.
In this connection, I have been in contact over the
last 24 hours with leaders in the region. Also, my
Personal Representative in Lebanon, Mr. De Mistura,
and the Force Commander of UNIFIL, yesterday met
with Council members who have representatives in
Beirut, as well as with the Lebanese leadership, about
the situation.
Let me conclude by saying that the building
blocks of peace, once broken down, are not easily
rebuilt. Recent events have had a further, severely
corrosive, effect on mutual confidence. On both sides,
bitterness and despair are at an all-time high. We all
need to cling to the conviction that, in the end, however
long it takes, there will one day have to be a peaceful
settlement of this conflict.
Third-party mediation is needed more than ever,
as the parties are unable on their own to find a way out
of the present situation. In this connection, I strongly
welcome President Bush’s decision to send Secretary
Powell to the region.
The road back to the negotiating table will not be
easy or smooth. But all sides can take the first steps by
exercising maximum restraint so as to reverse the
current dangerous deterioration of the situation.

6

Resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), taken
together, provide the vision for a permanent settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the immediate
security and political steps needed to move beyond the
present crisis. Our efforts need to focus on
implementing those resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2002/347) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1403 (2002).
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.
