UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/786
14 July 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 JULY 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

As you will recall, in my letter to you of 10 July 1999 regarding the East
Timor popular consultation process (S/1999/773), I proposed rescheduling the
start of voter registration to 16 July 1999 to allow time for the Government of
Indonesia to take concrete steps, based on specific criteria provided by me, to
improve the security situation.
In subsequent meetings in East Timor with senior officials of the
Government, my Special Representative for the East Timor popular consultation
has been assured that the authorities are taking steps towards the fulfilment of
those criteria.
It is not, however, possible for me to conclude at present that the
necessary security conditions exist for the peaceful implementation of the
popular consultation process throughout the Territory, as called for under
paragraph 3 of the agreement on security arrangements dated 5 May 1999 reached
by the Governments of Indonesia and Portugal and the United Nations (A/53/951S/1999/513, annex III). As I noted in my letter to you dated 10 July, the
security situation in the Territory as a whole remains serious, and there has
not been time to assess properly how far recent steps taken by the Government
will result in an improvement. In particular, as I have previously reported to
the Council, violence and intimidation have continued to be carried out with
impunity by pro-autonomy militias. Nevertheless, determined as I believe we
should be to go ahead, undeterred by the intimidation, and in view of the need
to adhere to the shortest possible time-frame, I have decided to begin the
registration, based on positive assurances by the Indonesian authorities, on the
condition that meaningful, visible improvements in the security situation will
be observed in the immediate future.
The United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) will continue to keep the
security situation constantly under review and I intend to make another
assessment of conditions based on its objective evaluation, halfway through the
registration period. At that time, I will determine whether there has been
enough significant progress to continue registration on the basis that the
people of East Timor are able to participate in the popular consultation safely
and free of intimidation.

99-20780 (E)

140799

/...

S/1999/786
English
Page 2

I have informed the Governments of Indonesia and Portugal of this decision
and I will keep the Council fully informed of any future developments.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
