244

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for
the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Believing that the successful codification and progressive
development of the rules of international law governing
succession of States in respect of State property, archives
and debts would contribute to the development of friendly
relations and co-operation among States, irrespective of
their differing constitutional and social systems, and would
assist in promoting and implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for its valuable work on the question of succession of States in respect of State property, archives and
debts, and to the Special Rapporteur on the topic for his
contribution to this work;
2. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries shall be convened to consider the draft articles
on succession of States in respect of State property, archives
and debts, and to embody the results of its work in an
international convention and such other instruments as it
may deem appropriate;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the United
Nations Conference on Succession of States in respect of
State Property, Archives and Debts early in 1983 at a place
to be determined by the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;
4. Invites Member States to submit, not later than I
July 1982, their written comments and observations on the
final draft articles on succession of States in respect of State
property, archives and debts, prepared by the International
Law Commission;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion on the subject
at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Succession of States in respect of State Property, Archives and Debts".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/114. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-third session, 49
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 52 and
to give increased importance to its role in relations among
States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirty-third session
the International Law Commission, pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions 34/141 of 17 December 1979 and 35/
163 of 15 December 1980, completed the second reading
of the draft articles on succession of States in respect of
State property, archives and debts, and commenced the sec-

» Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

ond reading of the draft articles on treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between
international organizations,
Noting further with appreciation the progress made at
that session by the International Law Commission on State
responsibility, international liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international
law, jurisdictional immunities of States and their property
and the status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic
bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
Taking note of the intention of the International Law
Commission to appoint a new Special Rapporteur on the
topic •'The law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses' ' 53 and stressing the desirability of the Commission doing so at the commencement of its thirty-fourth
session, thus ensuring continuity of its work on the topic,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting
questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics which
might be submitted to the International Law Commission,
thus enabling the Commission further to enhance its contribution to the progressive development of international law
and its codification,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-third session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the written
comments of Governments as well as views expressed in
debates in the General Assembly, the International Law
Commission should:
(a) Complete at its thirty-fourth session the second reading of the draft articles on treaties concluded between States
and international organizations or between international organizations, adopted at its twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh and
twenty-ninth to thirty-second sessions, also taking into
account the written comments of principal international
organizations;
(b) Continue its work aimed at the preparation of draft
articles on:
(i) Part two of the draft on responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts, bearing in mind the
need for a second reading of the draft articles constituting part one of the draft;
(ii) International liability for injurious consequences
arising out of acts not prohibited by international
law;
(iii) The law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses;
(iv) Jurisdictional immunities of States and their property;
(v) The status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier;
(c) Continue its study of the second part of the topic
of relations between States and international organizations;
4. Endorses the conclusion reached by the International
Law Commission regarding the establishment, at its thirtyfourth session, of general objectives and priorities which
would guide its study of the topics on its programme of
work within the term of office of Commission members
elected at the current session of the General Assembly;~ 4
5. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusion of the
International Law Commission that it will continue to keep
under review the possibility of improving further its present

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. /0 (N,6/10 and Corr. I}, para. 256 (c).
4
'
Ibid .. para. 25X

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

procedures and methods with a view to the timely and effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it; 55
6. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning research
projects and studies required by the work of the International
Law Commission and the increased role of the Codification
Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat,
as well as those concerning the need for continuing provision
of summary records of the Commission's meetings;
7. Urges Governments to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments and observations on its draft
articles and questionnaires and for materials on topics on
its programme of work;
8. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission will continue to enhance its co-operation with the
legal organs of intergovernmental organizations whose work
is of interest for the progressive development of international
law and its codification;
9. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the records
of the debate on the report of the Commission at the thirtysixth session of the General Assembly and to prepare and
distribute a topical summary of the debate.
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

36/115.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, 50
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 57 and the Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations, 58
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
the Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of
the host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts of terrorism
against the premises and personnel of missions accredited
to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should be taken by
the competent authorities of the host country, in particular
to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and
the safety of their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country which appear in paragraph
37 of its report;
2. Strongly condemns the acts of terrorism perpetrated
against the missions accredited to the United Nations and
their personnel;

" Ibid., para. 260.
Ibid., Supplement No. 26 (A/36/261
57
Resolution 22 A (I).
58
Resolution 169 (II).

245

3. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Nations
with the host country and to continue to stress to the host
country, in this context, the importance of effective measures to avoid terrorist acts against the missions and their
personnel;
4. Requests the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country to continue its work, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December I 971;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December /98/

36/122.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 686 (VII) of 5 December 1952,
992 (X) of 21 November 1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 December
1967, 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2697 (XXV) of
11 December 1970, 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972
and 3349 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of 27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973 and
3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the strengthening
of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, by which it established the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its resolutions 31/28 of 29 November 1976, 32/45 of 8 December
1977, 33/94 of 16 December 1978, 34/147 of 17 December
1979 and 35/164 of 15 December 1980,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization on the work of the
session it held in 1981, 59
Noting that significant progress has been made in fulfilling
the mandate of the Special Committee,
Noting also the progress of the debate held during the
thirty-sixth session on the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States", included in the agenda in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 35/164, especially
concerning the consideration of the draft Manila declaration
on the peaceful settlement of international disputes, 00
Noting the importance that pre-session consultations
among the members of the Special Committee and other
interested States may have in facilitating the fulfilment of
the Committee's task,
Considering that the Special Committee has not yet completed the mandate entrusted to it,
I. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee should continue
its work in pursuance of the following tasks with which it
is entrusted:

56

-'" Official Records <i( the General Ass,,mh/_y. Thin,· sixth s,,.uion. S111•plement No. 33 (A/36/33)
"" See resolution 36/1 10 abm ,·.
