S/2019/775

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 September 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 26 September 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), as well
as to my remarks to the press on 23 September 2019 regarding the Syrian Arab
Republic, and to bring to your attention the “Terms of Reference and Core Rules of
Procedure for a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, credible, balanced and inclusive
Constitutional Committee facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva” (see annex).
The Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure were agreed by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Syrian Negotiation Commission with the
facilitation of my Special Envoy for Syria, Geir O. Pedersen.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-16687 (E)

270919

*1916687*

S/2019/775

Annex
Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure
For a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, credible, balanced and inclusive
Constitutional Committee facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva

1. Consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and its principles and purposes and all
relevant Security Council resolutions on Syria and based on a strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic;
2. In the discharge of his mandate in Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), including to
facilitate intra-Syrian negotiations that, inter alia, sets a constitutional process to develop a new
constitution, pursuant to which free and fair elections under United Nations supervision shall
take place in line with the resolution; and with full respect of Syria’s national sovereignty;
3. Recalling the Twelve Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles which emerged from the
Geneva process;
4. Giving effect to the Sochi Final Statement as a contribution to the Geneva process with the
support of the Sochi co-conveners;
5. Stressing the importance of the broader political process moving forward to build trust and
confidence and implement Security Council resolution 2254 (2015);
6. The United Nations Special Envoy for Syria looks forward to convening under United Nations
auspices, in Geneva on 30 October 2019, and facilitating a credible, balanced and inclusive
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee that operates in accordance with these
Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure:

Article 1: Mandate
7. The Constitutional Committee shall, within the context of the UN-facilitated Geneva process,
prepare and draft for popular approval a constitutional reform, as a contribution to the political
settlement in Syria and the implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). The
constitutional reform shall, inter alia, embody in the constitution and constitutional practices of
Syria the letter and spirit of the Twelve Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles.
8. The Constitutional Committee may review the 2012 Constitution including in the context of
other Syrian constitutional experiences and amend the current constitution or draft a new
constitution.

2/4

19-16687

S/2019/775

Article 2: Composition and Structure
9. The Constitutional Committee shall have a large and a small body.
10. The large body shall comprise 150 men and women - 50 nominated by the Government; 50
nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission; and 50 civil society.
11. The small body shall comprise 45 men and women - 15 nominated by the Government from
among its 50; 15 nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission from among its 50; and 15
from among the 50 civil society.
12. The small body shall prepare and draft the constitutional proposals and the large body shall
adopt them. The large body may be convened, in parallel or periodically as the work of the small
body proceeds, to discuss and adopt proposals.

Article 3: Decision-making
13. The Constitutional Committee should be governed by a sense of compromise and
constructive engagement aimed at reaching general agreement of its members which would
enable the outcome to receive the widest possible support by the Syrian people, and to this end
the Constitutional Committee large and small bodies move forward and take decisions by
consensus where possible but otherwise by voting requiring support of a minimum of 75% of
members in the respective body (i.e. 113 members present and voting in the large body, 34
members present and voting in the small body). The 75% voting threshold shall be a fixed one.

Article 4: Chairing
14. The Constitutional Committee shall have balanced chairing arrangements with two CoChairs – one nominated by the Government of Syria and one nominated by the Syrian
Negotiations Commission.
15. Co-Chairs shall proceed in consensus in chairing the large and small bodies.
16. Co-Chairs shall in consensus exert the prerogatives necessary for ensuring the observance of
the rules of procedure and the good functioning of the Constitutional Committee. Their functions
may include:
- chairing and guiding meetings and sessions;
- proposing and ensuring observance of rules of procedure;
- facilitating and proposing an agenda and work-plans that enable all issues to be
considered and does not make consideration of issues dependent on agreement on other
issues;
- identifying and inviting speakers;
- promoting gender mainstreaming;

19-16687

3/4

S/2019/775

-

receiving and putting forward ideas on the work as may be appropriate;
coordinating with the Special Envoy to ensure that his facilitation is at their disposal in
the discharging of their duties.

Article 5: Facilitation
17. The Special Envoy shall facilitate the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee’s work, including by supporting the Co-Chairs to reach consensus and by bringing
closer viewpoints among the members through exerting his good offices when needed.
18. The Special Envoy shall regularly review progress through his reporting to the Security
Council.

Article 6: Confidence, safety and security of Constitutional Committee members
19. There is a strong and shared commitment to build confidence beginning with guaranteeing
that members of the Constitutional Committee and their relatives or political and civil society
organizations and entities of which they are part are not subject to threat or harassment or actions
against person or property directly related to their work in the Constitutional Committee and to
addressing and resolving any incidents and concerns should they arise.

Article 7: Additional Provisions
20. Consistent with these Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure enjoying the consent
of the Syrian parties, the Constitutional Committee may agree on further rules of procedure
within the Constitutional Committee process to ensure its efficient and sustainable work on all
issues without preconditions.
21. The Syrian parties agree that, in the interests of the Syrian people alone, the Constitutional
Committee shall work expeditiously and continuously to produce results and continued progress,
without foreign interference, including externally imposed timelines.
22. The Constitutional Committee may agree on any adjustments that may be necessary along
the road in these Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure to enable the Constitutional
Committee to move forward, and it may seek the good offices of the Special Envoy as may be
needed.
23. The Constitutional Committee shall agree on the means of popular approval and transposition
into the Syrian legal order of the constitutional reform adopted by the Constitutional Committee,
and it may seek the good offices of the Special Envoy as may be needed.
END

4/4

19-16687
