UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2597”

MEETING:

24 JUNE 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Ageda/2597)

. ... .. .... ..... .. .... ..... .... .. ... ..

I
1

Adoption of the agenda ,,,.,,,..,......................................
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 13 June I985 from the Permatmt Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the Pcsident of the Security Council (s/17%7). . .

VW.2597

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Suppemenrs of the Ofj%iul Records of the Sect&y Council The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council. numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securlry Courtll. The new system. which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965. became fully operative on that date.

2597th MEETiNG
Held in New York on ‘hmday,

20 June 198s. at 3.30 p.m.

Resident Mr. D, H. N. ALLEYNE
(Trinidad and Tobago).

the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote. in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and under rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Resenr: The representatives of the foliowing States:
Australia. Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France.
India, Madagaxar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

I.

Adoption

A[ the inviration of rite &esk&?nt. Mr. tiayama (Congo)
took ffie place reserwd for him 01 dte side of the Council
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Bahamas, who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States for the month of June. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 13 June 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17267)

4. Mr. HEPBURN (Bahamas): I happily uphold the tradition of the timt-time speaker5 to pay tribute to you. Sir,
and to commend you for the efficient manner in which you
are fulfilling your duty as current Resident of the Council,
and also to endorse the just compliments apportioned to
your predecwwor for his pertotmance last month.

77te meedng war cai&d to or&r at 4.35 p.m.

l%e agent&t nas a&p&.

5. In my capacity as pmrnt Chairman of the Group of
Latin Ant&an
and Caribbean State% I take this opportunitytoexpressontheirbebatfttsen5eofmoftiBcationat
the ptmilhtg
situation in southern Africa, which continues to become inemasingly grim bceatwe of the tutrelentingnrakvd#rcoftherodrt~trtahtSotttbAf~.Not
3lly dots the Rnoria dgime flspdy
t35regd
the
~xbonstiotw of the international eommurtity for fleaibRity
andcomprmnise.btaitfwrsiswinvtok5tingtbet&tor&l
integrity of nei#rbouriyr 5overeigrt State5 in its determirtatkmtopeqetuatetheheinow3sy5wtnof~~ti

cOmplsbtt by Aagob agahwt %ntUt Afrlem

1. The PRESIDENT: Inaccotdancewithsde&iitaken
at the 2396th meeting, I i&e the Minister for Foreign
AffaiRofAn~totaLcaplaccattheCouneillablcandI
invitethcrcprwntativcPofA~tina,thc~,Cuba,
the German &tnoemtic Republic, Liberia, Pakbtan. Sao
Tome and Rincipe, South Africa. the Sudan, the United
Republic of Tsnzania and Yugodevia to take the places
re5med for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6, The Minister for Fc&gn Affairs of Anftola, in his
reports and his 5tatement tbi5 morning [25m m&f&g],
outlined the event5 of21 May 1985, when a group of South
African conwnandos was appmMr&d
within the border5
of Aqpia. In e&t. bad thb mirrion to robotage an oil
company in the province of Cabhlda been succe5sful, once
againtherewouldhaHCkcntbe~
dUK~le5s
lorsoTinnoccntl~ar#II~ara~k16thccconomi?r
rtabihty of the An&
State a5 a whole. We in tbe region
rhare the indignation and fnwtration that the Angolan
Govemrnent and people must feel as a re5ult of thrae
unwarranted violation5 of their territorial integrity.

At the bwitatkm &he hskhwr. Mr. win Dunem (AQ&I),
rook a pkw at the CoPPscUleblr Mr. Mdilt (Argentha),Mr.
Hepbwn flbhamm), Mr. Chtntw OUw(Cn&), Mr. Schkgd
(German Lbnacratk Rep&c), Mr. Kofa (Dberkg, Mr.
Shah Nomu (Pakiuan), M. Ranco (Sao Tome and MRcipe), Mr. HIM Schhd4g (South @tco), Mr. Birk& (SW&M),
Air. hm
(iinr~d &public sf Tmtumfo) and Mr. Golob
!&~T~~~&
pIacts reserved fi tkm at the st& of
2. The PRESIDENT: i should like to inform the Council
that I have received a ktter from the representative of the
Congo in which he reque5ts to be invited to participate in

7. It is not the intention of the Member State5 of Latin
America and the Caribbean to make any judgement on the
I

circumstances surroundrng the message tram the Angolan
Government. the text of which is contained in document
S/17246. Rather. it is to the nature of such acts of aggression that we voice our seriousconcern. We feel that unconstrained behaviour of this sort must not be tolerated by the
international community because, in the final analysis. it is
the peace and security of an integrated and interdependent
planet that is threatened.
8. Further, it is also of utmost importance to recall that a
short time ago both the Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa had given publicly what
turned out to be lip service to the idea of participating in
serious and positive negotiations with the aim of establishing a peaceful, fair and permanent solution to the problems in southern Africa. It is cleat. although not
surprising, none the less. that the words of the representatives of this perplexing taeist r&me are not in accord with
its actions. This kind of duplicity does not and cannot
enhance the peace and security of southern Africa oc. for
that matter. of the continent and the entire international
community.
9. The most disturbing aspect of all these incidents is that
the unique nature of the apurdwid system prevails, and it is
on that offensive and abhorrent system that the entire
legal. political, economic and social structure of the Remria Government is based. Consequently. unless the
Government of South Africa continues to hear statements
of condemnation of its violation of human rights, territotial integrity and selfdetermination of peoples. it is probable that even greater atrocities would occur.
10. Finally, I wish to thank you, Mr. Resident, and the
members of the Council for this invitation to speak, and I
also wish to reiterate that the Member States of Latin
America and the Caribbean condemn the insurgence of
South African commandos into Angolan t&toy
and consider eotnments about linkage and so on as excuses and
delaying tactics. We further consider the acts as a calculated
effort on the part of the Pretoria r&ime to bolster and
maintain this evil system. In this regard, we express our
determination not to stand idly by and allow our silence to
be misconstrued. Whik we cannot claim to be privy to all of
the facts, we know enough to deplore and condemn these
actions as ilkgal and in direct contravention of the principles and Articles of the Chatter of the United Nations.
Il. It is along those lines that we register our opposition
and recommend that the entire international community
act accordingly.
12. Mr. LOUET (France) (fftnrerprrotihn from French):
The international
community is in duty bound to
denounce tti behaviour of a State that does not comply
with rhe r&s of inicmaiionai iaw and pursues a poiicy of
force against its neighbours. 1 note with regret that this is
yet again the case with South Africa. The States of southem Africa are the victims of its aggressive behaviout: Botswana, where last Friday South African commandos
carried out a bloody operation. has brought to the Security
Council a complaint that we shall be considering shortly

[5Y17279]. Today. it is the People’s Republic of Angola
that is denouncing yet another strike against it by the
South African Government.
13. The signing of the Lusaka agreement by South
Africa and Angold in February 1984 had afforded grounds
for hope that there might be a genuine regional detente.
Although South Africa implemented it only after some
delay and with a certain reluctance, Ihe agreement none
the less led to the withdrawal of the South African troops
that had been occupying southern Angola since August
1981. No sooner had that withdrawal taken place than the
Pretoria Government launched a commando raid in
Cabin& Province in the far north of Angola.
14. Tite facts, as stated by the representative of Angola
and borne out by the statements of the South African
prisoner. are overwhelming. They show that South Africa
is pursuing a policy of brutal pressure against the countries
of the region and that it is bznding its efforts towards
weakeniblg their already shaky economies. France unreservedly condemns that effort to create destabilisation
being made in disregard of international law and in flagrant violation of Angolan sovereignty.
i5. The attitude of the South African Government is a
source of very great concern. The Angolan Government
has drawn attention to other recent actions. It has also told
us of its fear that South Africa is preparing another invasion of its territory. The South AMcan authorities must be
made to undenrtand that that policy. which cannot fail to
lead to further deaths and suffering, will in no way solve
the problems of southern Africa.
16. When he spoke last week during the debate on the
question of Namibia [2583rdmeering]. the representative of
South Africa enumerated the ground rules that the Statesof
southern Africa should abide by. He pointed out, lnrpr&,
that the problems of conflict in that region should be solved
by peaceful means rather than by violence. That principle is
actually universal. The peaceful settlement of disputes and
refraining from the threat or use of force are, indeed, the
very foundations of the Charter of the United Nations.
France hopes to see them applied everywhere.
17. My dekgation therefore urges South Africa to bring
its deeds into line with its commitments and, by renouncing its present course of conduct, further. through dialogue. the solution of the probkms of the region.
18. Mr.

RABETAFIKA

(Madagascar)

(inmpre/afion

from French):It is distressing to note the persistence of
three phenomena in southern Africa which are interrelated
because of crpcshetiand which, in spite of OUTcollective of
individual stands, seem to find the Council increasingly
powerless. They are the repression of democratic liberation
.--. --..--. L‘K
-a._ UKga,
!,a_..-, uw.UyaU”‘,
_______*!__ “I-A--:l____l:
---, -a-*III”*CnKI,U,
01, 111,
S‘,,(I,,“,u)I
1c,ritory and acts of aggression against States in the region.
acts foor which, as all the world clearly sees, the racist
r&imc of South Africa alone bears the guilt.
19. We keep being tokl that thanks lo the criticismswhich are preferred to condemnations-to
the suitable and

firm statements and to timely engagements, it is reasonable
to say that the overall situation in southern Africa has
improved-to
the point where some even view as positive
acts, especially from the vantage of a pticuiar ideology,
the South African regime’s barely concealed attempts to
impose its imperial will.

independence. We pay a tribute to the Council for having
adopted eight resolutions on Angola. Probably there wiTi
now be another such resolution, condemning South
Africa, demanding that it withdraw its army from AngoIan territory and cease the use of Namibia for its aggressive
designs against Angola, and calling for redress and compensation for the material damage suFfered by the victim.

20. The pity is that, rightly or wrongly, we have held
back from strict application of the Charter to counter that
imperial will, and some circles claim that the attitude of the
apartheid regime can be justified, or at least understood,
without reference to the strict framework required by
respect for international law. Yet is is clear that whatever
the actual situation in the region may be-which is all too
basic and obvious-South
Africa cannot place itself above
the law and base itself on rules grounded solely on the
contumely with which they are vaunted.

25. But what assurances do we have that such actions
will not be repeated? To what extent can we trust the
apartheidregime. which has constantly reneged on its obligations? Are we to continue counting on the pragmatic
gradualism of some and the reformism of others? We
cound have found refuge in Article 6 and Chapter VII of
the Charter had we been clear that the racist regime of
South Africa could be considered as the enemy not only of
~‘fricans but of all mankind. Then international public
opinion would no longer be abused by the impenitent
defenders of universalism and persuasion.

21. We are all bound by the provisions of the Charter,
which in this case are fleshed out by the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. None of those
provisions-whether
they involve the non-use or threat of
force against the territorial integrity or independence of
any State, the settlement of disputes by peaceful means,
non-interference in the internal affab of States or the sovereign equality of States-has been tespected by South
Africa.

26. We may be accused of being unrealistic, but at least
our lack of realism will have the a vantage of being based
on the provisions of the Charter, which remains the sole
valid basis for the decisions which the Council must take
one day in order to carry out its responsibilities and its
obligations towards the African people, and in particular
the Angolan people, which also is entitled to security and
development in a country whose sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity will finally be respected.
27. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) (ixrer~~rurlon/iunr
An&c): I
should like first to thank you, Sir. for the ideal way in
which you are conducting our deliberations and for the
great eIfortx you made during the recant series of meetings
on the question of Namibia,

22. Thus, blithely and with virtually assured impunity,
South Africa sent a special forces commando unit against
the Malongo oil installations in Angola. Thus it pfovkies
military mut&le/ and explosives to UNITA (Narlonol
Uniun for the Tofu/ lndoppndnrce qf&oh),
which is cornpktely in its pay and which ix devoted to its wretched
cause. Thus, it has massed troops and logistic support
along the northern border of Namibia. AII thasc measures
of intimidation are intended, it exams, to ettxure peace and
security in the region through the use of State tcrrorIsm,
repeatcd acts of sabotage and political and aeonornic de+
tabiition;
but the I&t ix, they are e~re@s
acts of
aggm&m,withinthemamIngolartIck3oftheDcfiion
“N A=
;ii$ruI
,ixmtbfy rao&un
3314 (XX&I qf

Zs. Unfortunately, the Council is meeting for the fourtenth time within a few days to discuss yet another of the
grave problems caused by the abhorrent upwthetdregime
andthcthrrattopcaceandsccurity~bytheactionsof
that r&gime towards nrighbouring States, particularly the
front-Itne States.
29. Thismorning~heardthestatementoftkMiniater
for Foreign Affairs of Angola, who once again told of the
actsofaggm&nagainsthIscountryperpetratedbyracist
South Africa. If these actx ofaggreasion show anything,
they show, first and f memost, the extent ofreckkssnesx the
updeid
r&me has reached, and why it is mjectal by the
international
community and by the e~nscience of
mankind,

23. In an attempt to justify itx depredations. South
Africa puts forward the suppoeed need to save Namibia in
spite of the Namibians and evineg the determinatii
to
give chase to those terrorIs& who dare to speak out in
favour of freedom, equal political participation, justice
and social progress. Certain -not
to say
fascist--circles gladly go along with thix, for it is considered necessary that the m&t regime of South Africa
entrench its domination in southern Africa and become, in
- __-. .-L-I-L __- L- A:.- L!-- L ..-

30. It is ckar to everyone that this aggressive r&ime has
decided to chalky
the entire international community.
Even knowing that the Security Council was to meet to
eor&kr the question of Namibix, the fap&teidt-igim
did
nothaltitsactsof
aggmsbn; indeed, it began to carry out
raids against sovereign States, first on the pretext of “hot
pursuit” and then on other pretexts familiar to us all.

24. The People’s Republic of Angola, with which, of
course, we feel solidarity, continues to pay the high cost of

thatpotiey. Wetderstandwhyithasbccnobt&dtotum

31. The fact is that from the international point of view
that regime is an illegal on. It does not conform to inter-

to the Security Council for the ninth time in its IO years of
3

national norms or to the standards set by mankind in
general. We do not believe that such a regime can be dealt
with in a conciliatory way or given any co-operation,
32. The world has just witnessed another flagrant attack
against the sovereignty of the territory of Angola, In the
face of this aggression the Council cannot fail to condemn
South Africa for penisting in its acts of aggression against
Angola and for the threat it poses to peace and security,
With increasing urgency, we ask when the international
community will act. When will the Council adopt the
enforcement measures for which we have asked time and
again?
33. We say that the time has come for the Council decisively to shoulder its responsibility to deal with those who
insist on defying the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The issue is crystaltlear. Angola’s appeal is a
rightful one. The pretences of the Pretoria regime are
totally invalid. In our opinion, the path the Council must
take is also clear. There must be no compromise, no
doubt. We are prepared to go along with the Council as far
as it wishes to go. We hope that this will be sufficient to
make the abhorrent Pretoria r&me aware of the tmequivocal stand of the international community.
34. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): I had occasion recently.
Sir, to extend my delegation’s warmest congratulations to
the Minister for Foteip AtTairs of your country and to
evince our sincere admiration for the way in which the
Council’s recent delikrations pmomded to a satisfactory
conclusion. It is now my great pleasure, Sir, to say how
happy we are to see you in the Chair at this important
meeting.
35. Last week. during the Council debate on the question
of Namibia, my delegation learned with indignation of the
renewed aggremlon of South Africa against a neighbottring country, which took the form of the commando incursion at Cabittda, deep inside the People*8 Rep&hi of
momingof21
May.Mydel~tion&o
Aneole*onthe
tooknotewithgraveeoneem
oftbernesmtgefromthe
Minister of Drfencc of tM Pkopk’s Republic of Angola,
annexed to -1
S/V263. That mavlg stated tbttt
South Africa had increamd its violations of Angobn sovereignty and territoriai integrity, in parti&ar its violations
of Angob’s national airspace.
36. During tbe debate on Namibia my delegation
expressed its gmw concern before. and strongly amdemned the aggressive acts of Soutb Africa. Hence my
delegation has felt compelled to make a statement in
today’s meeting of the Council to consider the complaint
made by Angola against Soutb Africa.
37. Thailand shares the view of the otber Member States
which condemn the racist regime of South Africa for its
renewed escabtion of unprovoked, predatory and prsistent acts of aggtession against Angola. including the continued military occupation and violation of Angola%
sovereignty, territorial integrity, and airspace. This unprovoked aggression by South Africa is not only in complete

contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and
the norms of international law but is also in blatant
defiance of all the relevant !&zcurity Council decisions and
resolutions.
38, The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola informed
the Council this morning that:
“If the operation had succeeded, the toll would have
been dozens dead, some of them American nationals.
Damage would have amounted to at least $I billion . . .
United States dollan. including a $216-million reconstruction of the onshore installation. It would have
taken over a year to rebuild the Malongo oil installations. and the halt in production would have caused a
loss of at least $770 million, in addition to stock worth
$30 million.” [259&h Mf?&rg, pfrru. II. ]
Furthermore, the aggressive act by South Africa would
have had widespread repercussions in other provinces of
Angola. All that would mean heavy losses, particularly for
a developing economy. In addition to the economic and
financial costs must be mentioned the serious impact of
political destabilisation.
39. My delegation’s position in this regard is clear and
consistent: Thailand has consistently and in the strongest
possible terms opposed and condemned South Africa’s
acts of aggression. as well as any foreign occupation and
violation by one country of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of another country. Hence my delegation
demands that the racist Pretoria &time desist from such
lawless acts and immediately and unconditionally withdraw its occupation forces from the territory of Angola,
compensate Angola for all the damage incurred and cease
all further violations against the People’s Republic of
Angola. My delegation will therefore vote in support of the
draf resolution in document S/I72&.
40. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) (inle?prelation
from
S@af.s& First, I extend to yott Sir, my most sincere personal congtatulations and the appreciation of my country
fortheefTortsmadebythepresidencydtheCouncilduringthepastMckswbenwecu&lemdtJtequestionof
Namibia. Thanks to your skilb and fine diplomacy and
those of the Minister for Foreign Alfairs of Trinidad and
Tobago, if has proved possible to achieve testtlts in keep
ing with the direct nsponsibilities of the Organisation and
in harmony with the human values and legal principles it is
required to uplwld.
41. MycounttybverydiuurbedbythcwaytheCouncil’s attention is constantly requited by the situation in
southern Africa owing to South Africa’s obstinate reliance
on forrc in that te-+I.
42. From the dawn of its existence as an independent
nation, he People’s Republic of Angolo has known the
trauma of violence and occupation. This fate of Angolan
history has still not chat@, despite the express pr;z
of the Charter of the United Nations and tioIt3 of the security Council.

this will result in a new condemnation of Pretoria-yet
another condemnation that will doubtless meet the same
fate as the others, that is. to be spurned by the racist
regime of Pretoria.

43. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola has described to us here a situation which calls for the justified
condemnation of the Council. The attack against the
Malongo complex in Cabinda Province is unfortunately
neither a new nor an isolated act. It is an act that is part of
a long chain of events which show that South Africa
clearly has a penchant for solutions of force combined
with colonialist and racist pmctices which run directly
counter to the very essence of the objectives of the United
Nations. That attack, which struck at vital areas of the
Angolan economy, makes it even more difficult to achieve
the minimum conditions of living standards, progress and
development which the Organisation has an obligation to
promote.

51. Such conduct is possible only with the suppott,
whether avowed or not, of those who, again yesterday,
refused in the Council to impose sanctions on the Pretoria
regime under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations which has so often been violated by that same
regime.
52. We address ourselves to those who assure impunity
to Pretoria and who sit around this table with us. We
appeal to their conscience, over and above machiavellian
political calculations, so that they will linally dare to put
an end to a r@ime which has been utterly rejected by the
international community. We call upon them to ensure
that the countries neighbouring on South Africa will at
long last be able to live free and in peace within secure
boundaries and will also be able to devote their resources
to their economic and social development.

44. Peru, in keeping with its dedication to the cause of
peace and its full adherence to the principles of intemational law as enshrined in the Charter, condemns South
Africa’s armed aggression in violation of the sovereignty,
independence and integrity of Angola and the inviolability
of that country’s frontiers. We support Angola’s right to
demand adequate amends and compensation for the huge
economic losses that it has suffered.

53. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

45 Lastly, my country cannot fail to express its deep
disquiet at acts of aggression that undermine the atmosphere necessary for the machinery of dialogue and negotiation to stand some chance of success and for all States of
the region that are neighbours of South Africa to be able
to live in peace and devote their efforts to the arduous task
of promoting the well-being of their peoples.

54. Mr. von SCHIRNDING (South Aftica): During my
statement to the Council on IO June on the question of
South West Africa [2&&j ##tee&g], I dealt at length with
the Cabinda incident. I should like today to expand on
some of the Points 1 made on that occasion.

46. Mr. BASSOLE (Burkina Faso) (&uetp#mion
from
IRCIIEA): First, I congratulate you, Sir. on the excellent way
in which you have been guiding the Council’s work and
the great patknce you have shown throughout our
deliktetiotts.

53. Iat me Iirst of all restate once again what we have
termed the ground ruks for coexistence in southern Africa:
lint. no State should make its territory available to individuals and organiratiorm wishing to promote or prepare violence against othar States in the mglon; secondly, no fomign
forces should be permitted to intervene in the region;
thirdly, the probletne of con&t in the region should be
sol& by peaceftd mfans rather than by violence; foutthly,
thesepmblemexhouIdks&edonaregionaIbasBbythe
leaders of the region themeelvcr; and ERhly, although the
Statesofourreglonh.awdilferentrocicnconomicand
political systems, we can live together in peace and harmony
and work mgether in the pursuit ofcommon interests. Each
country of the tegiott has the right to order its alfaiairsas it
deems tit, and inter-State relations. in particular between
neighbours, should not be disturbed by differing internal
policies. This is only sensible and pm&al, as recognition
is accorded to the fact that each country has its own set of
conditions for which it must seek its own solutions in the
intetests of its citizens. Divergent outlooks should not be
allowed to distract Governments from carrying out their
duty to accord their first priority to the welfare and
prosperity of t-heir peopks.

47. It is sad to note that for a whole week the racist
r&g& of Pretoria has been at the centre of the attention of
the Security Council and the international community.
Indeed, the way in which that r&ime mocks the intemational community can only be attributed to one logic: to
perpetuate 4mrfheri+in South Africa and illegally maintain
its colonial Pmmnce in Namibia ittdeftrtitely.
48. Once again, the Council has heard Angola complain
about the same aggmaor. The facts are well established,
and no one. here or elsewhere, can deny their veracity.
Since the commando unit was caught red-handed, its own
kaderadmitteditscrime.Asweheardinthesuuemem
made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola this
mornin& if the operation had ulccdcded it would have cost
the lives of a number of Americans, among others.
vene to hear the same complaint from the same plaintilf.
The resolutions have grown in number, but not even their
number or their content has led the South African racists
to see reason.

56. Is there anything unreasonabk or unrealistic about
these ground NkS? Surely tbey provide the minimum busis
for healthy intergovernmental relations anywhere.
57. The fact of the matter is that the MPLA (fop&r
Movementfor l& L.d&mtlott ofAngola) is providing facilities

50. ‘The evidence is so persuasive that we have no doubt
as to the outcome of our discussion, We are certain that
5

for thousands of ANC (,QiicattNationalCongress
of South
Africa) terrorists on its territory. It is actively assisting the
ANC in iIs training, arming and preparing for theperpetration of acts of terrorism against the peoples of South Africa.
The MPLA government has not denied this, nor has it
denied that it is supporting terrorist attacks of SWAPS
(South Best Afdca People’s
Organisation) against South
West Africa. Indeed, the Minister for Foreign Affaiairsofthe
MPLA regime this morning reatlirmed that commitment,
and I quote from the text of his statement, when he said,
“Angola will not stop giving its support to SWAPOand the
freedom lighten of the people of Namibia and South
Africa.” [255+5th
meeting,
puru 28.] Thereit is.

regard to the target of the operation. We challenge the
Council to allow Captain Du Toit to appear before it to
give his free and uncoerced version of what transpired.
62. Ihe Minister for Foreign Affairs of the MPLA
regime had a great deal to say this morning about South
Africa’s alleged violation of Angolan territory. I have no
intention of replying to his distortions, but let me once
again remind members of the Council of the facts.
63. In terms of the Alvor Agreement, Portugal recognized three movements: FNLA (NatiottaIRantfor theLiberarionofAng&), MPLA and UNITA. Those movements,
together with Portugal, were to have formed a transitional
government which would have held nation-wide elections
for a constituent assembly before the end of October 1975.
Those elections were never held, because the MPLA
imported foreign troops into Angola to impose its rule
over the country. That is a fact. There have never been free
elections in Angola. Ever since then there has been a civil
war in Angola, which is still far from being resolved. At
the moment the MPLA controls the cities, but UNITA
controls the countryside, where most of the people of
Angola live.

58. In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, South Africa has sought a peaceful resolution of
its dispute with Angola. In a number of ministerial meetings last year, it sought to persuade the MPLA regime to
accept the advantages of peace. South Africa expressed its
grave concern to the MPLA government over the activities
of a large number of ANC terrorists in various parts of
Angola. The South African Government repeatedly urged
the MPLA government to remove these terrorists from its
territory and to cease assisting them with ttaining and
equipment and by making ita territory available to them
for the furtherance of their violent activities. On 21 May
1954 the South African Government proposed that both
South Africa and Angola should issue a joint declaration
that they would not a!low any person or organisation to be
trained or accommodated on their sovereign territory to
operate against one another or to practise violence against
one another. Huts far, the MPLA government has failed
to respond to these representations.

64. For very good reasons, South Africa has not ruzognixed the MPLA government, inter a&a.because
it was
responsible for the collapse of the Alvor Agreement,
because it is not in effective control of the greater part of
Angola and because it would be incapable of maintaining
itself without the support of foreign troops.
65. llte South African Government believes that the
people of Angok should themselves decide who their
government should be. But the MPLA government has
denied them the tight so to decide in free elections. I
should like to know which metnbe~ of the Cotmcil believe
that the Alvor Agreement has been honoured. I should
like to know which members support the principle that
there should be ftee and fair elections in Angola, and that
theprob&msofthatcountryshouJdbemsolvedbyrcconciliation rather than violence.

59. As I have demonstrated, the South African Government has tried all peaceful channels in its endeavours to
solve
this problem. Having done so, it has no intention of
apologizing for having taken appropriate action to counteract this threat. I stated in the Council as recently as last
week, and I repeat today: we will not allow ouraelvea to be
attacked with impunity. We shall take whatever action is
necessary and appropriate to defend ourselves.
60. South Africa is confiit
that its actions have been in
accordance with international law. It is an established principle tbat a State may not permit of encourage on its
territoty activities for the purpose of carrying out acts of
violethze on the territory of another State, and it is equally
well established that a State has a right to take appropriate
steps to protect its own security and territorial integrity
against such acts.

66. Finally, I should like to call on all the members of the
Council to join South Africa in calling for an international
agteement for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from
Angola.

61. As for the so-called testimony of Captain Du Toit. I
do not believe that it would stand up in any reputa&
court of iaw. it is ciear irom the interview that Captain Du
Toit was under the inflwnce of drugs when he delivered
his statement, which he was forced to read from a carefully
edited text. Doer any representative on the Council
imagine that that statement represents anything like the
truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth? Captain
LIu Toit’s statement ditTers in important respects from the
actual events surrounding the incident, especially with

68. Mr. BRANCO (Sao Tome and Principe) (intrrpmotion from Fwnch):Speaking on khalf of African countries
whose official languar is Portuguese-the
Republic of
Cape Verde, the Republic of Guinea-B&au.
the People’s
Republic of Mozambique and my own country-l should
like to offer you, Sir, our most sincere congtntul?thr
on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. 1 should abo like, through you, to thank
all members of the Council for giving us this opportunity
to take part in the debate on the question now before it.

67. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sao Tome and Principe. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

6

69. I am speaking in the Council after a week ofdebate
in which the actions of South Africa in southern Africa
have been the subject of profound analysis. Our delegations support the conclusions reached by the majority of
representatives who spoke in that debate, that: first. the
upartheid regime, because of its nggressivp nature, its lack
of respect for the principles and decisions of the United
Nations, its support of many kinds for armed bands, its
systematic violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and of intemptional law and its direct acts of aggression
against the countries of the region, is a permanent source
of destabilization. an obstacle to peace. progress and security in the region; secondly, that it is time-indeed. it is a
matter of urgency-that the Security Council take effective
measures to prevent and eliminate all the threats that the
attacks by South Africa pose to peace and security in the
region.

States of the region and strict respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of
Angola.
73. The policy of our tive States has always been based
on unswerving defence of and respect for the principles of
sovereignty, national independence. territorial integrity
and non-interference in the affairs of States.
74. As was reaffirmed once again by the heads of State of
the People’s Republic of Angola, the Republic of Cape
Verde, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the People’s Hepublit of Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of Sao
Tome and Principe in the Declaration of Sao Tome,
adopted at the Fifth Summit of Heads of State of the
African countries whose offkial language is Portuguese+
“The summit declares its unconditional support for
all the initiatives and measures that have been and will
be taken by the People’s Republic of Angola and by the
People’s Republic of Mozambique to defend the sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity and accomplishments of the peoples of those respective countries.

70. In January 1984, the Council met to consider the
item entitled “Complaint by Angola against South Africa”
and adopted resolution 546 (1984). In that resolution the
Council expressed its grave concern about persistent acts
of aggression, including military occupation, committed
by the racist r&me of South Africa, in violation of the
sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of Angola.
After condemning those barbaric acts, the Council
demanded that the racist r&me should cease immediately
its acts of aggression and unconditionally
withdraw its
occupation forces from Angola and scrupulously respect
the sovereignty. airspace, territorial integrity and independence of Angola. The Council reaRirmed in the same ICSOlution the right of Angola, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and in particular Article 51, to
take all the measures necessary to defend and safeguard its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.

“Within its means, and bearing in mind the historic
tradition of shared struggle and sacrifices, the summit
reaffirms its resolve to give multifaceted support to the
People’s Republic of Angola and the People’s Republic
of Mourmbique.”
75. loyal to that tradition and aware of the need once
and for all to put an end to acts of aggression perpetrated
by South Africa against the neighbouring States of the
region, we ask the Council to take appropriate action. We
hope that the Council will assume the responsibilities
assigned to it by the Charter, which in our view remains
the most appropriate means of strengthening international
peace and security.

71. In spite of the demonstrations of good will on the
part of the People’s Republic of Angola with a view to
finding a peaceful, just and lasting solution in southern
Africa, in spite of its readiness to participate in complex
and serious negotiations in order to end the impasse
created with regard to the problem of Namibia, in spite of
the willingness of other states to help in the scar& for
realistic sohltions, South Africa haa given striking proof by
its most recent actions of its lack of good will and its desire
to perpetuate its domination in Namibia by putting forward unacceptable pretexts, creating false obstacles and
using armed bands against the neighbouring countries that
support the just cause of the Namibian people.

76. Mr, OUDGVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (/nterpmat/on /mm R&an): For 10 years now,
starting in 1975, the racist South African r&time has been
waging war against Angola. Numerous nsolutions have
been adopted by the Security Council emphatically
demanding that South Africa immediately and unconditionally withdraw its occupation troops from the tertitory
oTche~sRcptWicoTAlleda,thatitput~etndtoall
acts of aggres&m and other subversive actions against that
State and that it strictly respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

72. We completely share the corr~ms of the international community in connection with thb added dimension
in the escalation of acts of aggression committed by the
racist South African r&gime in the region. Proof of that
esaiatim,

ii any

were

W,

ha.5 .kn

pruvi&d

77. However, today the Council is obliged yet again to
consider the question of new aggressive military actions by
South Africa against Angola whiih constitute a gross
&.-&+, “< .L..
. .-L.-A.,
“Ic ^-.--L.-A..
Jacrcay#r, .oov
WC(I.,“,Ia. :..au.i*..
.. ...~l.J A“1
Angola and seriously jeopardise international peace and
security.

0siCe

again through the acts of terrorist intervention against
Angola and Botswana. We firmly condemn those acts, all
the more so since we have links of solidarity with those
countries developed during our shared fight against colan&+&m and well understand the An&an people’s desire
for peace following the decades of war impo5ed upon it.
We call for the cessation of all acts of violence against the

78. The racist South African r&me is at all costs and in
every pm&k
way clinging to its policks in southern
Africa, It is seeking to pcrpetuate its rule in Namibia, to
intimidate An&
and the other front-line States and to
I

force them off their peace-loving and independent course.
It is seeking to impose its diktat on the independent neighbouring African countries to obstruct the progressive
so&-economic changes in those countries and to preserve
and safeguard the apurtheid regime.

85. The PRESIDENT: The next spebker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (imerpreration from
S’nish): As a fellow inliabitant of Latin America and the
Caribbean, 1 should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Your proven talents and diplomatic skills
promise that the work of the Council will be characterised
by your well-established dedication to the freedom and
independence of peoples.

79. As has already been pointed out, the fundamental
reason for this aggressive, reactionary position of South
Africa and the principal obstacle to the elimination of
colonialism, racism and qmrtheld in southern Africa, as
well as to a just and effective solution of the problems of
the cxurity of the peace-loving independent African
States, is the close so-called constructive engagement
which links the United States and a number of other Western countries and Israe: with that r4gime. and their sup
port for it.

87. May I also express my appreciation to the representative of Thailand for his dedicated work at the head of the
Council last month.

80. By its most recent acts the Pretoria regime has yet
again quite clearly shown its true aggressive nature. While
hypocritically holding forth about the need for a peaceful
settlement of the problems of-outhem Africa, Pretoria has
worked unceasingly to destaHlize the situation in Angok.
South Africa’s declaration oi its so-called peaceful intentions towards Angola is but the latest in a number of
mendacious and propagandistic manouevres.

88. The People’s Republic of Angola, in the person of its
President, Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos, has been
compelled to request this urgent meeting of the Council to
denounce another repugnant and cynical act of aggression
by the racist Government of Pretoria against his country.
89. On 21 May, South African commandos landed in
Cabin&, more than 2.50 kilometres from the South
African border, and, in a clash with a small patrol of
Angolan forces, were defeated in a matter of minutes; two
South African soldiers died and their leader, a captain, was
taken prisoner. Two other captains and five soldiers from
the group escaped into the forest.

81. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic wishes to
declare its full solidarity with the valiant people of Angola,
which has taken up arms to defend its freaiom and independence. We resohttely condemn South Africa’s conthuting a88ression against Angola, including the act of
aggression it has perpetmted in Cabinda Rovince, and we
demand its immediate cessation, the unconditional and
prompt withdrawal of all South African troops from
Angolanterritotyandthecusationofallactsofa8grcssion a8ainst that country.
.

90. A few days later, the leader of the commando group
acknowledged before journalists in Luanda that the
instructions he had received had been to destroy the oil
installations of Cabinda Oulf Oil at Malongo, in Cabinda
Province. The startling thing is that those installations
belong to an American tr8nsnationial corporation--Oulf
oil. We hop that the Government of the Unhed States
will take vigorous measures in tesponac to this otTence by
lhON&fkffSCiStS.M~~inthiUCO~lUVCUOSIUIY

82. In our opinion, it is neecssay for the Courril to take
resohuemeasurestoputanendtothaaggmasinactionsof
South Africa against Angola. In paragraph 7 of its rmohtlion 475 (1980), the colmil decided
“tomaetagainintheevwntoffurtberausofvi&ion
of the sovereignty and writorial
integrity of the Paupie’s Republic of A@a
by the South African racist
r@ime,inordertocuns&rthead@onufmoreeffective measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including
chapter VII thereof.”

91. Surprised by thedefeat and taken aback by the irrefutabk evkknce held by the Angolan authorities, Pretoria,
through the Chief of Stad of its fascistic army, General
Viljoen, stated that the mimion of the infiltrators was to
gather intelligence on SWAP0 and ANC bases in
Cabinda. In other words, the South African racists bad to
acknowledge that they were violating the sovereignty of a
State, in this case Angola, and that they were sending a
unit of their regular army into the territory of that country.
What right allows racist South Africa to violate the most
basic norms of international law?

83. ‘kadoptionofsucbmcaswes
bythecolmcil
against the racists is in our opinion hmg overdue. The
Council must most msdutely condemn the racist Pretoria
d&su
.-we..-

fne
.".

ha .-m&u&w
.u-..Y..YI.*nwu".

aam*

a8

'Y
aggEs~lra#w~wr"l&uIa

rm.L-4

h---L.

and demand that it immediately put an end to &em. The
Council must oblige South Africa unconditionally
to
respect the soweignty, indeprrdence and territorial integrity of Angola.
84. The dekgation~k;,iiia,BR
draft resolution in

92. TbeperliiyoftheracistleadenofPretoriacouldnot
be more insolent and @grant. The mcirt authorities said
that they were seeking information on ANC and SWAPS
camps in Cabinda, These emulators of Hitler are cynical
andbrazen,sinatheyknowrhattbemhaveneverbeen
ANC or SWAPS camps or group in Cabinda. Only the
oil installations are there.

suppom the

8

93. The abortive Malongo action demonstrates

the
treachery and criminality of the Pretoria racists, whose
system of apartheid now smells of putrefaction. Its
megalomania, arrogance, false and fatuous sense of
superiority, lack of scruples and disdain for other human
beings go so far as to sabotage the economic installations
of its major American allies and endanger the lives of
American citizens. This deed also clearly demonstrates
that UNITA is nothing but an instrument of the Naziracists of Pretoria and that it perpetrates criminal actions
against the Angolan people when it receives orders from its
bosses. who in turn carry out wide-ranging terrorist
actions in the name of their lackeys. This is obvious from
the fact that among the materials captured from the
criminal commando group was propaganda of that
counter-revolutionary organisation and paint, to be used
to spread the rumor that it had been an action of the
UNITA bandits.

98. The faint reaction of the United States Administration to this criminal act of State terrorism which could
have cost the lives of many Americans is not surprising,
since that act was the result of the encouragement that
Pretoria receives from United States economic, political,
diplomatic and military aid.
99. This demonstrates the synicism and duplicity of the
Washington authorities when they speak out against what
they describe as international terrorism. And how are we
to interpret the fact that they have just repealed the Clark
amendment? In all logic, South Africa is today more
aggressive than it was when the Constructive engagement
policy oif Washington did not exist.
100. It is clear that there is a sharp contrast, if not an
abyss, between the position of Angola and that of South
Africa. Angola has been flexible, reasonable and constructive on all aspects leading towards peace, independence
and security in south-western Africa, in its well-known
platform, the supplementary text to that platform, and in
its daily attitude.

94. The racists learned a powerful lesson at Malongo,
and the fighting spirit of FAPLA (People’s Armed Forces
for the Liberation
of Angola)
has strengthened
considerably.

101. South Africa has responded to Angola’s attitude by
policy of State terrorism and by deceptions. The racist
Government announced one year after the deadline set in
the Lusaka agreement that it had withdrawn its troops from
the south of Angola, but the truth is that some unitsarestill
in Calueque. This recalls the pretext used to invade Angola
in 1975. since now, as then, they use thesame pretext, that it
is “to safeguard the Calueque Dam”. Since when have the
Pretoria racists acted with such generosity towards tlie
black Africans? The ill-famed Butfalo Battalion is stationed
with the troops of UNITA in the vicinity of the Namibian
border. in the Angolan province of Cuando Cubango.

95. The South African racis@ are among the best
disciples of Goebbels. Lying is one of their most frequently
used tools, which is why we must refer to what was stated
in the Jomai& Angolaof 24 May:
‘The
attempt to sabotage the Malongo
oil
installations, carried out directly by the regular army of
Pretoria, is part of a vast plan of political and economic
destabilisation of Angola, in which the racist r&gime of
Pretoria is deeply involved. It should be mcatled that it
was with the same objective that the Pretoria
commandos carried out another sabotage operation
against the installations of the Petfitngol retinery at
Luanda, the Giraul Bridge, the I.&to oil tanks and
two ships that were moored in the port of Luanda. It
has now been proven that all of this was the work of
elements of the same unit found in Cabinda.”

102. South Africa has been using negotiations with
Angola to gain time iu which to prepare new commando
sabotage forces and to create conditions for a so-called
internal settlement in Namibia,
103. It is imperative for the Council to assume its responsibilities visd-v/s the international community and to
adopt the measures needed to put an end to racist South
Africa’s insane policy against its neighbours and to require
its allies to stop their honeyed conduct, which only fuels
the criminal and fascistic attitude of the upurtheid leaden.

96. Had the sabotage of the Gulf al installations at
Malongo been smzcssful, the Angolan economy would
have suBered losses calculated at almost 81 billion and
dozens. perhaps even hundreds. of foreign and Angolan
techniciins would have l-1 their lives, including the 178
American technicians. It must k borne in mind that the
oil tanks are some 108 metm away from the housing complexes of those technicians and that, bad the tanks
exploded, those homes and compkxes would have been
destroyed as well.

104. Cuba believes that the Council must take the following steps: first. demand the unconditional withdrawal
forthwith of all South African occupation troops from
southern Angola; secondly, strongly condemn South
Africa for its violation of the sovereignty of Angola, which
the South Africans themselves admit when they state officially that the group that was at Malongo was on an
inteiiigence-gathering
mission; thirdiy. condemn South
Africa for its attempt to attack and destroy the Gulf Oil
installations in Cabinda. which would have cost the lives
of Angolan and foreign technicians; fourthly. demand that
South Africa implement. without further &lay. resolution
435 (197R). and thus resmre a climate of peace to which the
peoples of southern Africa keenly aspire: and. tifthly.
demand that South Africa’s allies cease all forms of sup-

97. Is it not clear that those who support Pmtoria are
encouraging the racists in these criminal practices? Is it not
time ior those who advocate the p&y of constructive
engagement to put an end to that honeyed rhetoric and
stop supporting a Government which is as irresponsible
and criminal as is that of Pretoria? Everyone is familiar
with the aggressive policy of South Africa against neightlwring countries. which has caused the loss of thousands
of lives and countless material datnae. Who violates
human rights so systematically as South Africa?
9

port for the upurrireid regime. which encourage it in its
criminal policy, and in particular the policy of socalled
constructive engagement.
LOS. The Pretoria Government must be given a deadline
for the implementation of those steps, and ifthat deadline is
not met, the Council will have no alternative but to adopt
the comprehensive and mandatory sanctions set forth in
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
106. At the very moment we were meeting to consider the
question of Namibia here in the Council, the Pretoria
racists, in a demonstration of their proverbial contempt for
justice and for the sovereignty of other States, launched a
criminal commando incursion into the capital of Botswana
on the pretext of eliminating freedom-fighters of the ANC,
causing the deaths of a number of civilians and the destruction of several buildings. Because it is a repeated practice
and an outrage on the part of Pretoria, more than by
statements, that crime alone deserves to be met with severe
sanctions.

by Pretoria against his country. The flagrant violation of
the sovereignty of Angola and other independent States in
the region proves that the racists’ peace declarations are
null and void. In contrast to Angola, South Africa is not
willing to adhere to the arrangements agreed to in Lusaka
in February 1984.
112. Angola, with which the socialist countries are linked
by fraternal bonds, was for centuries oppressed under the
colonial yoke. Over the past decade it has made great
efforts, with the diligence and commitment of its citizens,
to construct a new, humanist society, for which endeavour
it needs peace more than aything else. It needs peace for
the accomplishment of social progress and for economic
development. During the first decade of its independence,
Angola has not experienced- that badly needed peace.
113. Acts of sabotage against Angola, violations of its
airspace, continued occupation of Angolan territory and
outside support for counter-revolutionary
UNITA gangs
are only a few of the tesserae in the blood-stained mosaic
of Pretoria’s subversion and aggression against the young
People’s Republic. During the IO years of its existence,
Angola, jointly with Cuban internationalists, has repeatedly had to repulse direct armed attacks of the racists.
Because of the concentration of troops on its southern
border, the danger of new, large-scale South African acts
of aggression is imminent. It thus becomes clear that the
so-called linkage is intended only to diven attention from
the real causes of the dangerous situation in the region.

107. The racists and those who support them must not
forget that the patience of peoples has its limits.
108. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic, who has asked
to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the
Group ot Eastern European Socialist States for the month
of June. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
109. Mr, SCHLEGEL (German Democratic Republic):
Allow me to convey through you, Sir, to your Minister for
Foreign Affairs, our high approval for the manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council during the
debate on the question of Namibia. We are sure that you
will spare no efforts to reach a successful conclusion to this
present debate. I should like to thank you and the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
speak in my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Eastern
European Socialist States on the continued policy of
aggression and destabilization by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola.

114. Angola is compelled to spend huge sums of money
on the maintenance and strengthening of its defence capacity, sums that must be diverted from the implementation of
tasks in the field of its domestic policy and economy.
Further, it is almost daily challenged by irreplaceable
kxnes of human life and immense material damages
because Of Pretoria% war. That is Pretoria’s precise aim: to
weaken the progressive system and thereby be able to
impose its will upon that country.
115. The bomb attack attempted by a South African
commando unit against the plant at Malongo in Cabinda
at the end of May is the latest of many links in the chain of
acts of systematic tabota~. The criminal attempt against
the economic bean of Angola would, had it not been
foiled, have resulted in the loss of at least $I billion to the
country, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs told us this
morning. President dos Santos has stated that half of that
amount of money would be sufficient to provide food for
one year to the entire population of Angola.

110. In the course of the Councilf debate on the question of Namibia, so&Iii States uttquivocally co&mned
the racists’ manoeuvres to bring about an “internal settlement” and further to miwae Namibian territory for military acts against neighbouring States. Now the 4xtrtM
regime is again in the pillory. White tbb body was considering steps for settling the question of Namibia and thus to
improve the situation in the entite region of southern
Africa, the rulers in Pretoria again had the audacity brutally to express their cynical contempt for the will of (hc
international public. They launched an attack against Gaboronc. ihc capiiai of Eomvana, and tbcy itave escaiatcd
their permanent attacks and acts of interference against
sovereign Angola.

116. Rut there is more to it than that. In their attempted
bomb attack, the South African terrorists unscrupulously
and in cold blood were aware of the possibility of the death
of many more people, since there is a large inhabited area
in the vicinity of the tanks. Who, in view of the revelation
by the leader of the terrorist group of the aims of this latest
act of sabotage, is not disgusted at the response of the
racists? They have had the impudence cynically to attempt
to justify that action by citing an alleged search for
members of the ANC and SWAPO,

I I I. A few days ago [258&/r mreti~g), during the debate
on Namibia. end again today. the Minister for Fore&t
Affain of Angola furnished impmeive proof of the continti
acts of aggression and destabilisation perpetrated
IO

117. Who gives Pretoria the right to send its gangs of
killers into sovereign Angola7 Who gives Preto ‘n the right
to launch an attack against the capital of another sovereign State, Botswana, and to murder innocent people7 The
answer is that the racists arrogate that right to themselves,
because they regard themselves as rulers in that region and
possess a sophisticated military machine. Nor must we
forget that they know only too well that at their side are
mighty allies, namely the most reactionaty circles of imperialism, which are interested in aggravating the intemational situation. Thanks to them, Pretoria has so far been
able with impunity to carry murder and aggression beyond
its own borders into independent sovereign States.
I 18. We vigorously condemn the racists’ policy of terror,
especially the continuation of their undeclared war against
the People’s Republic of Angola.
119. Condemnation alone, however, is not sufficient.
Pretoria’s acts Of aggression, violating international law.
must be given a proper answer in the form of resolute
measures. In common with the majority of non-aligned
States, we call for the imposition of comprehensive mat&tory sanctions against South Africa. Any prevention of
such measures by members of the Council is only bound to
encourage the frenzied racists to commit new crimes, and
will make those members accomplices in those crimes.
There is no doubt that the policy of Pretoria has hecome a
serious threat to international peace and security.
120. One point must be clear: if there is anyone who
believes that, having thrown off the yokeofeoloniallsm, the
African States can be blackmailed, that ptxon is mistaken.
Historical progrem can for a certain time be impeded, perhaps even halted, but it can never be prevented.
I21. The Eastern European socialist States stand in Arm
aoUdarity at the side of the Angokwt people and the p
pies of the other front-line States in their stnt&
against
the aggr&w
and colonialist qponltpidr6ginte and for the
maintenaneeofi lx@&nce,~andtmhorial
integrity. Wesupporttheeomnu&epoIleyofAngoIa
dimetedtowardspeaceandsecurityintheregion.Tha
pfopu&submittedbythePeopIe%Repub8eofAng&
and contained in the letter dated I7 November 1984 front
President dos Santos to the !Ief3etary=Geneml [g/1makeitcIearagainwhoisreallyintematedinaata&
situation in southern Africa,
122. Let me themfore express the hope that by an unambiguous decision the Council will support those who are
thevictimr,ofthtpolicyofapmrlrPid.ItisuptothcCouncil to see to it that the IO.year war in AngoIa is RnalIy
followed hy the peace which that country has been kmging
for so eagerly.
123. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the repmentative of Argentina. I invite him to take a plaee at the
Council table and to make his statement.

Tobago on his assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month, I wish on this occasion to reiterate yet
again our congratulations and to express our satisfaction
at seeing you, Sir, in the Chair. I am convinced that with
the high diplomatic qualities you have demolritrated on so
many occasions you will be able successfully to guide the
work of the Council in this important debate.
125. Before I set out the particular position of my eountry, I want to say that we are in complete agreement with
the settlement made by the representative of the Bahamas,
which was a precise i&ction
of the clear and unanimous
position on this issue of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
126. The repeated violations of the territorial sovereignty
of Angola by South African armed forces and intelligence
personnel deserve the unanimous condemnation of the
international community and an appropriate response on
the part of the Council. llte events that led to t!tis meeting
are all the more serious as they violate agreements painstakingly negotiated between Angola and South Africa
and constitute dangerous new obstacles to the search for
bdanee and barntony in south-western Africa.
127. Only a few days ago, during the Council’s consideration of the situation in Namibia, my delegation stated
that brettuse of its racist, colonialist and violent nature the
fore@ policy of South Africa is largely incompatible with
an intematlonaI order based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and intended to ensure the tnainknance of intematlonal
peace and security and the
devcloptnent of harmonious relations and eu-operation
among States. We rrpat this today.
128. In something Icss than one week, South Africa has
takenthrucactionsc+3nWarytoapceiIicpfovisionsofdte
Chatter and &vmt
United Nations ratohttions. The
ittCtUEiOttbyimc~folasifltOAtlgOl8,thC~C

anduajurtifIaMeaaac&onBotowanaMdthe~
of an interim admInistnttlon in Namibia ati~umd
ttbkt#stocheemdiiandefr~
NlMiOttC.LbgCltbfIlntlycarkmIlEthOCC8UiOllS.d
beIievesutattIteQntnciIeJtouIdnotremalnlndiIremntin
thefacrofthip~tion,~~fucthcrendan~trathepros
pattsforpsaceinscmtbemAfriea.
129. Argmhta
lily
wpports the quest for peaceful
andncgotiatedsohttiomtotheditrcTmtpr~of
southem AfIb
-I%e CompIexity of the conflicts to be
mttdvedinthatreg&nbsuchthistonlydiilogueandConeertalactifmamongaIIthepartieseanensureastabIe
future. It would seem c&af that there is no room for solotions imposed uni&tm~Ily or that disregard the kgithnate
interests of given sectors or countries. Insistence on
extfemeeourusofactionandproposalswouldonlycontribute to an indetinite extension of the confrontations and
tragedy in southern Africa.

124. Mr. MI,%IZ (Argentina) (MerRrerurfox from Spmr- 130. That is why we have observed with renewed interest
fd)i Only a few days ago I conveyed our congrattdations
the diplomatic proceum that in meent days seem to give
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and
hope for prompt and genuine i&pe&nce
to Namibia

and the establishment of new parameters in relations
between South Africa and other African States. As for
certain internal measures within South Africa itself, we do
not believe that they represent valid alternatives to uporrheid, the complete and definitive eradication of which is
essential. The recent military operations in Angola and
Botswana and an inflexible insistence on unacceptable preconditions for Namibia’s independence eloquently prove
the intolerance and violence that characterire the South
African Government’s position.

Angolan territory and underlined that it considered that to
be an act of aggression against the non-aligned countries.
It demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of South African troops and decided to increase support
for and solidarity with the people and Government of
Angola [S/15675 aad CM. I a~td 2, annex, sect.I, pota. 64.
Sovereign and non-aligned Angola needs peace to be able
to proceed with the solution of its economic and social
development problems.
137. Military aggression against Awzola violates the
basic norms of international conduct and the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. Tht use of force, occupation, intervention, interference in internal affairs and
destabilisation of Governments of independent countries
are ctimm in southern Afka just as they are in the rest of
the world. We believe it is the obligation of the Council to
respond adequately to such behaviour.

131. At this advanced stage of a century which has seen
unprecedented progress in human and international nlations. Pretoria’s policies represent a dangerous moral and
political anachronism, incompatible with the very values
that the South African Government afirms or claims to
defend. Evidence of that is the increasingly active and concrete opposition to those policies in regions that have traditional links with South Africa. Pretoria should not ignore
or underestimate the importance of clear signs that point
to its growing isolation at the international level. Iltose
who continue to link their destiny to uporrkold should
understand that rigidity and intransigence are the worst
enemies of their own interests. It is time for the South
African leaders to awaken to the truth and carry out the
profound changes so justly dentanded by Africa and the
rest of the international community.

13s. The countries maintaining
relations and c-+
operating with South Africa should heed Ute voice of teason and underutand that any co-operation with South
Africa is detrimental to peace and atability in the region
and blocks international efforts aimed at eliminating qpmr&/d and achieving indeJsett&nce and selfdetermination
for the Jreop!e of Namibia, aa well as the liberation of the
opprreged black population of fioutlt Africa. ‘Ihose ormntries should use tbe weigbt tbat they carry with South
Affiea to make it change its policy.

132 The PRESIDENT: ‘Ihe next speaker is the mpresentative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take P place at the
council table and to nulkc his statematt.

139. This time, the Council should find and adopt a&qtuw mtasurca to pwmn&n;ym~t
d&ndlheindepmdmcc
rity of AngoJa and other front-line states, it abould
strongly condemn Soulh Africa; and it should use all
tnatnaatltsdisposalutt&theCJmrtertomakeJ!kntth
Africa Wltluknw unroaditianally from Angola, ratpct its
fiov-ty
and t4nitoM intcgrlty, and apptopriauly rw
drcsstbedamagcshbM~.

133. Mr. GGLGB (Yugo&via)~ For the second timt in
scmalda)9,thcCounCiliSdclibtratingOntbGaoneequcntea of military aggression and occupation by fioutb Africa.
Fortbesecondtbnetbe&uncilbttyingtofindattadequate response to gouth Africa’s poucy of agg=ion,
whieb is threatening intematiottal pa80c and rscurily.

140. We bdievc that the Catncil tdtould eend a dear
lttemptDsoktulAfricathatthe~connawiy
thaunitadNotiorrrandtJJe&!urityCo#cJlwJllnolos&
pdcyofnwcssiml,ocoupationmbd
14;. TttaPRE!3IDENT:‘IJrenextrpeoLeristJterepmsmtatkaftbeSucfPn,wbowifbeatomabeaatatemcntinbis
es~asChmmtanoftbeGroupofArub!3tatesfortbe
tnontbofJunc.1fnvitehimtotakeaplaccattbeCou&l
tabkadtomakctlisItetemen1.
135. AConfarenceoftbcForei~~ofNonAlignalC+untrimwillbcbeblattbekginningofSPtmtberofthisyearat
Juanda, WeundemtMdtheoograrion
andsubvenionbysoutbAfrica~~tok
-mew,,
--- - a- - plcawrc
--. --.- - apbI&m
--I--. au
-I. && ia.J&
-**
z
well. This attempt to intimidate the non-ah&ted countries
will fail, as have other such attempu.

142 Mr. FJUUDO (Sudan) (b#crprro#an porn-&
Mr.kJident,ItbankyouandthernembemdtbeCouncllforaffordingmydek&ontheopporntnityto8peakort
L . .” .a _.
anmuoltncGioup&irrPbStascsonthcimucudcr
.
.
dnamon
Wedoroontbcbaisofso&ityandtbc
jointMrt&khytbeArabandAfricanStatesagaitmttbe
gy-&lfe-~&=g-nY”““““““”

136. JtwillhemcalledtbattheScventhConferenoeof
OfJvon-wcotmtti,
He4dsofsteteoraovrnrmsnr
held at J&w Delhi from 7 to I2 JHurch 1983, stmngly
condemnedtbccontinualmititmyoccupationofpartof

143. wlehueundcrdbcurrionietheeurnsntriturtionin
Angolareutltin8fromtbeact8ofPslpcrioneommittedby
I2

the racist Government of South Africa against an independent African State which in the past has been the victim of
blatant aggression against its pple and soil, a State which
now lives under a permanent and dangerous threat pzuud
bv the Government of South Afripa.

people of South Africa, under the leadership of the militant national liberation movements, as well as to the
increasing awareness and concern over the policy of uporrheld and the occupation of Namibia. This concern is
reflected in the growing number of demonstrations in
many countries and in the administrative and legislative
resolutions adopted by many countries to strengthen the
boycott and promote the isolation imposed on the Pretoria
r&gime.

144. This morning we listened to the comprehenmve
statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola,
and we have read document S/17263, reproducing the text
d a message from the Minister of Defence of the People’s
Republic of Angola to the Council in which he reviewed
the chain of acts of aggression and provocation directed by
the South African Government against his country.

150. However. despite this growing denunciation, the
Pretoria r&gime continues to obtain assistance from some
Western States and Israel. Cver the years this situation has
led to strengthening the security and military institutions
of South Africa and to enhancing the economic potential
of the racist r&&me. This economic potential has grown
~ntinuou?-@ ,,nd thr monopolistic interests and Western
fl.+~.!Ls
have prospcted despite the opposition cipublic
q*ul’til0n in their countries.

145. One of the most dangerous acts of aggresr: .- was
the attempt to attack the oil installations in Cabindao~ .‘I
May this year, including overflights by South ti+~
;;eto
planes over various regions of Angola. There if 31:-d tfi:,
fat. that South Africa is tnaintining along its bort’cr . u:
Angola armed forces totalling more than 2O,ooO, which
shows that the Pretoria r&me is indeed preparing for a
new invasion of Angola.

1.41. nte negative role assumed by ..nme pem!anent
members of the Security Council and other States-&her
to protect ecclnomic interests binding them to the racist
@me in South Aftiea or to further individual strategic
ambitions by providing assistance to a regime that has
heen rejected by the international community in both form
and substance--hae -ted
the Council from fully
undertaking its responsibilities in maintaining intemational peace and security, achieving independence for Namibia and eradicating u&&i
in South Africa, as well as
in putting an end to the acts of aggression and military
incursions carried out by South Africa against neighbouring stltw.

146. South Africa’s repeated acts of aggression against
Angola re?zsent a Ragrant bn%ch of Angola’s independencq temtorial integrity and sovereignty and arc, furthermore, a fidgrant violation of United Nations resolutions
and the principles of international law. These acts of
aggression threaten international peace and security. For
bse mums the Arab States have strongly c0ndemne.f
*he laist acts of aggression -ted
by South Afri~
againa: Angola, and we call upon the Ccmcil
strong;y to
condemn such acts. We call upon it to demand
that bath
Afrieawhhdrawit&fore%fKmlAngolaandcaBeallaus
of aggression against Angob as well as against all other
front-line State&

152. A&African
&id&y
has a very strong basis of
many pars’ standing This solidarity has been m&et& in
the staggks umkd out jointly for liberation from colattidii,
racism and 7.ionkm, in -tar
where cc+
oprmtionbenwsm&uthAfr&aandfsrnelhasincmasedat
the economk, military and t+ological
levels, thus help
irtgbothraeistr@irnestoamttnuatheirpoliiofoceupadonbNamib&,Pale&s~ndthemupiedArab
tcniti.
For that ICIWWI, the Arab Statea have always
pgfpd&mL”fhys

147. Yesterday the council concluded long and fruitful
&tiberations in which more than 80 reptusatativrj wpted, including a farge number of Foreign Minis&m of
non-a&ed
countries. All those speakers condam&
the
practiccsandactsof~earrkdotttby~8outh
AfrieainNtldbismldwitkin~AfrieaitaeJf,Thcy
funhere&emnedSouthAfrica’saetsdsggmdoasd
continuedprovecatkmamlmiMdagain8ttk~balur.
ing front-line African States. Following these deliturations
andcottsttltacionr,theCounciladopted~566
(IpS5.AFtt&mtom,on3Maylast,the-oftbs
CuuncilissuedastatementonthedechiontakeninRetoria to estdish a so-called interim government in Namibia
[s/I7f5f).Ontheotherhand,theunitalNationsCowch
for Namibia held a special meeting on 17 June, on which
theActingFmsidentofthatCouncifmportedtottsin
detail ysterday [2ll9sh mecrb&

mgionaf or intematiar&-in
their just struggle against &
Pmoriar@ime.lnthiscctntext,theCouneiloftheArab
I.#agueofStateaatitsmostrecentmeeting,hekiatTunis,
isst&aqeeialdecisioninsuftportofliturationmovemerits in southem Afti,
in terms of which it:

14P nesfmuilycMurilwiumeet~yfy~
SouthAfrica%actsofaggra&n
cmmttcd
cgaimt
another imkpemknt
African State, the Republic 0’
8olawana.

“First,&easestbefumpo&ionoftheArabStatesin
tharcondemMtkmofdtepolkydapanirrldpmctiscd
bytbemci8t&imeofSoutPAfricaandtheirsuppcrt
anda&tanceforthe&ratfonsttugtdeofthepe&es
of southern Africa to attain setfdetermination, freedom
and dignity, and calls for pra&cal steps to eradicate the
policy of awthd4

I49 Allthescfactsrevealthestateofdesp&~~
tion d the Pretoria r&me owing to tbs incr&ng
opposition Campaigns in tk interior undertaken by the vahnnt

“&ondly,renewsfullsupportforthepeopkofNamibia in their struggk br indeper&nce and calls for
the irrwte.
uneonditianal implementation of SecuI3

rity Council resolution 435 (1978) on the independence
of Namibia;
“thirdly, condemns the alliance and co-opration
between the racist regimes in Pretoria and Tel Aviv. an
alliance which is a violation of the legitimate rigJtts of
the African and Arab poples:
“Fourthly, emphasixes the solidarity with the popuJar, intensifying struggle of the majority in South Africa
against the unjust racist laws, and condemns the South
African racist rtgime’s attempt to impose military conscription on black citizens;
“Fifthly, condemns the recent barbaric massacres
perpetrated by the racist r6gJme in South Africa, in
which a large number of black citixens fell victim;
‘Sixthly, salutes those political militants who are langttishing in the prisons of the racist r&imes, pattJcuJarly
Nelson Men&la, and calls for tJteir immediate, umnditional release,”

1%. Finally, we should like to renew the Arab States’
pledge of full suppott for Utc people’s Republic of Angola
in its sttuggJe to defend its independence. sovereigttty and
terrJtorbl integrity. we FurtJler umesewdy
condemn the
acts of aggression of the racJst Government of J?~utJt
Africa agahtst Angola. We call upon it to put an end to aJI
its aggressive acts and to respect Namibia’s sovereignty
and htdependence.

justify its raid into northern Angola, South Africa needed
to convince the whole world of the untold benefits of its
continued occupation of the south of that country.
157. South Africa’s occupation of part of southern
Angola &rives, as everyone knows, from a premeditated
act of aggression about three years ago. TJu.t occupation
was preceded by numerous armed raids, causing many
casualties and very heavy damage to property, and was to
all intents and purposes a genuine, unprovoked war. The
stated purpose of the racist Pretoria Government was to
guarantee a so&led defence of Namibia against SWAFG,
overlooking the fact that SWAPfIt’s principal strength
comes from inside the country, from the Namibian people
opposed to South Africa’s illegal colonial presence, and
not from outside. In fact, as far as one can tell, the South
African regime’s demonstrations of force have not at all
weakened the resistance and the struggle against that miserable regime and the undesirable power that it embodies.
158. Wishing to be helpful to certain of its allies in the
Western world and seeking to please so-called modemte
sections of opinion, the South African Government is anxious to depict itself as a reliable bulwark against what
some describe as tJte expansion of communism. Therefore.
tJtrougJt ha occupation of pan of Angolan territory, it has
been able to conclude a marriage of convenience with tJte
UNITA rebels, who were disconsolate at having been
rejected by the Angolan people JO years ago, at tJte
moment of independence, despite the intervention of
South Africa itself.

154. The PRESIDENT: The next spcakcr is tJte m~nesetttathe d the Catgo. I invite hJm to take a m
at the
C3xtncll tabJe aud to make hJs statemeut.

159. There was even some question recently of tJte cmadon of a socaJled JMtoeratJc Jnternational grouping
toge&er, under the aegis of South Africa and witJt the
bkssittg of a super-Power, a ragtag band of embittered
J55. Mr. GAYAMA
(Congo) (b-W
jlum
reactionaries, ready to sacrifw the least negouable interncwch) nte congoke dekgation Is pitdaddy
pkascd.
ests of Africa, such as Ute swggJe against ~rfheld and
colonJalJsm-Jn other words, ready even to ally dtemselves
with the dev8 JrJm:lf in order to tealize tJteir wve
Mdyt&odfhavashowno;;tstandingsk~lntJleoon- imJntJses. As, moreover, that pJan requited a symbol, an
ductoftkdebtueonJ%mJbJa.In&ct.wwshouJdhave
“Open sesame”, SoutJt Africa found it stdfii
to
bsengbdJfptlCOUldhWCCttjOpdatVCtl~not,
uucnpctthemfraJn,uothtAftica,buteJuMere,ofasup
buttkrebahvayathettqdkwelaolorofsouth
JmeeddaugercausedbytJteptwfsnoeofCubantmoJrsin
Afrkatokmkenhttott4xmtnt.
AngoJa.ItwastotJtesoundofthatrefraintJtattJuhnpkmenmuon of tJte United NatJous setdement
plan for NaI56 It Is not stuprb@tJutttberackt,~aacktIutd
mibia was boycoUed, dgating
to obscurity the only
cokmi&tPmtoriar&hneisouceagaJuthefocuaofour
questhmthattruJyremainedtoJsenegotiatal-thatofthe
debtste.IftheoppodkwerethecrfaeJtwouldmeanthat
ekctoral system.
therhgimehadknam~totheirkabofpeoccMd
goahteighbouri~andtotheprlnciJtksofnottinterferenceintheaJf&ofotJteiuaudrcrpeafortlte
160. Apart from the gmve infrhtgement of tJte ~&cJpJes
~ereignty8ltdMto&¶Jhttcgrityofirsn&hbotlr&WC
d non-interference and respect by States for the soverdoubtthatJtashappewd,notdelibemtely,butotttbebmii
elgrtty dothers represented by South Africa’sdiiion
..fobsenQttionssuJ@nlalbytJtef~,whiehtellusmore
uf problems coming within the sole competence of tJre
shltthenaturedthesouthAfrkanfCgimcthanauthe
Angolan Government at Luanda, such a&on clearly
is *ym&&G
.&-#~; & g@@ av&<~i* A f& QLi *,
showstJtewmemptinwhiihthemcistr6gifneJtoJdsthe
whik the Council was conskkriug a plceise item on its
Aftican pec@es. JBemonstrating that contempt, the regime
that invented in its own country the phenomenon of banagenda, nmeJy, the rituatlon in Namibia, with tlte object
d evahwting the situation mtdting from tlte fpihrre to
tustanswould like to extend that experiment outside South
Africa, by denying to sovereign countries, members of tJte
impkment its resoJution 435 (1978), tJte repracntativc d
theraciurkgimeputfiJw#dan~~oR
GrgnnimtJon of African Unity and Members of the United
the intemd situadoo in Angob. Gbviody, in order to
Nations, tJte right to govern themselves as they pleaK and
14

the right to choose their own political and so&-economic
regimes and their own partners. Even if the independent
African countries have their defects, which they do not
seek to conceal, at least they have never institutionalized a
crime against humanity comparable to apartheid, It is
upwheid that renders the South African regime unfit and
makes it incapable of leading a normal life, both in Africa
and in the world at large.

166. One of the many facets of the South African ill is
thus displayed before the Council for all to see. Numerous
resolutions have already been adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly condemning South
Africa’s aggressive policies against its neighbours. Can one
allow such a danger to be perpetuated without thereby
acknowledging the obsolescence of the machinery set up
40 years ago to protect international peace and security? I
would recall that slightly more than 40 years ago the
democracies allowed fascism to spread its rot when it
attacked, with full impunity, a member country of the
League of Nations, Ethiopia, without any appropriate
response. Then it was the turn of Czechoslovakia, Poland
and other countries, but by then it was too late. A great
deal of blood and tears were shed in subduing the fascist
hydra.

161. South Africa therefore cannot seek to impose its will
on the rest of Africa and the rest of the world. It is up to
South Africa to adapt itself-and not by surprising us with
picturesque details of so-called opendoor operations in
restaurants, hotels and other public places or by the imminence of mixed marriages. South Africa will represent
nothing. whatever its brutality, if it deliberately turns its
back on justice and morality. both against the majority of
people within its borders and outside them,

167. We therefore fail to understand why certain
members of the Security Council are so reluctant to
endorse collective sanctions against a notorious troublemaker. How can one guarantee and justify the adoption in
other circumstances of preventive measures. or even unilateral sanctions, as some have been doing outside the context of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations?

162. A few days ago, within this very chamber, we
emphasized that South Africa, because of the values it
represents, was incapable of inspiring and promoting even
the most insignilicanl peace policy. On the contrary, it
constitutes a permanent source of insecurity for its neighbours, with clear dangers to international peace and security. How else can one explain the defiance Pretoria has
shown to the world and to the Organization by otBanidng
and perpetrating acts of aggression, first against Angola
and then against Botswana, on 14 June last, at the very
moment when the Council was discussing the subject?

168. My delegation would fail to express the essence of
its feelings if it did not take this opportunity to reiterate the
unswerving support of the Congo for Angola in the struggle it has been obliged to wage to protect its independence,
tmitorial integrity and sovereignty. We wish to thank the
Angolan Minister for Foreign Affairs for the information
and first-hand analysishe gaveus in the Council on the
cxwcerm of the Angolan Government in connection with
the provoa&e
sets of South Africa.

163. Aggression is an intrinsic part of the political behaviour of South Africa. That is what explains the permanent
danger hanging over virtually all the front-line States.
Without drawing up a complete list, I would observe that
the acts of aggression against Lesotho, Zambia, Zimbabwe
and Mozambique are too fresh in the memories of all of us
for me to need to refer to them individually.

169. I also wish to refer to the statement which the heads
of State of the Congo and Angola, President Denis
Bassou-Ngucsso and Resident Jo& Eduardo dos Santos,
published a few days ago after the working visit Mr. DOS
Santos made to Braazaville, in which the two heads of
stateconfhmedtbeeQmmon
determination of their eountries to fight colonielism, imperialism and sqpen)rpld, for
pcaceinsouthemAfGcaandthrou@uttheworld.

164. In de&ring recently that it regarded itself a9 a
regional Power, South Africa was saying nothing new to
thOsetphoreU&Xlitsactto5intervcMion8tttRtbneOfthe
wars of liberation in Angola, Zimbabwe and b
bique, when it tried, albeit uns~~&uSy,
to altar the
come of history in its favour. just as it is trying to do
today.Toshowitsintentiom,itdedareditsdfreadyto
intervene wherever and whenever it saw fit south of the
Equator, which it regards as irs zone of influma, hs living
space. as it were, in terms of sound expansionist k#e.
Thus South African participation in the mcrocnary aggression against the Seychelks. out in the Indian Ckcan, in
November 19111wasnosurpriseeithet.Evenkssofasurprise was the bizarre commando raid that took place this
month in Cabinda, in northern Angola, on 21 May.

170, It is our duty to extend this assistance to Angola. It
iethtdutyaftheSccuriryCounciltodox,alro.Thatir
why we hope the council will adopt a draft mlution
at
least condtmning South Africa for its *3s of aggres&n,
demanding that it pay just compensation to Angola for the
damage continuously in&ted upon the people of that
country for the last IO years and that it unconditionally
withdraw its forces from Angolan territory, prohibiting it
from ever returning there. As fct the rest, we have full
confidence that the council will consider appropriate ways
and means of ensuring implementation of its decisiofts.

165. The message is clear: South Africa till shrink from
nothing in order lo cast its sinister shadow over southem
Africa. As if open aggression were not enough, it has
resor&d to infiltration for purposes of sabotage, spreading
disorder ard genznl insecurity in order to destabilize plb
gressive Angola, whose a-ion
to i&ependence it never
accepted.

171. Tbe PRESIDENT: 1 shall now make a brief statement in my capacity as the representative &TRINIDAD
AND TOBAGO.
172. For the IO years of its life as an independent State,
Angola has had to endure the travails of South Africa’s
I5

outright aggression, interference and intervention in its
internal affairs. This persistent dcstabilization campaign
seeks to frustrate Angola’s attempts to achieve total realization of the benefits of its mdependence.
173. The raid by South Africa’s racist military forces at
Malongo. in the province of Cabinda. is but the latest in a
long chain of aggressive acts and territorial intrusions by
the apartheid regime of South Africa. It is as if South
Africa were working to some evil design. It is obvious that
in view of this persistent aggression Augola will have to
continue relying on international support to resist the
upurtheid rigime’s flagrant violations of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. These unprovoked and persistent acts
of aggression against Angolan territory constitute blatant
and totally callous violations of international law and elementary principles of justice. In these circumstances, it is
clear that the actions of the racist Pretoria regime are a
threa* to international peace and security and should be
condemned by the Council. Any country that is a producer
or refiner of petroleum understands the enormous impact
on a country and on its economy of any act-and in particular a foreign incursion-leading
to the destruction of its
petroleum installations. Such an event would strike at the
very heart of any economically weak developing country.
174. The statement of 17 May 1985 by the South African
Government has led international
public opinion to
believe that South Africa has disengaged its military forces
from Angolan territory. llte capture of the South African
commando, the seizure of military equipment parachuted
from aircraft coming from South Africa and from the
occupied Territory of Namibia. the increased violatron of
Angolan national airspace by South African reconnaissance flights and the concentration of South African military and logistic units along the border with Namibia all
belie Pretoria’s assertion and underline its deceit. It is clear
that, contrary to its pronouncements, the South .Afrimn
r&me is continuing its policy of destabilization and uccupation of Angola.
175. llte Council has the responsibility of ensuring
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
A&a.
The Council must therefore call for the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of Pretoria% military fonm
from the territory of Angola. The Council must also seek
topcrauedeSwthAfricalhattherrseofforadocsnol
resolve political problems, but only exacerbates them,
South Africa’s policies of destabilisation and aggression
towards Angola must be condemned unanimously by the
Council. A strong signal would thereby be sedt to that
r6gime of the international community’s determination
not to allow one State, on the basis of a destorted. archaic
and abhorrent theory of human relat’tOllSdptd&-CO
disrupt international Peace and security.
.-1 lb.
Tile use of Namibia by tbe mast r&me ot South
Africa as a springboard for perpetrating Lstabilization.
armed attacks and the occupation of parts of the territory
of Angola compounds South Africa’s aggression, That a
Territory for which the United Nations is responsible
should be used in this manner by South Africa shows the
insensitive nature of the racist South African imperialists.

177. The Council must act on the draft resolution before
us decisively and with unanimity, so that the apartheid
regime in South Africa will have no illusions about the
determination of the Council to maintain international
peace and security.
178. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the

179. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it [S/17286j.
Unless I hear an objection, I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote.
A vote wus raken by show of hands.
l7te &oft resolution was odoped wunbnously [resolution
567 (1985)].
180. Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): I have not spoken
up to now, first because it was the wish of the delegation of
Angola and of other members of the Council that this
debate should be concluded rapidly, and secondly, because
I registered my Government’s views on the Cabinda incident fully in my statement in the Council on 14 June
[254@Ir me&g].
As I said then, the United Kingdom
unequivocally condemns this violation of Angola’s sovereignty and regards the involvement of South African military personnel in Cabinda as indefensible.
181. In accordance with these views. my delegation considered that the Council should express strong condemnation of South Africa’s illegal and totally unjustifmble act of
force in Cabin&t. We ha= accordingly voted in favour of
the resolution. In so doing, we do not endorse every formulation in the present text. We do not Eonsider that the
third prezunbular pansgraPh and paragraphs I and 3 fall
within the provisions of Chaptet VII of the Charter of the
United Nations or constitute a finding or decision which
has spm+f= connsquences under the Charter. Our intention
is simply to express our vkws in the &rarest Possible
manner to the OovmvDcnt of South Africa, and our sympathy to the Government of Angola.
182. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): The
United States deplores the South African action in
Cabin& We havlz made our deep disPkasure known both
in public statements and directly to the Government of
South Africa. We have received no satisfactory explanation from that Government for its conduct. Naturally, we
are Particularly disturbed by evidence that the South African military action in Cabinda posed a threat to the lives
of United States citizens in that province, and a danger to
the property of United States companies there. In view of
.I.,, .,,CYIIWO‘~*,
r:---r----WC____.
:--:A-->“,CL
WO‘,, ._
L” -scs rL-,aIQ, -..A.ucu IIH.8uI;,,ta*
which violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola, do not recur.
183. The views of my Government on cross-border vialence in southern Africa are well known to members of the
Council and were reiterated in this chamber most recently

187. The PRESIDENT:
has asked to speak, and

in our statement
during
the Namibia
dcbatc on 12 June
[2587rh meetingJ. We deplore cross-border
violence in any
direction
and in any form.
United
States diplomacy
in
southern
Africa
has been aimed at stopping
violence,
obtaining
the removal
of foreign
forces and rccuring
respect for national
sovereignty
and the inviolability
of
international
borders.
It is clear that any South African
military
activities
inside Angola-includirrg
itnclligcutrgathering
operations
which South
African
Governmom
spokesmen
have said are continuing-run
directly
contrary to thu goals and objcctivcs
of the United
States.

18X.
heard
racist

The representative
I now call on him.

of Angola

Mr.
de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola):
The Council
terminological
inexactitudes
from the very lips of the
rcprcsentative
of South Africa.

189.
Mr. President,
allow me to express my Government’s appreciation
for the skilful
manner
in which you
have handled
Angola’s
complaint,
yet another
instance of
South African aggression
against the People’s Republic of
Angola.
The people of Angola bear the warmest
fraternal
regard for the people of Trinidad
and Tobago.

184. My Government
has been in the forefront
of efforts
to bring about a pcaccful
negotiated
solution
to the conllicts in southern
Africa.
it was this effort that resulted
over a year ago in the signing of the Lusaka accord, which
Icd to the progressive
withdrawal
of South African occupation force!
from
southcrn
Angola.
Despite
continuing
problems
in the region, this agreement
produced
over 12
months
of effective
peace and practical
co-operation
bctwecn South African and Angolan
military
forces along
the Namibian
border.
We are encouraged
that South
Africa has completed
the disengagement
process and heartened by its announcement
of the withdrawal
of its troops
from the dams at Ruacana and Caiuequc.
In view of this
positive
development.
my Government
does not understand, nor does it accept, the use in the resolution
of the
term “occupation
forces” to describe any continued
South
African
military
presence in Angola.

190.
I also wish to thank all those who have once again
spoken out in support
of the position
of the Government
and the people of Angola,
and all our non-aligned
friends
who sponsored
the resolution
just adopted
by the Council
and, indeed, all those who voted in favour.
191. The representative
of the racist regime has blatantly
and shamelessly
obfuscated
the truth and misrepresented
reality. The only ideology completely
foreign to the continent of Africa is that of apartheid,
introduced
into southern
Africa by the minority
racist regime of South Africa, perpetuated
by it, constitutionalized
by it, institutionalized
by
it. It is the apartheid
regime which is the threat to peace
and security in our region, leading it to disastrous
consequences because the people of southern
Africa refuse to
succumb IO the tyranny
which has been imposed on them
by the minority
racist regime of South Africa.

185. In light of the progress
represented
in the Lusaka
accord,
my Government
was particularly
disturbed
to
learn of the incident
in Cabinda.
In our view, this incident.
and other reeent instances
of violence
in South Africa,
Angola.
Botswana
and elsewhere in the region. underscore
the importance
of moving
rapidly
IO a negotiated
settlement in the region. We are committed
to this goal, and we
will continue
to pursue it.

192. The oflicial
position
of the Angolan
Government
and its offer are contained
in the letter addressed
by the
President
of my country
to the Secretary-General
on I7
November
1984 [S/16838].
193. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further
speakers
for this meeting. The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

186. Despite
our objections
to the reference
to South
Aft&n
“occupation”
forces in Angola, and our objections
lo the implicit
references
to Chapter
VII of the Charter
of
the United Nations contained
in several paragraphs
of the
resolution.
our strong feelings on the question
of crossborder violence led us to vote in favour of this resolution.

Thp meeting

I7

rose at 7.03 p.m.

Lub

in United

Na~tcm.

New York

m4rm

90-61439-April

I994-2.050
