S/PV.7673 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7673rd meeting

Monday, 18 April 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Casimiro
Mr. Moussa
Mr. Gorjestani
Mr. Takeda
Mr. Abdul Razak
Mr. Walbridge
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Diallo
Ms. Del Río Novo
Mr. Bilan
Ms. Maguire
Mr. Wagner
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Arcia Vivas

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10849 (E)
*1610489*

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Security Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would appeal to
speakers to deliver their statements at a reasonable
speed so that interpretation may be provided accurately.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open debate
today. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and to acknowledge the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.
After five years of protracted hostilities and human
suffering, it is heartening to acknowledge that the
cessation of hostilities in Syria is creating the conditions
for a gradual advance towards stabilization and peace.
There has been an overall decrease in casualties since
February. Important cities such as Palmyra are no longer
controlled by the self-proclaimed Islamic State. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
reports a positive trend with respect to humanitarian
access. Besieged or isolated areas are being reached for
the first time in years.
Nevertheless, growing violations reported by both
sides to the conflict in recent weeks may threaten the
significant progress that has been made. We call on the
parties to fully respect the cessation of hostilities. We
should spare no effort in working towards a Syrianled and Syrian-owned political transition aimed at
establishing credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governance, drafting a new constitution and ending the
war, as established by resolution 2254 (2015).
In that regard, we welcome the new round of
intra-Syrian negotiations launched last week in Geneva
under the auspices of the United Nations and with the
assistance of the International Syria Support Group.
Brazil reaffirms its steadfast support for the efforts
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and those of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, led by Mr. Paulo
Sérgio Pinheiro.
2/37

18/04/2016

But we are also concerned about the negative
humanitarian impact of unilateral sanctions on Syria.
As a study commissioned by a group of experts recently
confirmed, unilateral economic and trade measures
often create insurmountable practical barriers to the
work of humanitarian organizations attempting to
deliver food, medicine, fuel and other essential items
to civilians affected by the conflict. The sanctions also
hinder the establishment of conditions conducive to
refugees’ safe and voluntary return to Syria, thereby
exacerbating the massive displacement crisis currently
affecting many Middle Eastern and European societies.
Lastly, they obstruct key initiatives aimed at restoring
and rebuilding Syria’s economy and infrastructure.
It is worth recalling that the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, set up by the Human Rights Council,
has spoken out against such sanctions. Brazil has long
held that unilateral sanctions are counterproductive
and incompatible with international law. The Security
Council is the only body with a clear legal mandate
to impose coercive economic measures, and I would
like to recall here that, in its resolution 70/185, the
General Assembly states clearly that unilateral coercive
economic measures constitute a flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and contravene the
basic principles of the multilateral trading system.
The absence of any positive signs of concrete
developments on the question of Palestine is alarming.
The peace process remains stalled, acts of violence
continue to occur and we are witnessing disrespect
for the principle of due process of law, leading to
more violence. Illegal settlements, demolitions and
land expropriations proliferate in the West Bank, and
the humanitarian situation remains dire, particularly
in Gaza. If left unchanged, this intolerable status
quo will continue to destabilize the Middle East and
erode the credibility of the Security Council. Brazil
expects the Council to live up to its responsibilities by
acting decisively to establish parameters for the end
of the occupation. The only viable solution remains a
Palestinian State that is fully sovereign, economically
sustainable and territorially contiguous, with borders
based on the internationally recognized 1967 lines,
living in peace and security with Israel. In that regard,
we are following with interest the initiative of holding
an international conference aimed at garnering broad
support for the peace process, as proposed by France.
Reports of a draft resolution that would require Israel
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to freeze the construction of settlements and set a
time frame for arriving at a two-State solution are
also encouraging.
Concerning Yemen, the cessation of hostilities
initiated last week and the resumption of peace
negotiations in Kuwait under the auspices of Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, are a much-needed step towards ending a
conflict that has left innocent civilians unprotected
and exposed them to many extreme forms of strife. As
reported by international human-rights organizations,
air strikes have repeatedly hit protected areas such as
hospitals, as well as populated regions. A particularly
grave incident was the bombing of a market in Mastaba,
which killed at least 97 civilians, including 25 children.
We call on all parties to fulfil their obligation to
respect international humanitarian and human-rights
law, including the fundamental rules of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. Brazil continues to
uphold the imperative of a sustainable and inclusive
political solution to the Yemeni crisis achieved through
non-military means.
While Libya remains deeply unstable, recent
developments suggest that a measure of progress has
been made towards solving the country’s significant
political and security challenges. We welcome the
arrival in Tripoli of the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, endorsed by resolution
2259 (2015), as well as reports that it has already
consolidated authority over key ministries and State
institutions. Brazil reiterates its support for Special
Representative Martin Kobler and urges all the parties
to work to restore peace and national unity in Libya.
As a general thought, and in line with the overall
template that underpins the three reports submitted in
2015 on peace operations (S/2015/682), sustaining peace
(S/2015/560) and on women and peace and security
(S/2015/716), the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, should privilege and revitalize
preventive measures and diplomatic efforts to solve
disputes through peaceful means, especially those in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The ongoing crisis in Syria, including the connected
spread of Da’esh, poses an existential threat to the
Syrian people. The consequences are also particularly
felt by its neighbours and the wider region, and in
Europe itself as well. If we want to tackle this threat,
we must first intensify our joint efforts to put an end
to the war in Syria by arriving at a political solution
within the framework of the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Secondly, we must all join forces against Da’esh in an
even more effective way.
The European Union is an active member of the
International Syria Support Group and its two task
forces, on humanitarian access and a cessation of
hostilities, and fully supports the efforts of Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
There is no alternative to the intra-Syrian talks being
conducted under the aegis of the United Nations if we
are to reach the goal of a political settlement. We expect
all Syrian parties and their backers to engage in the
process. In particular, we encourage the Syrian regime
to engage in good faith and to address the substantive
aspects of a political transition.
In that context, the EU emphasizes the importance
of four key elements agreed on by the International
Syria Support Group and endorsed by Security Council
resolutions. First is the consolidation and expansion
of the cessation of hostilities. It is incumbent upon
all parties to respect the agreement of 27 February.
Secondly, there is the consolidation and expansion
of humanitarian access, especially to besieged and
still hard-to-reach areas. The Al-Assad regime has a
particular responsibility in that regard, since a clear
majority of the besieged areas are under its control.
Thirdly, there is the release of arbitrarily detained
persons, particularly women and children. Fourthly
and, I would say, extremely important, is embarking
upon a political transition, without delay and with the
intention of reaching a lasting solution.
As we have stressed in the past, the Middle East
peace process remains vital not only for those directly
affected by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but also for
the stability of the wider region and thereby also for
the European Union. Despite current challenges on the
ground, the EU remains united in its commitment to
achieving a two-State solution based on the parameters
set out in the Council’s conclusions of July 2014. We
reiterate that there is no alternative to a negotiated twoState solution, which remains the only realistic way of

16-108493/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ending the conflict to the main benefit of both Israelis
and Palestinians. Regrettably, those populations are
now adversely affected by the recent violence, which
is taking a terrible human toll and further undermining
trust on both sides.
The EU has taken a clear stance and condemned acts
of terror and violence against innocent civilians from
all sides. In January, our Foreign Affairs Council also
urged all sides to refrain from actions that could fuel
further tension by way of incitement and provocation,
while adhering to the principles of necessity and
proportionality in the use of force. We also recognize
the special significance of holy sites and urge all to
uphold the status quo for the Temple Mount, Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. However, we remain convinced that security
and short-term measures alone are no substitute for
sustainable political solutions. Only significant policy
shifts on the ground and the re-establishment of a
political horizon can end the violence, rebuild trust
and pave the way for meaningful negotiations on the
outstanding issues. In that context, it is vital to ensure
that all international initiatives are directed towards
that goal.
The EU will play a leading part, not least through
the its Special Representative for the Middle East peace
process and the Quartet, which is currently drafting
a report on the dangers of the current trajectory
with significant recommendations on the best way
to advance a two-State solution. In that context, the
European Union also welcomes other initiatives in the
international arena, such as the international peace
conference proposed by France, as one part of a broader
and coordinated effort to preserve and strengthen the
two-State solution.
The role of regional partners remains essential.
The Arab Peace Initiative could serve as an important
pillar of any future comprehensive peace agreement,
while it also provides an opportunity for building a
regional security framework. The Security Council
has an obvious and crucial role in that context. We
take this opportunity to offer our full support to the
Secretary-General’s Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Process, Mr. Mladenov. The EU believes that an
integrated approach among international stakeholders
can help revive the Middle East peace process. We
look forward to working closely with partners in the
months ahead towards that common goal. The power
to change the situation is obviously primarily in the
hands of local leaders and societies. The support
4/37

18/04/2016

and active participation of both sides of the conflict
remain a crucial prerequisite for the success of any
peace initiative.
Both sides will need to demonstrate through
policies and actions that they are genuinely committed
to the two-State solution. They must end all actions
that undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
The EU is highly concerned by the ongoing erosion of
the viability of a two State-solution. In that context, we
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. As it has consistently
reaffirmed in its Council conclusions, and most
recently in January 2016, the EU is strongly opposed
to Israel’s settlement policy and to actions taken in that
context, such as the recent increase in demolitions,
including those of EU and EU-member States’ funded
projects in Area C, the declaration of private land as
State land, the legalization of unauthorized outposts
and confiscations, as well as the forced transfers of
people. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem seriously
jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as the
future capital of both States.
By the same token, jointly addressing the needs
of the Palestinian population should be a top priority
for Palestinian political leaders. We therefore urge
Palestinian factions to bring ongoing reconciliation
efforts to a rapid and successful conclusion, on the
basis of democracy and the principles of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization. Palestinian unity and
accountable and democratic Palestinian institutions will
be crucial in establishing a viable Palestinian State. We
welcome the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, the main mechanism for aid management
and donor coordination, being held in Brussels today
and tomorrow in the presence of the two parties. Its role
is to underpin political efforts to achieve a two-State
solution by supporting the development of institutions
in preparation for Palestinian statehood.
There must also be accelerated efforts to address
the dire situation in Gaza. While the EU has delivered
on all its pledges made at the Cairo Conference in 2014,
we urge all others to follow suit. Increased access to
Gaza through legal crossings would also contribute to
an improved situation in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009).
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Let me end by noting that, in our view, the
forthcoming Quartet report should be the basis to set
out in more detail the concrete steps that both sides
must take to recreate the political horizon for a twoState solution with the full support of the international
community.
Together, we need to find ways to prevent further
disasters in the Middle East mainly for humanitarian
reasons, but also because despair can breed
radicalization and further violence. Together with
international partners, and hopefully with crucial input
by the core parties to the conflict, the European Union
will continue its concerted efforts to prevent the further
escalation of violence and defend the viability of the
two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Since the beginning of 2016,
according to official United Nations statistics — let
me underline that those are official United Nations
statistics, not drawn from any Palestinian or Arab
source — the Israeli authorities have demolished
539 so-called structures in Area C of the occupied
Palestinian territory, as compared to a total of 453 for
all of 2015. Similarly, since the beginning of this year,
805 Palestinians have been displaced as a result of the
demolition of their homes, as compared to a total of
580 for all of 2015. In fact, statistics from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show that
from 50 demolitions per month in the period from 2012
to 2015, the average has risen to 165 per month since
January 2016, with 235 demolitions in February alone.
To put those figures into context, let me also recall that,
since September 2000, Israel has been responsible for
the killing of more than 9,300 Palestinian civilians,
including 2,100 children, and for the injury of more
than 87,000 persons. Moreover, since 1967, Israel
has been responsible for the demolition of 28,000
Palestinian homes.
Those facts are a clear reminder that Israel, the
occupying Power, has not only failed to meet its primary
responsibility under the Fourth Geneva Convention
to protect Palestinian civilians, but, on the contrary,
has been pursuing a deliberate and continuous policy
of strangulation against Palestinian civilians in total
disrespect for their lives and basic rights, with the aim
of perpetuating and consolidating its illegal occupation
of their territory. After nearly five decades of daily

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

violations of their basic fundamental rights — including,
among others, countless arbitrary arrests and detentions,
extrajudicial killings and torture — and after almost
five decades of confiscation of their private property,
the demolition of their homes and forcible displacement,
the least that the Palestinians of the occupied territories,
in both the West Bank and Gaza, can expect from the
Council, which under the Charter of the United Nations
is entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security,
is that, pending successfully ending the long-standing
Israeli occupation, it takes all the necessary measures
to ensure their protection, both as individuals and as
a people, including stopping all forms of settlement
activities on their land.
Let me now turn to the Syrian crisis. Last February’s
agreement on a cessation of hostilities has given Syria
and its people a glimmer of hope that a settlement
of the conflict has become a realistic possibility. We
take this opportunity to commend Special Envoy De
Mistura for the tremendous effort and time he has
deployed to set the conditions for the achievement of
the cessation of hostilities, guided by the work of the
International Syria Support Group. We also recognize
the leadership of the co-Chairs of the ceasefire task
force, the Russian Federation and the United States, in
supporting the cessation of hostilities, which resulted
in a significant reduction in the number of civilian
casualties and cleared the path for the resumption of
the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, which, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, should lead
to the achievement of a lasting political solution that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people to live in
peace and dignity in a sovereign and unified country.
Only such a solution could turn the present cessation
of hostilities into sustainable civil peace by allowing
the Syrian people to begin the long and arduous task of
national reconciliation and reconstruction and paving
the way for the return of Syrian refugees and displaced
persons to their homes and livelihoods.
Having said that, until the eventual return of
the 1.2 million Syrian refugees currently residing
in Lebanon, we continue to reiterate our call to the
international community to meet its pledges and to
provide Lebanon with the necessary means to deal with
that massive responsibility. Only adequate assistance
that integrates humanitarian and developmental
funding can enable Lebanon to provide for the needs
of the refugees and offset some of the negative impacts
that the protracted humanitarian crisis has left on my

16-108495/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

country’s economic growth and unemployment levels
and the pressure on our infrastructure in the education,
health, energy, water, sanitation and housing sectors.
It was just last month that my country was privileged
to welcome the joint visit by the Secretary-General,
the President of the World Bank and the President of
the Islamic Development Bank. It was an important
occasion for them to assess such needs at first hand.
Five years into the conflict in Syria and after multiple
donors conferences, in particular the one held in
London in February, it is crucial to establish a followup mechanism to those conferences. In our statement
before the General Assembly on 20 November 2015 (see
A/70/PV.59), we detailed our proposal regarding such a
mechanism to enable follow-up with donors regarding
the fulfilment of their pledges. Today, we reiterate our
call for such action.
For Lebanon, the joint visit also provided a
significant message of international support and
solidarity to help it maintain stability and security. In
that context, my Government has stressed the need to
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) and to put an
end to Israeli violations of my country’s sovereignty
by land, air and sea. We would also like to point out
that paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006) requests the
Secretary General
“to develop, in liaison with relevant international
actors and the concerned parties, proposals ...
for the delineation of the international borders of
Lebanon, especially in those areas where the border
is disputed or uncertain”.
We also recall that, among the chief purposes of the
United Nations, as stated in Article 1 of the Charter of
the United Nations, is
“to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace”.
My Government has also sought the good offices of the
Secretary-General in the delineation of the disputed
maritime border and the exclusive economic zone
between Lebanon and Israel, emphasizing that the
non-resolution of the issue would remain a source of
conflict that threatens peace and security in our region.
Let me conclude by going back to where I started
in order to stress again the urgent need for the Council
to put an end to the settlement activities in the
occupied State of Palestine and to provide international
protection to the Palestinians living under occupation.
6/37

18/04/2016

A failure to do so would not only constitute a moral
and political abdication, it would amount to granting
Israel permission to continue its blatant violation
of the numerous resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly on the question of Palestine, let
alone the principles enshrined in the Charter and the
rules of international law. In fact, the Council’s failure
to live up to its responsibilities made it possible for
Mr. Netanyahu to declare on Saturday,
“It’s time that the international community finally
recognizes that the Golan will forever remain under
Israeli sovereignty.”
Is it not, rather, time for the international
community, represented by the Council, to remind
Mr. Netanyahu of Israel’s obligations under resolution
497 (1981), which reaffirms the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, and to condemn his
declaration in the strongest possible terms?
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me once again to express to
the President our appreciation for his wise leadership of
the Security Council during this month and to wish you
every success. I also wish to thank you for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning.
It is also my pleasure to refer to the important
statement delivered by His Excellency the President of
the People’s Republic of China before the Council of
the League of Arab States at the beginning of the year,
on 21 January, when he specifically called again for an
end to the historical injustice done to the Palestinian
people, referring also to the need to enable that people
to exercise their right to establish their own sovereign
Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We wish to express our
appreciation for all the efforts by friendly China and for
the President’s efforts in that regard.
We meet today once again as Israel pursues its
aggressive terrorist practices as well as its grave
violations of international law. Israel persists in
challenging international legitimacy, with no fear
of sanctions or accountability. We have called on the
Council again and again to compel Israel to end its
war crimes and its violations of human rights, which
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

it has been perpetrating despite the unanimity in the
international community on the illegitimacy of Israel’s
colonialist policies and arbitrary practices against
the Palestinian people. It seems that the Security
Council remains timid vis-à-vis the need to end
Israeli aggression, to make Israel responsible for that
aggression and to make it accountable for its ongoing,
repeated crimes against the Palestinian people.
Israel continues to use excessive force against
the Palestinian people. It has detained thousands of
Palestinians. They are tortured, they are exploited, and
many are simply being killed in the field. Despite its
ongoing acts of terrorism, Israel now claims that it is
committed to the two-State solution. We wonder: what
two States are the occupier talking about? Settlements
continue to be built without any restraint. Land and
properties are being confiscated. Homes are being
demolished. Families are being expelled. There are
acts of forcible displacement. Does the Council not
know, for example, that Israel took a decision to build
200 new settlements in the West Bank just days ago?
Israel continues to implement its illegal plans to annex
the Holy City of Al-Quds, distorting its Arab identity,
changing its demographic makeup and isolating it from
the Palestinian community. It continues its ongoing
attempts to change the legal status of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque, wishing to lay its hands on Islamic and
Christian properties in Al-Quds and Haram Al-Sharif.
What two States is Israel talking about?
Matters have reached a point where the Israeli
occupation Government holds meetings in occupied
Arab Syrian Golan, which is a grave development. The
occupying Power is demanding that the international
community recognize its occupation of the Golan. It
claims that the Golan is an indivisible part of the State
of Israel in the modern era, that the Golan Heights will
remain in Israeli hands forever. That is a clear violation
of resolution 497 (1981), as well as of all international
instruments, which do not accept a change of status
for occupied territories. We condemn in the strongest
terms such declarations and such acts of aggression. We
call upon the Council to compel Israel to implement all
United Nations resolutions concerning its withdrawal
from all Palestinian lands beyond the pre-1967 borders
and all Arab occupied lands, including the occupied
Arab Syrian Golan.
Against that backdrop, my delegation would once
again like to welcome the French initiative to convene an
international peace conference, as this would contribute

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

to peace and security in the region, in accordance with
the terms of reference of the peace process, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We must devise an effective international
mechanism that ensures that an end is put to the
Israeli occupation of the State of Palestine within a set
time frame.
The Palestinian people have long suffered from
a brutal occupation, policies of racism and arbitrary
repression. We commend the Palestinian people for
their steadfastness and for defending their people
and their holy sites. We call on the Security Council
to ensure that the Israeli Government bears criminal
responsibility for its actions. Israel must be called upon
to immediately release all detainees and prisoners and
immediately respond to the resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also reiterate our call to ensure a quick
intervention so as to provide international protection
to the Palestinian people. We appeal to the Security
Council to respond in a manner that is commensurate
with the gravity of the situation and to grant the
Palestinian people their right to self-determination and
their independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, on the borders of June 1967.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia wishes to express
its grave concern at the continuing suffering of the
brotherly Syrian people. Despite the efforts made to
resolve the Syrian crisis; the adoption of resolutions
2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016); and the cessation of
hostilities and the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
with a view to the resumption of official negotiations
on a political transition and the full implementation of
Geneva I, these violations by the Syrian forces continue.
Syrians are being killed and maimed on a daily basis.
Their cities are being destroyed, including through the
use of weapons with indiscriminate effects, including
barrel bombs.
Iran’s Revolutionary Guards are also present in
Syria, as are Hizbullah militias, which are terrorist
militias that have participated in the criminal acts
perpetrated by the Syrian regime against its people.
These represent grave continuing escalations that could
have terrible repercussions on peace and security in the
region and the entire world.
We would also like to express our grave concern
at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria.
A siege continues to be imposed on many cities and

16-108497/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

regions, including Daraya, where dozens of women
and children are protesting on their destroyed homes
against the fact that international parties are ignoring
them and will not act to lift the siege.
My delegation reiterates its support for the United
Nations Envoy to Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, within
the mandate entrusted to him and resolution 2254
(2015), which set out the road map for official political
negotiations on a political transition.
We wish to stress that we will continue to support
the Syrian people by all means available and to respect
their decisions. We call for the establishment of a
transitional authority with full executive powers to
build Syria’s future. Syria, whose sons, whatever their
political, religious or ethnic origins, reject terrorism
and violence, has no place in it for those whose hands
are stained with the blood of the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Today more than ever,
the Middle East is a cauldron of conflict. War and
suffering have steadily spread from their epicentre,
the Palestinian-Israeli dispute in the Holy Land. The
prospects for peace between Israel and the Palestinians
are abysmal. The current Israeli leadership is fast
closing off the possibility of a two-State solution,
formally accepted by the parties and the international
community. It is doing this willfully, through its policy
of expanding settlements, demolitions and incitement,
accompanied by the refusal to engage in a meaningful
dialogue to implement the internationally agreed twoState solution.
Violence by the occupation forces against
Palestinian children, women and other innocent
Palestinians continues. Illegal Israeli settlements in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem increased by 250 per cent
during the first three months of this year as compared
with the last.
A report of the Office of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process last week rightly
acknowledged that the viability of a two-State solution
was in danger. There is an ever-present danger of
another intifada if a credible peace process is not revived
rapidly. Unless the Israeli Government agrees to resume
the implementation of the two-State solution and halts
and reverses its policy of expanding settlements, the
Security Council must, in accordance with its mandate
8/37

18/04/2016

and its own resolutions, adopt a concrete and legally
binding plan to implement the two-State solution and
take the necessary measures for its enforcement.
A two-State solution was promised by the
international community to the Palestinian people.
This promise was a solemn one and must be kept. An
independent, contiguous and viable state of Palestine,
based on the pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, is and must remain our objective.
Pakistan, for its part, remains committed to
supporting the Palestinians in their decades-long
legitimate struggle for their rights and for their dignity.
The President of Pakistan reaffirmed this commitment
when he met President Abbas at the Extraordinary
Summit of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in
Jakarta last month.
It will be difficult to resolve the other crises that
have proliferated in the Middle East or to stem the rise
of terrorism and extremism if the world does not find
a just and durable solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Meanwhile, what was termed the Arab Spring has
turned into a winter of despair and suffering. The scale
of the suffering in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and elsewhere is
unprecedented in its scope and intensity.
As we discuss solutions here today, people continue
to endure unimaginable suffering, and their exodus has
created a humanitarian catastrophe. There is an urgent
need for statesmanship, diplomacy and dialogue. The
political and ideological polarization in the region has
exacerbated the consequences of external intervention,
intensified sectarian and ethnic divisions and rendered
political solutions more difficult.
The unity displayed by the international community
in combating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIS) is a critical first step. But these efforts will
be successful only once the world has addressed the
underlying reasons for the appeal of its toxic ideology
to so many young and impressionable people in so
many countries.
Syria recently marked the fifth anniversary of
its conflict. Every succeeding year has been worse
than the one before. The Syrian people continue to
suffer unimaginable hardships. Atrocities are being
committed by all sides.
We all agree that there is no military solution to this
conflict. It is therefore critical that the fragile cessation
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of hostilities be maintained and that the proximity talks
in Geneva, reconvened last week, at least chart a way
forward towards a negotiated settlement.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy to Syria, Staffan de Mistura, and hope
that all sides will accord primacy to the interests of the
Syrian people in evolving a durable political solution to
this vicious conflict, in accordance with the principles
of the United Nations Charter.
Positive signs are also emerging from Yemen. A
truce was agreed last week and, although the direct
face-to-face dialogue that was to be initiated in Kuwait
earlier today has encountered a difficulty, we hope that
will be temporary. We note with hope the statement
of Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in the
Council last week that,
“[we] have never been so close to peace.” (S/PV.7672,
p. 4).
It will not be easy to restore peace and stability
in the Middle East. Beyond diplomacy and a genuine
commitment on the part of all Powers and parties to
negotiated solutions, a comprehensive and enlightened
policy is needed to address and overcome the underlying
political, economic and social causes of those conflicts.
My country stands ready to make its contribution
to the construction of a new and peaceful order in the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Before
I deliver my statement, let me offer my condolences to
the peoples and the Governments of Japan and Ecuador
for the loss of lives as a result of the recent earthquakes.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM), and to convey the
Movement’s appreciation to the Chinese presidency for
convening this open debate at this critical juncture for
the Palestine people and the Middle East. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Given the time constraints, I will deliver an
abridged version of my statement. The full text will
be circulated.
Each and every time the Council holds an open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

question of Palestine, NAM appeals for international
attention and urgent action to address the illegal and
brutal Israeli occupation that is causing so much
anguish to the Palestinian people, provoking deep
anger and frustration and inflaming tensions. The
breaches of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, that are being committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, are inflicting widespread
human suffering and are deliberately destabilizing the
situation, with far-reaching and serious consequences
for the prospects for a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and for peace and security
in the Middle East and beyond.
Each time, we repeat our call to the international
community, first and foremost the Security Council,
to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and the obligations to respect those
instruments and ensure such respect, including through
the necessary measures to compel Israel to end its
war crimes and human rights violations against the
Palestinian people and end the illegal foreign occupation
of another people’s land.
Regrettably, the Security Council has failed to
uphold its obligations, despite the clear global consensus
on both the illegality of Israel’s policies and practices
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and the urgency of ending this decadeslong conflict so that the Palestinian people can finally
realize the freedom, rights and justice they have for too
long been unjustly denied.
Israel, the occupying Power, has been emboldened
by that inaction on the part of the international
community, which has enabled it to act with impunity.
Consequently, it has intensified its illegal, oppressive
measures against the defenceless Palestinian civilian
population, including, inter alia, by using excessive
force against Palestinian civilians, including children
and women, causing death and injury. As the occupying
Power builds and expands more illegal settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, which constitutes not only a grave breach
of the Fourth Geneva Convention but also a war crime
as defined by the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Israel also continues with its illegal,
repressive and punitive measures, including home
demolitions, leaving countless Palestinian families
homeless and without hope. The destructive impact
of such Israeli violations is immense, as reflected in
the increasing tensions, deteriorating socioeconomic

16-108499/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conditions and deepening frustration and despair
among the Palestinian civilian population, which has
been living under the Israeli occupation for nearly half
a century.
Moreover, the humanitarian disaster deliberately
inflicted on the Gaza Strip by the occupying Power
remains without redress, as the illegal Israeli blockade
continues to obstruct the reconstruction of thousands of
damaged and destroyed homes and infrastructure, and
socioeconomic conditions continue to deteriorate as
the blockade continues to have a suffocating effect on
Gaza. The Palestinian civilian population there remains
isolated from the rest of Palestine and the entire world.
The situation of youth in Gaza is especially critical, as
hope and opportunity are absent. We would draw the
Council’s attention to that critical aspect.
The Security Council must act in accordance
with international humanitarian law to ensure the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population under
Israeli occupation. The Council must also act, in line
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Council’s own resolutions, to
bring a halt to Israel’s ongoing illegal colonization of
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. That is a minimal and fundamental request
to the Security Council and is not beyond the realm of
reason, or its obligation for that matter.
How can the Council remain silent as Israel
continues its systematic settlement policy, its
construction of the wall, its confiscation and de
facto annexation of Palestinian land under various
pretexts, such as “State land” or “military exercises” or
“building without permits”? Those and other systematic
violations, including the demolition of homes, the
forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the arrest
and detention of Palestinians, including children, and
the incessant violence, terror and provocations by
Israeli settlers and extremists, including at sensitive
religious sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in
occupied East Jerusalem, have persisted in an unabated
fashion, worsening the extremely fragile situation
on the ground. Such violations must be addressed
immediately, because it is unacceptable to allow Israel
to enjoy impunity without suffering the consequences
of its actions. Any justification for such criminality
must be rejected, and the time is past due to act, in
line with United Nations resolutions, international law
and our moral responsibilities towards the question
of Palestine.
10/37

18/04/2016

Finally, at a time when the Palestinian people are
facing increasing Israeli aggression and have rapidly
declining hope for the possibilities for peace and justice,
the Non-Aligned Movement seizes this opportunity to
reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian
people, recognizing their decades of resilience despite
so much suffering and injustice. NAM reiterates its
support for the realization of their legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including their right
to self-determination and freedom in an independent
and viable State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, as well as for a just solution to ease the plight
of the Palestine refugees, in accordance with resolution
194 (III), of 1948.
Lebanon continues to suffer from continuous Israeli
violations of its borders and incursions into its territory,
which have been followed by years of occupation and
aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that ensures the strengthening of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, and
especially in view of the recent blatant defiance
exhibited against the will of the international
community, the Movement condemns all the measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status of the occupied Syrian
Golan, which have intensified after the outbreak of the
Syrian crisis. NAM demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing earlier today.
India has long had a clear and consistent position on
the Middle East peace process. We support a negotiated
solution that would result in a sovereign, independent,
viable and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

as its capital, within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in
the Quartet road map and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. India’s approach to Palestine is built upon
three core dimensions of solidarity with the Palestinian
people: support for the Palestinian cause, support for
Palestine’s nation-building and support for Palestine’s
capacity-building efforts.
Our continued commitment to the Palestinian cause
and our friendship with the Palestinian people remain
an integral part of our foreign policy. That is reflected
in the ongoing high-level exchanges, such as visits
to Palestine by Indian leaders in the recent months,
including our President, Prime Minister and Minister
for External Affairs.
As part of our ongoing support for the nation-building
efforts of Palestine, India has consistently extended
technical and financial assistance to that country. India
contributes $1 million annually to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. India also contributed $4 million in response
to the National Early Recovery and Reconstruction
Plan for Gaza.
We are concerned that, since the previous attempts
at serious direct talks, which broke down two years ago,
there has been a downward trend in the peace process,
despite efforts to hold serious negotiations between
the parties — efforts that have been inconclusive.
Instead, we have seen an unfortunate escalation of
tension in Gaza. Unilateral actions by the parties
are, unfortunately, moving them further apart. India
remains firmly convinced that dialogue is the only
viable option that can effectively address the issue. We
remain hopeful and urge both sides to resume the peace
process soon in order to reach a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue.
In Yemen, India has been urging all of the parties
concerned to resolve their differences amicably with
a view to finding a consensus-based solution. We
are encouraged by the planned peace talks and hope
that those talks will commence soon and lead to
positive outcomes.
With regard to Syria, India has consistently called
for a comprehensive political solution to the conflict
based on bringing all parties to the negotiating table.
We hope that the intra-Syrian talks held under the
auspices of the United Nations will ensure a Syrianled and Syrian-owned political transition, bringing

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

an end to the violence there and contributing to the
stabilization of the country and the region.
The humanitarian situation in Syria and
neighbouring countries has to be addressed effectively.
India has contributed $4 million in humanitarian
assistance for Syrian refugees. India also participated
in the London conference on Syria in February and
has committed to providing bilateral humanitarian
assistance to Syria.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Mashkoor (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the People’s Republic
of China on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. We would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I would also like to congratulate Angola for its wise
leadership of the Council last month.
The policies of Israel, the occupying Power, rely
heavily on building more settlements on lands that have
been confiscated from their Arab owners, on extracting
the natural resources and on subjecting the Palestinian
economy and market to the laws of the occupying
Power. The end purpose is to control the future of
the Palestinian people and prevent their sustainable
development. Settler colonialism can be considered to
be the strategic, military pillar of the policy to Judaize
the occupied territories and to impose a fait accompli
on the Arab States and the Palestinians in negotiations.
While there was a sincere intention on the part of the
Arab party to end this long-standing dispute and to
achieve a just peace, those policies have undermined
peace efforts in the region.
The demolition of Palestinian homes by the
Israeli occupation authorities will not bring peace to
Israel. It is an inhumane act that runs counter to the
right to housing. Israel also violates the standards of
criminal law, which calls for the punishment of those
who commit the crime in question. As such, criminal
law cannot impose collective punishment on family
members. Israel uses a policy of collective punishment
that was prevalent in the Middle Ages. The siege on
Gaza, the detentions, the increasing rate of violence and
the imposition of collective punishment, as well as the
provocations by Jewish extremist settlers, serve only
to exacerbate tensions in Palestine and the Middle East
region in general. Iraq calls on the Security Council

16-1084911/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people in all of the occupied Palestinian territories, in
accordance with the relevant international conventions
and international humanitarian law, in order to put an
end to the unprecedented violations committed against
the sacred shrines in Jerusalem, including Al-Aqsa
Mosque. We also call on the Council to ensure the
complete withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
territories to the borders of 1967, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Iraq welcomes the French initiative on the
convening of an international conference on the
Palestinian question and the peace process. We would
hope that the initiative would lead to tangible results
by providing an international political impetus for the
peace process and by addressing all the issues that have
made it difficult to arrive at a peaceful solution to end
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories. We
would also hope that it would ensure the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State that can exist in peace
and assume its place in the international community.
However, as a result of the intransigence of Israel,
which does not believe in the Palestinian right to selfdetermination or to recovery of the usurped territories,
Iraq does not expect that any international conference
can succeed. The experience of past conferences
does not encourage us to expect anything more than
diplomatic courtesies, which do not really respond to
the suffering of our Palestinian brothers living under
occupation.
We would like to express our solidarity with our
brothers in occupied Palestine and their struggle, which
is legitimate under the rules of international law, for
the establishment of an independent, contiguous and
viable Palestinian, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the 1967 borders. We urge the relevant
international parties to move faster and overcome the
impediments that have made it difficult to achieve the
two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
the appreciation of my delegation to the presidency of
the People’s Republic of China for convening this open
debate, and to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to express condolences to the Governments
12/37

18/04/2016

of Ecuador and Japan for the tragic loss of lives resulting
from the devastating earthquakes last week.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the State of Kuwait on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
This debate comes at a time when there is
increasing global concern about the prospects for peace
in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Last January, the
Secretary-General spoke about the growing frustration,
alienation and despair felt by the Palestinians with
regard to the prolonged occupation of their homeland.
Since then, violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory has continued to grow at an alarming pace. No
progress can be seen in the efforts to halt the violence
or address the injustice and oppression committed
against Palestinians. Indonesia is following with deep
concern that troubling development. Not only does the
continued violence reflect the hurdles on the way of
peace, it also symbolizes the hardening of suspicion
and animosity between the two peoples, which could
hinder efforts to restart the political process.
Indonesia remains convinced that the occupation
must be brought to an end and that all efforts must
be exerted to achieve the two-State solution. Indeed,
last month, the fifth Extraordinary Summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, hosted by the
Government of Indonesia, drew the attention of the
international community to the urgency of attaining a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine. The Summit also called on the international
community to support the boycott of products produced
in or by the illegal Israeli settlements.
Israel’s continued construction of illegal settlements
in and around East Jerusalem, along with other illegal
activities, poses a further challenge to efforts to find a
wise course of action. It is the responsibility of Israel,
the occupying Power, to observe and comply with its
international obligations, such as the protection of
the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people and
to prevent the occurrence of extrajudicial killings,
which have been rampant in recent times. Israel must
also realize that its restrictions on the movements of
Palestinians and the arbitrary conduct of its security
forces against Palestinians can only breed anger and
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resentment and that it must refrain from committing
collective punishment.
The United Nations has adopted hundreds of
resolutions on the question of Palestine since the
Organization was established. Last month, the
Commission on the Status of Women adopted yet
another resolution on the situation of Palestinian
women, which Indonesia co-sponsored. Sadly, despite
the overwhelming support of Member States for all
resolutions on the question of Palestine, no substantial
efforts have been undertaken to implement them.
Indonesia has repeatedly called on the Security Council
to delay no further in ensuring that Israel complies
with international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The Council must also pave the way for the
resumption of a credible peace process aimed at putting
an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The world cannot wait any longer for us to hold
briefings and closed consultations while people are
losing their lives and the two-State solution is fading
away. In that regard, I would like to express Indonesia’s
appreciation for the initiative on the part of the relevant
parties to mobilize the support of the international
community and push the peace process forward.
With regard to the conflict in Syria, Indonesia
once again urges all concerned and interested parties
to work hard to bring the conflict to an end and allow
humanitarian assistance to reach all those in need. It is
absolutely intolerable that the conflict, which has been
ongoing for approximately five years, has dragged on
for so long, with repercussions now being felt around
the world. That fact only underlines the imperative of
an inclusive process involving all Syrians to settle the
conflict.
Indonesia remains hopeful that the round of peace
talks that began in Geneva last week will build the
momentum needed for an inclusive political process.
We commend the work of the United Nations in
facilitating the talks, especially the dedication shown
by the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
encourage all parties to the conflict to respect the goals
of peace and humanity. We urge all Syrians to make
full use of the current diplomatic impetus by swiftly
reaching a political settlement that can serve as a basis
for future peace and stability in Syria.

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

With respect to Yemen and Libya, we welcome the
continued dialogue that could boost efforts to restore
national unity and peace in the region. What is at stake
are the lives of many innocent civilians.
Lastly, Indonesia remains steadfast in its
commitments to ensuring peace and stability in
the Middle East and will do its utmost to attain that
noble objective.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See commends
China’s presidency for bringing the topic of the Middle
East to the attention of the international community
through today’s Security Council open debate.
The Holy See shares the grave concern of the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, that the two-State solution
between Israel and Palestine is in danger of failing,
as peace talks stall and inflammatory rhetoric, acts of
terror and unilateral actions scupper efforts to restore a
process of meaningful dialogue and compromise. In the
face of such a frustrating scenario, Pope Francis pleads
with both the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities
to consider their own peoples’ need for peace and
courageously pursue the path of dialogue, reconciliation
and peace, because there is simply no other way.
During his May 2014 visit to Jordan, Palestine
and Israel, Pope Francis expressed special concern
for the Holy City of Jerusalem, the patrimony of
the world’s monotheistic religions and a city of
universal importance:
“Jerusalem means, of course, ‘city of peace’. This
is what God wills it to be, and such is the desire of
all people of goodwill.”
Yet sadly, Jerusalem remains deeply troubled because
of long-standing conflicts.
The Holy See firmly believes that the two-State
solution provides the best possibility for a peaceful
settlement. Pope Francis reiterated that position at Tel
Aviv Airport, when he pleaded both for a universal
recognition of the right of the State of Israel to exist and
to flourish in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders, and for the creation of a viable
State of Palestine, a sovereign homeland in which the
Palestinians can live in peace, dignity and freedom.

16-1084913/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/04/2016

The two-State solution must become a reality and not
remain merely a dream.

condemn fellow believers who use their religion as a
justification for violence.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the appeal that
Pope Francis made to the Palestinian authorities on
25 May 2014 in Bethlehem:

Finally, the Holy See appeals once again to
the international community to hear the cries of
the beleaguered communities of Christians and
other ethnic and religious minority groups in the
Middle East, which are being discriminated against,
persecuted, slaughtered, set afire or drowned because
they do not share the ideological or religious views of
their persecutors. Their very peaceful enculturation
as minorities into the majority culture has made them
particular targets for the extremist violence that has
forced them to flee their homes and abandon their
properties and homeland, risking everything as they
cross inhospitable deserts and perilous seas in search
of calmer shores and welcoming communities, which,
unfortunately, they do not always find. My delegation
therefore hopes that Pope Francis’s visit two days ago to
the migrants and refugees stranded on the Greek island
of Lesbos has touched many hearts.

“The time has come for everyone to find the
courage to be generous and creative in the service
of the common good, and to find the courage to
forge a peace which rests on the acknowledgment
by all of the right of two States to exist and live
in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders.”
The Holy See hopes that the comprehensive
agreement between the Holy See and the State of
Palestine, which came into full force on 2 January 2016,
will encourage all parties to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict to engage sincerely in a negotiated and peaceful
solution. In the complex reality of the Middle East,
the Holy See hopes that the agreement may serve as
an example of dialogue and cooperation, in particular
for other Arab- and Muslim-majority countries in
the region.
The Holy See reiterates its appeal that special
attention must be given to Lebanon, where refugees
from neighbouring conflicts constitute nearly a quarter
of the population. The Parliament of Lebanon must
act to elect a President. Soon Lebanon will have been
without a President for two years, at a time of regional
instability and the growth of vicious non-State actors.
The international community must assist the leaders
of Lebanon to constitutionally stabilize their own
Government and deal with the immense burden of the
refugee population.
My delegation also calls on the international
community to take collective political action to stem
the spread of the fundamentalism and extremism,
which have sown terror in so many countries in the
region, in North Africa and in many parts of the world.
The internationalization of terror can be countered
only by a collective international response. Ideological
terror cannot be effectively defeated by military action
alone; it must be tackled by also addressing the root
causes upon which international terrorism feeds. The
lie and blasphemy of terrorist groups that claim to kill
and oppress in the name of religion must be openly
denounced in the strongest possible terms. Religious
leaders in particular have a grave responsibility to
14/37

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month, as well
as to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I
would also like to offer our deep condolences to the
Government and the people of Japan and to the families
of the earthquake victims there.
Our region is dealing with many political and
intellectual challenges and a very complex reality.
Words are simply inadequate to express the fear and
suffering that the peoples of the region are enduring,
whether in the occupied Palestinian territory, Syria,
Yemen or other countries. The increasing gravity of the
conflicts is forcing us to ask whether the international
community’s intervention, through the resolutions and
international instruments adopted at the United Nations,
is enough. Have we failed to ensure lasting stability?
Jordan made major efforts during its membership
of the Security Council to try to arrive at realistic
solutions to the conflicts in the Middle East. We have
often voiced our vision in that regard, emphasizing that
the main issue is still the question of Palestine and the
lack of a just and lasting solution to it, which continues
to undermine previous efforts to resolve the problem
of the Middle East. We cannot ignore the inherent link
between a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace in the region. We need a comprehensive approach
to its various aspects and a genuine effort on the part
of the international community to reach a lasting
solution that will prevent violence and extremism from
exploiting this vacuum and expanding the crisis to the
entire region and the rest of the world.
Israel’s daily illegal violations — its demolitions
of homes, forced expulsions and displacements of
residents and attempts to change the status quo, first and
foremost through methodical colonial expansion — are
outrageous. We condemn them and urge the Council to
live up to its responsibility and to take steps immediately
to end the colonization in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
which is a violation of international law. Israel’s actions
on the ground run counter to its declarations and stated
positions and hinder every effort to re-launch the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.
We therefore reaffirm the need for serious efforts
to pursue negotiations on a two-State solution within
defined parameters, including a specific timetable
for arriving at an agreement on an independent
Palestinian State, within the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the relevant
international initiatives and the Arab Peace Initiative.
This should also aim to guarantee the supreme vital
interests of Jordan, which are linked to all the aspects
of a definitive solution. Jerusalem, the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the Al-Haram Al-Sharif have a very particular
significance for His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, owing to the historical custodianship of
Jordan, which is the guarantor of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites and has spared no effort to defend
them against the Israeli authorities’ unilateral and
illegal acts of aggression towards the Holy City.
As it has always done, Jordan will firmly
oppose all who try to violate the holy sites. Under its
custodianship, Jordan will continue to explore every
possibility for taking diplomatic and legal steps to end
Israel’s violations and acts of aggression. We consider
its actions to be null and void, particularly because
they are carried out by an occupying Power that by its
very nature cannot be held accountable for its acts. Any
regional or international initiative to resolve the conflict
will remain mere empty words if we do not demonstrate
the political will and international commitment needed
to move forward. We continue to await a serious display
of commitment and engagement to peace on the part of
Israel, and we demand that Israel end its activities in
the occupied territory. This is not just a demand by the

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

Palestinians; it is an international demand with the goal
of saving a people who are being deprived of their basic
rights to dignity and security.
I turn now to the crisis in Syria, which has caused
unspeakable destruction and displaced millions of
people. We must redouble our efforts to support
the United Nations and to ensure the success of the
current negotiations on a political agreement based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2254 (2015). Jordan reiterates its support
for the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura and the
International Syria Support Group. We hope the
negotiations will enable the parties to achieve a political
transition and assure the establishment of a constitution
and secure governance that can help to restore security
and stability to Syria and enable its refugees to return
and begin a new era in their country’s history.
The numbers and flows of refugees from Syria
to its neighbours and to Europe continue to increase
and are living proof of the enormous humanitarian
tragedy in Syria, which threatens to blow up the
entire region. Jordan will continue to take the high
moral and humanitarian ground and to fulfil its duty
to Syria’s refugees. The heavy burden we have taken
on is exhausting our limited resources. It is therefore
essential that the international community abide by its
commitments, live up to its responsibilities and provide
us with assistance in accordance with its pledges at the
London conference in February, so as to enable Jordan
and the other countries hosting refugees to cope with
their growing burden. Jordan proposed a comprehensive
new approach at the conference for dealing with the
humanitarian crisis of the Syrian refugees, focused
on finding durable solutions based on international
development. We call on the international community
to support our appeal for the period from 2016 to 2018.
While it is essential to fight terrorist groups, it is
also crucial that we deal with the underlying causes of
their activity. We have become victims and hostages to
their activities in the region, which are preventing our
countries from achieving their aspirations as they find
themselves still living under the threat of terrorism. We
must unite the international efforts to eradicate such
groups, which exploit religion, and point out that their
Takfiri views have nothing to do with the Muslim faith;
on the contrary, they are targeting the Muslim faith.
The activities of such terrorists not only hurt Islam,
they represent an attack on all monotheistic religions

16-1084915/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the humanist principles that hold human life sacred
and privilege mind and logic.
It is therefore essential that international efforts be
concerted to confront such groups, in particular Da’esh.
We need to strengthen young people’s involvement
in society, so that they can resist the influence of
extremist thought and terrorism. That is what we have
done through the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015),
with regard to youth, peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate.
We also join others in thanking the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing.
Unfortunately, the reports that we receive every
month confirm that the situation in Palestine is
deteriorating daily, while the international community,
including the Security Council, remains unwilling or
unable to deal with the matter.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and
we wish to make the following additional comments.
Let me start by reiterating South Africa’s
condemnation of all forms of violence, regardless of
who the perpetrators are, and we again urge all parties
to engage in dialogue. Unfortunately, the situation on
the ground in Palestine and Israel today has set back
earlier gains, and should the parties agree to re-start
the negotiations, they will have to focus again on basic
elements of a peace aimed at creating an enabling
environment for negotiations. We have consistently
warned that the situation on the ground will change to
such a degree that the future of a two-State solution
will become more and more elusive. Unfortunately, we
are perilously close to that scenario becoming a reality.
Notwithstanding the grim picture, a small glimmer
of hope remains. We noted that Israel and Jordan were
able to reach an agreement on monitoring Israeli activity
around the Temple Mount, or Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That
agreement is timely, and we hope that it will de-escalate
tensions and prevent violence, especially with Passover
approaching. It is essential that the importance of those
holy sites to a variety of major religious groups be
respected equally by all parties. South Africa rejects
the use of holy sites to incite violence. Because there is
16/37

18/04/2016

no progress on negotiations, including on the status of
Jerusalem and its holy sites, it is imperative to maintain
the so-called post-1967 status quo. Although far from
ideal, we believe that those measures would contribute
to limiting provocations and reducing violence.
The Council’s failure is clearly demonstrated by
the continued expansion of the Israeli settlements,
which are illegal under international law. Israel’s
appropriation of land continues unabated. On
15 March, Israel announced the appropriation of 579
acres of land in the occupied West Bank near Jericho,
the largest seizure of West Bank land in recent years.
The building of those settlements is not only contrary
to international law, but it represents an obstacle to a
two-State solution and peace. We sincerely hope that
all Council members will uphold their responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and put an
end to the illegal appropriation of land. South Africa
stands ready to work with all parties and the broader
international community, including members of the
Security Council, to advocate for the immediate
cessation of settlement activities by Israel in the West
Bank and Jerusalem.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the statement made by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
a source of constant concern for the international
community, which has been reflected in the numerous
previous debates organized by the Security Council.
Despite the periodic open debates held by the Council
on the issue, which have demonstrated overwhelming
support for the Palestinian cause, the Council has not
been able to adopt a single resolution demanding from
Israel to put an end to its aggressive policies, settlement
activities, war crimes and the collective punishment
committed against the Palestinian people, which are
in clear and deliberate violation of international law
and international humanitarian law. Those actions
constitute a threat to regional and international peace
and security by depriving the Palestinian people of its
fundamental human rights.
The inaction of the Council with regard to such
acts is alarming. It is unacceptable that the Security
Council continues to be held hostage to the power
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

emanating from the use or the threat of the use of the
veto to prevent the Council from fulfilling its mandate
and protecting the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. It is morally unacceptable that the Security
Council continues to shirk from its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations with regard to
maintaining international peace and security within the
context of this conflict.
The international community calls on the Council
to fulfil its responsibility and spare no effort in making
the necessary decisions to end the occupation, the
various forms of aggression, the illegal settlements,
the flagrant, massive and systematic violations of
human rights, State terrorism, extrajudicial executions,
economic strangulation and collective punishment,
for which Israel is responsible. Israel must also end its
outright rejection of and disrespect for the provisions of
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly. Those
actions threaten the viability of a Palestinian State
and the possibility to resolve the conflict in a fair and
balanced manner.
The only possible solution to the Palestinian
question is the peaceful coexistence of two States. An
independent, sovereign and viable Palestine, existing
within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, deserves global respect and solidarity.
Cuba is convinced that a just and lasting solution to
the demands of the Palestinian people to exercise
their rights is fundamental to resolving the conflicts
and easing the tensions in the Middle East. Cuba
reaffirms its full support for the admission of Palestine
as a full Member of the Organization and calls on the
Security Council to decide on and accept without delay
Palestine’s application from 2011 to be recognized as a
State Member of the United Nations, as clearly desired
by the vast majority of States in the Organization. The
historical debt to the Palestinian people is enormous and
must be repaid. The Council has the responsibility to
take concrete action to end such a protracted injustice.
With regard to the situation in Syria, Cuba reiterates
that it will be possible to achieve peace in that country
only by respecting the right of the Syrian people to
choose their own destiny. A political solution through
dialogue and negotiation is the only viable solution
to the conflict in that country. Cuba welcomes the
cessation of hostilities and the new channels that are
opening, aimed at providing a peaceful and negotiated
solution to the conflict. We support the Syrian people in
their aspirations to live in peace and choose their own

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

destiny without outside interference. Those who have
fuelled the conflict from the outside, with the stated
goal of imposing regime change, are responsible for the
thousands of civilian victims of the conflict.
We regret the loss of innocent lives as a result of the
situation there and condemn all acts of violence taking
place in that country against the civilian population.
Promoting an interventionist agenda must not be
allowed under the pretext of combating terrorism. We
demand the cessation of the foreign presence in Syria,
as it does not have the approval of its Government and
is not working in coordination with its authorities.
The Security Council is a crucial organ for
achieving the aims entrusted to the United Nations of
safeguarding peace and achieving the well-being and
the development all peoples deserve, including those of
the Middle East. In respecting the mandate established
by the Charter of the United Nations and in fulfilling
the responsibilities pursuant to that mandate, the
Council is called upon to promote a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the conflicts and disputes in the
Middle East, which would make it possible to preserve
the sovereignty, security and territorial integrity of all
States in the region, which would in turn contribute in a
decisive way to creating the conditions for the progress
and well-being of all the peoples of the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
I would like to express my sincere congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Please allow me also to express our appreciation
for convening this timely debate to address the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his important
briefing on the current situation.
We meet again as the occupied Palestinian territory,
in particularly the occupied city of Jerusalem, is
enduring an unprecedented escalation of Israeli military
aggression and terrorist attacks by Israeli settlers
against the defenceless Palestinian people and their
holy places, without political, legal or moral deterrents.
The Security Council is meeting at a time when Israel
is continuing its gross, systematic crimes and breaches

16-1084917/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of international law, many tantamount to war crimes.
Israeli arrogance and disrespect for agreements with
the Palestinian side, as well as the total impunity it
enjoys for its violations and crimes, have brought the
situation to a dangerous juncture. Yet, regrettably, the
Council remains silent, disregarding its duty for the
maintenance of international peace and security and its
commitment to protect civilians in armed conflict.
Since the previous debate, in January (see
S/PV.7610), Israel, the occupying Power, has continued
killing and injuring Palestinian civilians, especially
youths. Since the current wave of unrest began, in
October 2015, Israel’s shoot-to-kill policy has claimed
the lives of more than 204 Palestinian civilians, 48 of
whom were children. Likewise, the Israeli military
aggression and settler terrorism have left 17,000
Palestinians injured. Israel has also continued detaining,
imprisoning, abusing and torturing thousands of
Palestinians in its detention centres; destroying homes
and infrastructure; and forcibly displacing Palestinians.
In addition, Israel has used all other forms of ongoing
collective punishment of Palestinian civilians, the most
egregious of which is its inhumane, illegal blockade
on the Gaza Strip, which amount to systematic human
rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law.
At the same time, Israel, the occupying Power, has
persisted with its unlawful colonization of Palestinian
land, including through the construction and expansion
of settlements and the separation wall, especially in and
around occupied East Jerusalem. All of those violations
blatantly aim at illegally, forcibly and deliberately
altering the character, status and demography of the
occupied Palestinian territory, thereby destroying the
viability of the two-State solution, based on the pre1967 borders. In that regard, the OIC reiterates that
all such acts by Israel, including in particular against
the Christian and Islamic holy sites in occupied East
Jerusalem, constitute a flagrant violation of international
law and resolutions of international legitimacy. They
fuel increased extremism, violence and racism, as well
as religious conflict, all of which demand the urgent
attention and action of the Security Council.
It is incomprehensible that Israel continues to
perpetrate violations and crimes without a response
or punishment. We once again call on the Council to
assume its responsibility for providing the Palestinian
people with international protection. The Council and
the Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
18/37

18/04/2016

Fourth Geneva Convention have clear responsibilities in
ensuring the protection and security of the Palestinian
people. It must be stressed that the right to security is
not exclusive to Israel. Security is a right that should be
provided to, and enjoyed by, all nations. The victims of
this nearly five-decades-long illegal, foreign occupation
should not be the exception.
At the same time, we should stress that an exit from
the current crisis and the revival of peace prospects
will not be possible without compelling Israel, the
occupying Power, to end its illegal construction and
expansion of its colonial settlements and the wall in
occupied Palestine, including East Jerusalem. That is
an urgent priority in line with the Security Council’s
own resolutions, and imperative for saving the twoState solution from demise.
I should note that the OIC, at its Extraordinary
Summit held in Jakarta last month, called on the
Council to uphold its Charter duties, as well as its legal
and moral obligations to ensure accountability for the
illegal actions perpetrated by the occupying Power, and
to act to protect the Palestinian civilian population and
end the pervasive, systematic and gross violations of
their human rights. The OIC reiterates its call for a draft
resolution that sets a specific timetable and practical
steps to end Israeli occupation in all manifestations,
including the illegal settlement regime, on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, I wish to avail myself of this
opportunity to reaffirm once more the OIC support
for, and solidarity with, the Palestinian people in their
endeavours to regain their inalienable rights, including
their right to self-determination and independence in
their own State on the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to
achieve a just solution to the question of Palestinian
refugees, pursuant to the relevant United Nations
resolutions — a solution that is long overdue and that
remains a legal and moral responsibility for the Council
to fulfil.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Wilfreid I. Emvula,
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Emvula: As we meet again for a periodic
debate on the Palestinian question, and while there are
rays of hope for the victims of other conflicts in the
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

region, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict shows no such
sign. Indeed, were it not for the date stamp on the news
reports, they would read like those from months and
years ago.

efforts, most notably by the Government of France and
the Middle East Quartet, to explore ways to overcome
the obstacles that stalled the bilateral negotiations, and
continues to offer its full support to those endeavours.

Data published by the Israel Central Bureau of
Statistics reveal that, in 2015, settlement construction
increased vis-à-vis the preceding year. In early 2016,
the demolition of Palestinian homes, the confiscation
of Palestinian land and its being redesignated as socalled Israeli State land, as well as the displacement
of Palestinians, have already exceeded those of all
of 2015. So have the mass arrests of Palestinians and
their long-term incarceration without a charge or trial,
under the label of administrative detention, a practice
that is illegal under international law. Those unilateral
measures, taken at the expense of Palestinian rights and
freedoms, mark a new and fairly disturbing phase in
terms of the clash between international humanitarian
law and the Israeli occupation of the West Bank.

Without the combined efforts of the international
community and the parties on the ground, the current
situation, bleak as it already appears, will only get
worse. In order to stop and reverse the spiral of
violence, the Palestinian people have to regain the hope
for a better future and for a free and sovereign State of
their own that offers prospects for a dignified future,
so that they and their children can feel that theirs is
a movement forward, not a slide backwards into the
abyss. We also hope that Palestinian reconciliation
efforts will succeed.

Furthermore, despite repeated assertions that the
situation could not remain the same following the 2014
war, Gaza is still under Israeli blockade and the pace
of reconstruction remains inadequate for the needs of
the Strip, while disbursement by donors of the funds
pledged for the Strip’s reconstruction continues to be
painfully slow. Unfortunately, the few voices in Israel
objecting to these policies and calling for constructive
negotiations with the goal of reaching a just peace
are facing increasing measures to silence them
completely, for example through proposed legislation
on non-governmental groups and on the suspension
of members from the Israeli Parliament, which targets
Arab members of the Knesset.
In 2015, the Security Council held 13 meetings to
consider the Palestinian question, but failed to initiate
any action. It is hoped that the Council will act and
support the draft resolution currently being circulated
by the Arab Group reiterating the Council’s demand that
Israel immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
non-permanent members of the Council, including the
five members that also serve on the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, have actively engaged the Council on this
issue, most recently through exploring options for a
mechanism to protect the civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory, on the basis of existing
Council resolutions. We hope that such efforts will
soon bear fruit. The Committee welcomes the recent

For all of this to happen, the generic vilification of
Palestinians, which at the moment is all too common
in Israel, has to end. Such demagoguery leads to a
dehumanization of Palestinians in the eyes of the Israeli
public and, ultimately, to such incidents as the apparent
extrajudicial execution of an injured and incapacitated
Palestinian in Hebron by an Israeli soldier just a few
weeks ago. The Committee welcomes the subsequent
statements by Israeli officials that such actions are
unlawful and illegitimate and that their perpetrators
will be prosecuted, and hopes that actions will follow
those words. The Committee also welcomes the clear
and repeated rejection of violence by the Government of
the State of Palestine, most recently again by President
Abbas, including on Israeli television just over two
weeks ago. I would like to reiterate here in the Council
that the Committee condemns all forms of terrorism
and regrets all losses of civilian life.
More needs to be done. In order for a peace to be
agreed upon and then sustained, a modicum of trust
has to be re-established. The Committee will do its
utmost to contribute to this endeavour, for instance by
providing a forum for exchanges between Palestinians
and Israelis at its international meetings and continuing
to encourage dialogue and synergies between civilsociety organizations on both sides. One such example
was a panel discussion on “Women’s role in the search
for Israeli-Palestinian peace”, organized by the Working
Group of the Committee during the sixtieth meeting of
the Commission on the Status of Women.
Additionally, in March the Committee organized
a round table on the legal aspects of the question of
Palestine in Amman to enhance the capacity of the State

16-1084919/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/04/2016

of Palestine to fulfil its obligations in the light of its
recent accession to a host of international treaties and
conventions. In two weeks, the Committee will hold the
International Conference on the Question of Jerusalem
in Dakar, organized jointly with the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. In line with the mandate of the
Committee, in the coming months a United Nations
seminar on assistance to the Palestinian people will be
held in Stockholm, focusing on how Palestine can work
towards the Sustainable Development Goals under
the occupation, and the United Nations International
Meeting in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace, to
be held in Paris, will examine how the international
community can reinvigorate the peace process. The
Committee welcomes active participation by all Member
States and civil society organizations in these events.

this month and for having convened this extremely
important debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

I am fully conscious of the fact that warnings of
impending doom have been given so often and for
so long in the case of Israel and Palestine that many
have become inured to them. The situation in the
region should serve as a stark reminder of how quickly
a catastrophe can break out. It is because the price
of failure is too terrifying to contemplate that the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People will continue its strong efforts
towards a peaceful and just solution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which can be achieved only by
ending the occupation, through the two-State solution
on the basis of pre-1967 borders and the just resolution
of all final-status issues.

Sixty-eight years have elapsed and we continue
to denounce Israel’s occupation and its expansionist
policies, which undermine all efforts to achieve peace,
while the Government of Israel continues to reject
the establishment of an independent, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State. Every time we address
the Security Council on this topic, we express our
opposition to the occupation, the suffering of the
Palestinian people and its victims. However, the pleas of
the Palestinian people and the voice of the international
community continue to be neither heard nor heeded.
And we see 5.5 million Palestinian refugees ignored in
this global refugee crisis. They are ignored by those
who continue to promote Israel’s impunity and to
obstruct a solution with regard to the ongoing use of the
veto against the creation and recognition of a Palestine
State as a full member of the community of nations.

Our efforts do not support the rights of one group at
the expense of the other. Finding and sustaining a just
peace is the only way in which Palestinian and Israeli
societies can endure and prosper. Failure to achieve a
peaceful solution would ultimately destroy both.
The Committee will continue to advocate and
work towards the goal, enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, that the Palestinian people, like all
other peoples of the world, realize their right to selfdetermination. For this we will cooperate with our
partners and all those who share our common values,
those of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua)
(spoke in Spanish): Nicaragua wishes to reiterate its
congratulations to the People’s Republic of China for
the outstanding work in the presidency of the Council
20/37

First and foremost, we would like to express
our feelings of solidarity with the peoples and the
Governments of Ecuador and Japan in the wake of the
earthquakes that occurred, as well as to the victims and
their families.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and with the statement
delivered by the representative of Namibia on behalf
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.

On its seventieth anniversary, the United Nations
adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) as an effort to eradicate
poverty and misery and create decent conditions
for the common welfare of all peoples. But we must
ask ourselves: Will it be possible for the Palestinian
people to exercise that right to development? And,
furthermore, will they be able to achieve the agreed
Sustainable Development Goals if the political space
for the Palestinian State is occupied by Israel?
The answer is obvious. The Palestinian economy
is an economy of occupation, in particular in the Gaza
Strip, which applies to all levels and in all spheres of
the Palestinian people’s lives — from the occupation
of their lands, the use of their natural resources, the
denial of their right to freedom of movement and the
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

return of refugees, the confinement of its citizens and
the daily destruction of their infrastructure. With each
passing day it fragments the little amount of territory
that they have left and destroys with it any possibility
of two States.
Once again, we condemn and reiterate that this
vicious circle of agression-reconstruction-aggression
must stop. Israel continues to colonize the occupied
Palestinian territories, in particular East Jerusalem, in
full view of an acquiescent international community.
Urged on by the alarming increase and worsening of
Israeli abuses of Palestinians, once again we again call
on the Security Council to demand that Israel fully halt
its occupation of Palestine, lift the criminal blockade of
Gaza and release all Palestinian prisoners, to whom we
reiterate our full solidarity.
Moreover, Nicaragua stands in solidarity with the
Palestinian cause and demands the immediate creation
of a Palestinian State based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as the capital, thereby laying the
foundation for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, with the two States — Palestine and Israel — living
side by side in peace.
We cannot fail to note that the policies of
interference, intervention and change of Governments
undertaken by the NATO countries in the Middle
East and North Africa have benefited Israel. They
have diverted attention away from the needs of the
Palestinian people and their struggle for a State, and at
the same time it allows Israel to pursue more aggressive
practices and policies against the region.
Peace in the Middle East does not just involve
a solution for the Palestinian question, but must
necessarily include Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon
and all the occupied Arab territories — from the Syrian
Golan Heights to the other occupied Arab territories.
It is also imperative to end foreign interference and
intervention in the region in order to finally bring
about a region of peace and security for the Arab and
Israeli peoples.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Nothing would do more
to pave the way for broader regional stabilization than
finding a political settlement to the conflict in Syria.
Norway fully supports the Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura’s tireless efforts to that end. All sides bear a

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

heavy responsibility to turn the talks into a credible
negotiating process that can lead to a genuine political
transition. That means that the parties must start
tackling the difficult questions set out in resolution
2254 (2015). And that includes the establishment of
credible, inclusive and non-sectarian governance, an
inclusive transitional governing body and a process
for drafting a new constitution. The parties also bear
a heavy responsibility not to undermine the political
process through detrimental actions on the ground.
The Syrian population has already endured the
intolerable. The scale of destruction, death and hunger
has been immense. Three out of four Syrians are now
living in poverty. More than 2 million children are
out of school. We urge the parties to ensure that the
cessation of hostilities agreement is respected and that
humanitarian access is improved, including for medical
supplies. That is also crucial for the political process.
In February, donor countries pledged approximately
$12 billion in support of Syria and the region for 20162020. The pledge for 2016 alone was $6 billion. That
was an unprecedented pledge, but disbursements are
lagging far behind schedule. It is time to honour the
pledges that have been made.
Resolving the conflict between Israelis and the
Palestinians remains vital for securing regional stability
and prosperity and for international peace and security.
We must seek to counter those who are eroding the
vision of the two-State solution, either deliberately
or by default. The status quo will not benefit anyone;
maintaining it will only cause more instability. For
every day the status quo continues, an opportunity for
peace is missed. The occupation is deeply damaging to
Israelis and Palestinians alike. The two-State solution
is the only credible way towards viable and long-term
peace. The parties themselves need to make greater
strides to resolve the conflict. The current tensions call
for immediate and coordinated steps by all sides. All
violence must stop.
Israel must stop building settlements and stop
house demolitions. The Palestinians must strengthen
their institutions and implement essential reforms.
The necessary political compromises must be found to
improve the situation in Gaza. The responsibility for
solving the conflict lies with the parties. At the same
time, the international community needs to make
greater efforts to ensure a just and agreed solution
based on the two-State solution. It is also in our

16-1084921/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

interest to do so. We cannot let this conflict continue
to aggravate the situation in a region that is already in
turmoil. The Security Council must therefore live up to
its responsibility.
Tomorrow in Brussels, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway will convene a meeting of the donor
coordination group, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee.
The Commmittee’s goal is to build institutions for
statehood and make the Palestinian economy as
sustainable as possible, until the conflict is resolved.
The aim of the meeting is to develop a plan for
balancing the Palestinian budget. The plan will address
matters such as plugging fiscal leakages, making the
revenue-sharing arrangements between Israel and
Palestine more effective and developing a sustainable
Palestinian economy through growth and private sector
investments. If the donors are to continue to develop
a Palestinian State, there must be a credible political
horizon for resolving the conflict. A sustainable
economy is essential for a future independent
Palestinian State, but the ultimate goal must be to
resolve the conflict.
As we all know, it is difficult to make peace. The
Security Council must show leadership and stake out a
path that leads to the resumption of the peace process.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this year’s second quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
At the outset, I would like to extend the Republic of
Korea’s heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families
of the victims of the earthquakes in Ecuador and
Japan. The Republic of Korea is actively participating
in international efforts aimed at rapid recovery in the
affected areas.
The Republic of Korea expresses serious concern
about the continuing violence between Israel and
Palestine at the cost of many lives and the viability
of the two-State solution. Genuine and lasting peace
can never be imposed by one party’s unilateral and
coercive measures; rather, it can be achieved only
through direct negotiations between the parties,
based on mutual recognition and coexistence. The
Republic of Korea joins the international call for the
parties to end the violence and incitement, and to take
22/37

18/04/2016

confidence-building measures with a view to resuming
negotiations and creating a viable framework for the
two-State solution.
In particular, we take note of the recent report of
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, according to which
the demolition of Palestinian homes and livelihood
structures more than doubled in the period of October
2015 to March 2016, in comparison with the previous
six months, and that the number of demolitions by
mid-April of this year had already exceeded the total
for 2015. Confidence-building measures, including
ending settlement expansion in the occupied territory,
are urgently required to create an environment that
is more conducive to dialogue for sustainable peace
between the parties.
We also express concern about the lack of unity
among the Palestinian parties. Unity and consensus
among the Palestinian people is a prerequisite to achieve
peace and an independent, sovereign and democratic
State. At the same time, the Republic of Korea calls
for the Middle East Quartet to step up its mediation
efforts and looks forward to seeing produce practical
recommendations to advance the two-State solution.
With regard to Syria, the Republic of Korea
welcomes signs of progress on the ground, including the
stabilization of the security situation since the cessation
of hostilities on 27 February, increased humanitarian
access to some areas and the new round of intra-Syrian
talks from 13 April. However, great concerns remain
about the non-compliance by all parties with the agreed
cessation of hostilities and the serious impediments
to access to international humanitarian assistance
for millions of Syrians in dire need, including the
4.6 million people in the besieged or hard-to-reach areas.
Compliance with the agreed cessation of hostilities by
all parties and guaranteed unhindered humanitarian
access throughout the country are not only critical to
creating conditions that promote the peace process,
but that also hint at the results of such a process. The
Republic of Korea once again urges all parties to strictly
comply with the cessation of hostilities and urges the
Syrian Government to guarantee full, sustained, and
unimpeded humanitarian access. We support the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, to reach consensus among
the parties and to forge a road map for a viable political
transition in Syria.
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turning to Yemen, the Republic of Korea expresses
regret that the third round of peace talks — which
were supposed to begin today in Kuwait — has been
postponed. We urge all parties to strictly abide by the
agreement on the cessation of hostilities and resume
peace talks without further delay. The Republic of
Korea reiterates its strong support for the critical role of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, in mediating between the parties
in order to establish peace in Yemen.
With regard to Libya, the Republic of Korea
welcomes the arrival of the Presidency Council in
Tripoli on 30 March as a significant step towards the
establishment of the Government of National Accord,
in accordance with the Libyan political agreement and
resolution 2259 (2015). Considering the grave threat
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its
attempts to further expand its influence into the central
part of the country, establishing the Government of
National Accord and normalizing its functions are
more urgent than ever. The Republic of Korea urges
all parties to put national security ahead of their own
interests and to cooperate with the Presidency Council
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Martin Kobler, in this process. The
Republic of Korea will join in international efforts for
the stabilization and reconstruction of Libya.
The situation in the Middle East has long been
one of the main items on the agenda of the Security
Council. However, the peace process between Israel
and Palestine has been stagnant for too long and the
multifaceted crises in Syria, Yemen and other countries
in the region have resulted in enormous human
suffering in the region and beyond. The status quo is
not sustainable. We still have the political momentum
necessary to resolve these overdue conflicts and crises.
The Republic of Korea once again urges all the parties
to the conflicts to take the necessary measures to
resolve them and bring about peace, and reiterates its
commitment to play a constructive role to that end.

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

Conflicts in Syria and Yemen, an unprecedented
refugee crisis and a surge in violent extremism have
contributed to the growing instability across the
Middle East region. In that context, the Palestinian
question takes on added importance. Especially at this
time of unprecedented unrest in the Middle East, when
our focus is on Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da’esh, and the exigent refugee crisis in Syria, the
world must not forget the dire humanitarian situation of
the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially Gaza, where conditions are indefensible. We
stress the urgent need for leadership in order to end the
marginalization and oppression of Palestinians in their
own land.
Sri Lanka supports the work of United Nations
agencies in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian.
Affairs, which keep the majority of the people in Gaza
supplied with the bare necessities, including education.
We reiterate the need for continued funding by the donor
community to enable UNRWA to function effectively.
As Chair of the United Nations Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories, Sri Lanka is particularly
concerned about the escalating violence and the number
of civilian casualties, which include infants.
The settlement activities in the occupied territories
violate international humanitarian law, including
the Geneva Conventions, and exacerbate incidents
of violence in the region. The continuing practice
of administrative detentions is another factor that
exacerbates the situation in the occupied territories.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.

Movement restrictions in and out of Gaza continue
to be a major problem for the economy and welfare of
the people of Palestine. Restrictions on imports and
exports are stifling economic growth. The continuing
exploitation of natural resources in the occupied
territories in violation of international humanitarian
law has a negative impact on the rights of the Palestinian
people.

Mr. Sabarullah Khan (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make the
following statement in my national capacity.

My delegation calls for a just and lasting solution
to the question of Palestine and an end to the suffering
of the Palestinian people. The ongoing settlement
activities are illegal under international law, and the
blockade of the Gaza Strip is yet another obstacle to

16-1084923/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace. Furthermore, settlers in the occupied Syrian
Golan enjoy disproportionate benefits in terms of water
and agricultural resources. Agricultural expansion and
the exploitation of natural and agricultural resources in
the area continues unabated.
Both parties to the conflict must create the
environment needed to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent necessity for mutual confidence-building
measures in support of efforts to resume dialogue
and substantive negotiations. Israel must protect
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
territories and desist from actions that are contrary to
the established rules of international law and practice.
We recognize the security needs of Israel. The
indiscriminate attacks against Israeli civilians will lead
to a counterproductive cycle of violence. We urge both
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
exercise the utmost restraint for the sake of the safety
of civilians and for the greater goal of peace.
It is important to remain engaged in seeking a just
and durable solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions on the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment of a
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.
We are encouraged that, despite decades of
disappointment, the people of Palestine have resolutely
sustained their spirit and strength of purpose in order
to obtain their legitimate rights, having prevailed over
the considerable challenges facing them. We hope that
the Palestinian people will work together to preserve
national unity. That is imperative for the creation of a
fully sovereign, independent Palestine.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like
to congratulate you on your friendly country on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.
Yesterday, the Israeli occupation Government held
a meeting in the occupied Syrian Golan, which was a
grave and very provocative step, one that reflects the
fact that Israel is operating outside international law
and is flouting the international community and the
resolutions of the United Nations, namely and notably,
resolution 497 (1981), which considers Israel’s decision
24/37

18/04/2016

to impose its laws, authority and administration on
the occupied Syrian Golan to be null and void and
counter to international law. As the Syrian Arab
Republic condemns in the strongest terms possible
this aggressive behaviour which threatens to further
inflame the region, we also call upon the United Nations
and the Security Council to immediately intervene and
condemn the holding of that meeting so as to ensure
that such violations do not recur.
We were most displeased that the briefing of the
Secretary-General this morning did not include a clear
condemnation of that step taken by Israel, although
nobody doubts that it is illegal and counter to the
Charter of the United Nations and United Nations
resolutions on the occupied Syrian Golan. We expect
the Secretariat to respect the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. We expect the Secretariat to
clearly and openly condemn such steps. Failing to do
so merely sends an ambiguous message to Israel. Either
the United Nations condemns or it supports what Israel
is doing in the occupied Syrian Golan.
Deluded is he who believes that the crisis
obtaining in my country, Syria, will distract us from an
inalienable right to recover the occupied Syrian Golan
completely — that is, to the pre-1967 border. We stress
again that such a right is open to neither negotiation
nor bargaining. It has no statute of limitations, and any
illegal Israeli practices will not change that right one
iota. Proof of this fact is the position of our people in
the occupied Syrian Golan, who stressed yesterday that
the visit by Netanyahu and his occupation Government
to the Golan would in no way change their minds and
that, just as other colonizers have been ejected from
Syria in the past, the Golan will be cleansed of the
Israeli occupation sooner or later.
We stress that Israel will be legally pursued and
brought to account for all the violations perpetrated in
the occupied Syrian Golan, whether it be settlements,
racist policies, the pillaging of the Golan’s natural
resources, including oil and water, support for terrorist
groups in the separation zone, or the arbitrary detention
of Syrians under occupation, especially the prisoners
Siddqui Al-Maqt, Bashira Mahmoud, Amal Abu Saleh
and Iyad Al-Jawhry, in addition to all other violations of
international law, the Geneva Conventions and United
Nations resolutions.
The United Nations and its States Members bear
a historic, legal and moral obligation to end Israeli
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

occupation of Arab lands and establish an independent
Palestinian State with full sovereignty and with Al-Quds
as its capital, and to see to the return of Palestinian
refugees to their homes, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), of 11 December 1948.
However, although many decades have gone by with
all the documented accompanying Israeli violations of
international law and human rights law, the Security
Council has failed to live up to his responsibilities.
We have witnessed no serious, genuine moves in that
regard. The recent history is known to all, namely, the
blind support for Israel by some influential members of
the Security Council, which makes Israel believe that it
stands above the law, that it will not be held to account.
As a result, Israel insists on imposing occupation as a
fait accompli, and has persisted in its settler colonialist
and racist policies.
We have noted a great increase in settler activity.
The size of the area where Israeli settlements have been
implanted in the past two decades has increased by more
than 182 per cent. The number of settlers has increased
by 189 per cent in the same period. According to the
latest reports, there are projects to build settler units in
the occupied West Bank. In the first four months of this
year, the number is three times greater than the number
that was recorded in the same period last year.
The situation is no less grave in the occupied
Syrian Golan. Israel continues to act there as well in an
attempt to entrench its settler policies and its occupation
of the Golan through expanding and building new
settlements, providing financial incentives to bring
in settlers through such projects as “Come to the
Golan” or the so-called Farms Project, and, recently,
through a plan designed to set up 18 new communities
in the occupied Syria Golan. The President of the socalled Golan Regional Council declared that it is now
preparing to absorb 1,500 new Jewish families in the
Golan settlements.
The settlements do not just constitute a war crime,
they are also part of a systematic Israeli policy to impose
a fait accompli that will kill any chance of achieving
peace in the region, entrench the occupation and
destroy any hope of creating a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State. Ironically, while some members of
the Council say that the settlements are illegal and must
end, not one step has been taken to stop the escalation
of the settlement campaigns and no serious pressure
has been brought to bear on Israel.

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

Lastly, if we want to retain whatever credibility
remains at the United Nations, prevent all chances of war
and improve the opportunities for peace in our region,
the Organization must stop dealing with the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands in such a routine manner,
with no serious effort to reach real solutions on the
ground. The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must take measures aimed at ensuring full
implementation of the relevant international resolutions
on Israel’s occupation of Arab land, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), and
must compel Israel to withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967.
We note that every time Israel escalates its
aggression against the Palestinian people or in the
occupied Syrian Golan, some delegations escalate the
misleading language of their statements about Syria, all
in an attempt to distract attention from Israel’s crimes
and reduce international pressure on it. To avoid falling
into that cheap trap, I will not use this statement on
the situation in the occupied Arab territories to respond
to the empty claims that some delegations have made
about Syria. We have many ways to refute such claims
by countries that support, harbour and arm terrorists,
help to spread extremism and destruction in Syria and
have sought actively to block any efforts to reach a
peaceful settlement of the crisis.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): It is an honour to speak
before the Security Council today on an issue that is of
profound importance not only to the Maldives but also
to efforts to achieve international peace and security.
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of the
Council for convening today’s quarterly open debate on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his dedicated efforts to find a solution to the discordant
situation in the Middle East. With the increase in terror
and conflict in the region, peace may seem to some
a distant if not impossible prospect, but we should
envision its achievement as a journey of a thousand
miles that must be taken one step at a time.
Let us look at Palestine, a nation embroiled in
conflict for decades. As of now, hope is dim for its
people. We reiterate our call for a two-State solution,
deemed to be the one and only viable way to achieve
enduring peace in the region. The Maldives once again

16-1084925/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

calls for full realization of the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination, their right to establish their
own State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
As the death toll from the conflict in Syria now
approaches 500,000 lives, we have witnessed immense
suffering among the people on both sides of the conflict.
The sheer extent of the loss of human life — the lives of
men, women and children — must compel us all to work
relentlessly to explore every option for a sustainable
solution to peace in Syria. We must seek a political
solution for ending the bloodshed that is in line with the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. We would
like to underscore the importance of achieving an
inclusive political solution in Syria based on the Geneva
talks. As such, we urge the United Nations membership
to actively contribute to proposing solutions in the hope
of finding an avenue to peace.
The situation in Yemen continues to be very
worrying, since it also contributes to regional instability.
As more ill-fated civilians are caught up in the conflict,
we see displaced people fleeing the country for their
lives. We must strive to work for peace in Yemen, and
in the meantime we must ensure that humanitarian aid
reaches all who so desperately need it. The Maldives
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and believes that it should not be associated with
any specific religion, race, culture or society. Islam
promotes peace and the protection and preservation of
life and unity. It also condemns violence. The Maldives
does not condone hiding behind religion as a pretext
for inflicting terror; it is not a means to a political end.

18/04/2016

Since the last open debate in January (see S/PV.7610),
hopes for a viable solution to the Palestinian question
have continued to fade and the situation on the ground
has deteriorated further. We are very concerned about
the latest developments. While our immediate priority
should be a rapid de-escalation, at the same time we
should all be very cognizant of the fundamental cause
of the problem, which is the illegal occupation by Israel
of East Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories.
Israel’s continuing occupation and practices violating
international law hinder efforts to achieve a permanent
solution. The expansion of illegal settlements poses a
major obstacle to peace. Israel’s denial of Palestinians’
right to use natural resources, its perpetration of
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and the excessive
use of force, its suppression of the right to freedom of
association and assembly, its confiscations of land and
efforts to undermine the Islamic status and sanctity of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif fuel anger among Palestinians,
who have been collectively punished for decades.
The humanitarian disaster in Gaza, aggravated by the
continued imposition of restrictions, further deepens
the suffering of the 1.8 million people living in Gaza.
Israel should respond to our repeated calls and lift the
inhumane blockade.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

The current situation is a sombre foreshadowing of
what will happen if the prospects for a two-State solution
vanish. We all agree that the status quo is unacceptable
and unsustainable. In that regard, the thirteenth session
of the Islamic Summit Conference, which Turkey hosted
in Istanbul on 14 and 15 April, adopted a resolution
on Palestine. Furthermore, the Security Council must
live up to its primary responsibility for international
peace and security, going beyond expressions of
condemnation to outline credible and concrete steps
for bringing peace and protection to the Palestinians.
On the Palestinian side, the need for reconciliation is
more relevant than ever. The consistent support and
encouragement of the international community is
vital in that regard. The establishment of a sovereign
and independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, continues
to be the only viable solution. Turkey’s commitment
to supporting the Palestinian people to that end will
never cease.

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): The Middle East is witnessing
unprecedented challenges. The Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, with its 70 years of history, is a microcosm of
what is happening in the region as a whole today.

What has happened in Syria is by any definition a
humanitarian catastrophe, and as such, a colossal stain
on our collective human conscience. No modern conflict
has been so devoid of respect for international norms.

We see the Middle East as a breeding ground
for oppression, hatred and violence, which is the
underlying cause of the instability in the region. We
need leadership. We need political will. But above all,
we need courage — courage from the leaders of the
region and leadership from the members of the Council,
as well as the international community. We need the
tenacity to do what is right and to take the right steps
towards creating lasting peace in the Middle East.

26/37

16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turkey continues to shoulder more than its fair share of
the burden of the ongoing devastation. We are extremely
concerned about the humanitarian and security impacts
of the crisis, which constitute a major national security
threat to us. The current chaos that has been created
in the northern part of Syria has played into the hands
of terrorists, targeting our citizens as well. Just today,
rockets fired from Syria hit the Turkish border town of
Kilis and killed four people. In addition, we are once
again faced with the risk of a new wave of refugees,
which has been triggered by the latest regime offensive
in Aleppo.
We are at a critical turn in Syria. The third round
of negotiations in Geneva has just started. That round
should produce a concrete outcome. The regime
should be pressured to talk about the essence of the
matter, which is political transition. The political
process should lead to a transition period with
concrete timelines, a new constitution and elections. A
transitional governing body with full executive powers
should be established. In the meantime, the Council
must ensure the implementation of all the measures set
out in its own resolutions. Unfortunately, the agreement
on the cessation of hostilities has become more fragile
owing to the systematic violations on the part of the
regime and its allies. Similarly, humanitarian access
continues to be hindered by the regime. The removal
of medical and surgical items from convoys continues.
The United Nations is unlikely to reach its targets for
the end of April in terms of the number of civilians
needing assistance in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
The lack of progress in those areas could jeopardize the
Geneva negotiations.
Another danger facing the process is the efforts
to intervene in the opposition delegation. The high
negotiations committee, as one of the two negotiating
parties, remains engaged in the political process despite
efforts to compromise its integrity. Non-intervention
by third parties to the composition of the opposition
negotiation team is a must for the credibility and
sustainability of the process. Attempts to dilute and
weaken the opposition will only harm the process. The
current tragedy will not end unless the people of Syria
have a legitimate Government that truly represents
their will and enjoys their full consent.
I would like to conclude my remarks on two
positive notes. With regard to Libya, we welcome the
arrival and assumption of duties by the Presidential
Council in Tripoli on 30 March. Turkey’s support for

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

that crucial step was demonstrated by the visit of our
special representative to Tripoli on 4 and 5 April, which
was the first international visit to the Presidential
Council at its headquarters. We recently hosted
Mr. Sarraj, President of the Presidential Council, on the
occasion of thirteenth Islamic Summit in Istanbul. His
participation contributed to the visibility of the Council.
We are also ready to host the Ministerial Conference on
International Support to Libya, as was decided in Rome
in March 2014. Turkey will continue to support Libya.
I would also like to express our support for the start
of the cessation of hostilities in Yemen. We hope that
the ceasefire will be observed and that the peace talks
to be held under the auspices of the United Nations in
Kuwait will succeed.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank the
Chinese presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this quarterly debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including on Israel and Palestine.
The region of the Middle East is witnessing an
unprecedented series of conflicts and crises, inflicting
suffering on millions of civilians. The international
community, led by the Council, is addressing those
crises in all their urgency, from Syria to Libya and
to Yemen. Iceland praises the countries in region that
are hosting such a large number of refugees and is
contributing new funds to assist countries in the region
dealing with refugee crisis.
As has been observed, we live in an age when
wars have no winners, only losers. Broad support
has been expressed for highlighting prevention and
political solutions in the conclusions of the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) and the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/682) on their implementation. We urge the
Security Council to refocus its preventative and political
powers on the oldest conflict in the Middle East. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a primary example in
which decisive action by the Security Council and the
international community is needed to prevent further
degeneration of the situation. The simmering nature of
that conflict is in danger of moving to a boil. The spate
of violent attacks against Israeli civilians continues,
with the death of 30 innocent Israeli civilians in recent
months. That is unacceptable, as is the targeting of any
other innocent civilians. Of deep concern as well are

16-1084927/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the killings by Israeli security forces of a large number
of Palestinians in relation to the spate of attacks, raising
questions of due process and the excessive use of force.
Israeli security forces have killed approximately 180
Palestinians since last September. Al-Haram Al-Sharif
has remained quiet in recent months. We would
encourage all parties involved to make sure that it
continues to do so. Action to prevent further conflict
is urgent.
First, it is urgent to defend the only clear course
to sustainable peace, the two-State solution. Israel
continues with illegal settlements, land appropriation
and punitive demolitions, despite international
condemnation. Those actions are in breach of
international law. They also seriously threaten the
viability of the two-State solution. Iceland urges
the Security Council to go beyond the words of
condemnation expressed by individual Council
members and to take action as a body to send a clear
signal to the Israeli authorities that settlements are
unacceptable. If we are all as serious about the twoState solution as we say we are, the Security Council
must defend it.
Secondly, the international community needs to do
more to lend impetus to the search for peace. Iceland
welcomes the launch by France of an international
support group and the call for a peace conference. In
the search for peace, we should not forget the huge
potential that exists in involving women on all sides.
Thirdly, ways need to be found to re-establish
trust among the parties. That is principally the
responsibility of leaders on both sides, who need to
be open to creative and innovative solutions. But the
international community, led by the Security Council,
should search for ways to bring a sense of hope and a
horizon of security for the Palestinians and for Israel.
That should include looking at measures to establish
international protection.
Fourthly, the situation in Gaza needs to be
normalized as part of a preventative approach. The firing
of rockets from Gaza into Israel is totally unacceptable.
The authorities on the ground are responsible for
preventing such action. Israeli responses should be
proportionate. But if Gaza is not to become a breeding
ground for radicalization, then reconstruction must be
accelerated and the Strip’s isolation lifted.
Iceland condemns all acts of violence against
civilians. We believe that the security Council must
28/37

18/04/2016

take firm action to safeguard the path to peace and the
two-State solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We also believe that broader international involvement
is now necessary to break the impasse, and we welcome
the French initiative.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I join previous speakers
in thanking the Chinese presidency for convening
this important open debate. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Constructive dialogue, negotiation and the
employment of other peaceful means are the only
realistic way to settle international disputes. That
is particularly true for the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. Viet Nam
advocates the peaceful settlement of the protracted
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, aiming at achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting solution and ensuring the legitimate interests of
all the parties concerned. Viet Nam supports the twoState solution with a vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side-by-side in peace, security and
mutual recognition.
We are therefore extremely alarmed by the most
recent report of the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Middle East Peace Process, which
highlights that the current negative trends on the ground
are imperilling the viability of a two-State solution. We
are deeply concerned about the recent complicating
developments in the region, in particular the latest
round of violence, which has cost hundreds of lives.
We feel heavy-hearted at seeing the humanitarian crisis
unfolding in the West Bank and Gaza and the plight of
millions of Palestinians. Viet Nam calls for an end to
all acts of violence. We urge Israel to immediately halt
illegal settlement activities, land confiscations and the
construction of the separation wall, and to strictly abide
by international, humanitarian law and human rights
law. We appeal to all the parties concerned to uphold
their determination to resolve the conflict through
negotiations and to refrain from any acts of violence
and hostility that escalate tensions. It is essential that
priority be given to the mitigation of the pain and
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

hardship of the Palestinian people, who have suffered
for many decades.
Viet Nam has always supported the struggle of
the Palestinian people for their fundamental rights,
especially the sacred right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent State. We call
for an early resumption of negotiations between the
parties concerned and welcome renewed efforts by the
United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab States
and regional countries to help promote the IsraeliPalestinian negotiations on all core issues, with a view
to achieving just, comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Chinese presidency for convening this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, which compels us to
take urgent action, without which the present tensions
could destabilize global security. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
Our world and the Middle East are once again in
danger, and the risks cannot be underestimated. It is
with that in view that President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan presented a new security paradigm
document entitled “Manifesto: The World. The 21st
Century” at the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit,
held recently in Washington, D.C. The manifesto is
significant as it announces a momentous stand on the
issue of war and peace. To implement it, he proposed the
establishment of a global coalition of States for peace,
stability, trust and security, under the auspices of the
United Nations. The common task of the coalition for
the next decade should be to end wars and conflicts,
including in the Middle East.
The Head of my State underlines that a world
without conflicts requires the removal of injustice,
which is its root cause. It is obvious that barriers to
trade and development have to be lifted, while the
principles of international law must be reaffirmed
and respected by all countries. Those steps should be
completed, President Nazarbayev urges, by the time the
United Nations celebrates its centenary. In addition, the
President warns that
“In the twenty-first, century humankind must
take decisive steps towards demilitarization. We
will not have another chance.”

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

All of those approaches are quite relevant to the
situation in the Middle East. It is clear that tensions in the
Middle East also gravitate around the Palestinian issue.
We realize that the two-State solution, the recognition
of the Palestinians’ right to self-determination and the
creation of an independent State of Palestine, peacefully
coexisting with Israel within the pre-1967 borders, are
the only means of durable peace. We also stand for
promoting Palestine’s full-fledged membership in the
United Nations and encourage Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate a political commitment to reach
a historic peace agreement.
Kazakhstan fully supports the Syrian peace process
within the Geneva III peace talks and resolution 2254
(2015). We call on Member States to endorse the
measures of the Secretary-General, the Arab League
and the International Syria Support Group to find
viable solutions. As our input, Kazakhstan hosted in
Astana in 2015 two rounds of Syrian consultations,
which were attended by the leaders of different
opposition groups and representatives of Syrian ethnic
and religious minorities.
By setting an example in Central Asia, the
Government of Kazakhstan fully endorses the longstanding proposal of establishing in the Middle East
a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. Establishing such a zone is dictated
by its pivotal role in ensuring both regional and global
security. Once again, we call upon all interested
parties to exert political will, understanding and trust
to overcome the different standpoints and to speedily
establish such a zone.
Furthermore, at the initiative of my country and
other partners, under the auspices of the United Nations
and the President of the General Assembly, a high-level
dialogue, entitled “Religions for Peace”, will convene
on 6 May to demonstrate the power of religious
unity against the destructive nature of terrorism and
violent extremism.
At the recent thirteenth Summit of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, held less than a week ago
in Istanbul, the leadership of Kazakhstan, together
with the host country, initiated the process of Islamic
reconciliation as a new paradigm of relations in the
Muslim world, with the aim of reaching a peaceful
settlement of disputes and strengthening the unity of the
Islamic Ummah. We therefore call on the leadership of

16-1084929/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all countries in the region to take the necessary measures
to prevent further escalation of sectarian tensions.
In conclusion, we reiterate Kazakhstan’s
commitment to join the multilateral effort to ensure
peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): The
Kingdom of Thailand shares the concern of the
international community on the issue of the alarming
escalation of violence in several cities in Israel and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which erupted in
October last year with no sign of ending. We therefore
commend China’s initiative to convene this debate, and
we thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
As a friend of both Israel and Palestine, we reaffirm
our strong support for a two-State solution, with a
vision of the Israelis and the Palestinians living side
by side in peace, harmony and prosperity. However, the
ongoing violence and the absence of genuine political
dialogue have dimmed the prospects for such a solution.
It is therefore a high priority for all stakeholders and the
international community to revitalize the peace process,
starting by promoting an atmosphere conductive to
a resumption of dialogue. As our contribution to this
debate, allow me to highlight the following points.
First, as a prerequisite for future negotiations, we
must de-escalate the situation on the ground and end
violence. Incitement and hate speech, coupled with
unhelpful rhetoric, have led to confrontations and
inflamed violence. We urge all the parties concerned
to exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any
provocative acts. The sanctity of all holy sites must
be respected and safeguarded. All attempts to alter
the status quo at those sites, including Jerusalem and
Hebron, must cease immediately.
Secondly, the ongoing settlement activities and
home demolitions in the occupied territories are most
worrisome and have caused the massive displacement
of people. That practice has heightened tensions and
undermined the possibility of a resumption of the peace
process. Therefore, we urge strict implementation of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions in that regard.
Thirdly, we are particularly concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation and the deterioration of the
living conditions of more than 1 million people affected
30/37

18/04/2016

by the long-standing conflict, including the Palestinian
refugees and prisoners. We stress the need for all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and to ensure
unimpeded access for all to humanitarian assistance.
We stress as well that there is an urgent need to rebuild
public facilities and the basic infrastructure necessary
for better livelihoods and economic development. In
particular, we join the international call for the lifting
of the Gaza Strip blockade to allow the resumption of
normal economic activities there.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our continued
support for the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
the West Bank and Jerusalem. We also commend the
countries of the region and beyond for their generosity
and contributions to assist millions of Palestinians
affected by the conflict, and we will continue to work
closely with the international community to help
alleviate the humanitarian crisis in the region.
The conflict has been at the top of the Council’s
agenda for decades. More than 200 resolutions have
been adopted, but the situation on the ground remains
alarming. The Council must live up to its responsibilities
and address this issue in a more efficient manner so as
to bring about peace and security and ensure the safety
and well-being of the peoples of the region.
To conclude, we reiterate our firm conviction that
a two-State solution is the best path to peace. We must
intensify our efforts to break through the political
impasse and reinvigorate the peace process. Thailand
urges all parties to make a genuine commitment
to rebuilding trust and confidence and to working
together towards a just and lasting solution through
peaceful means.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
wish warmly to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, and we should like also to thank
the Secretary-General for the comments he made this
morning. We endorse the statements made on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The various challenges facing the world require
that the parties to conflict respect international law
and international humanitarian law and work to ease
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

tensions, which have had disastrous consequences
for international peace and security. The aim of the
Security Council is a comprehensive and just peace
throughout the world, including the Middle East. To
that end, we must halt Israel’s violations and illegal
practices by putting an end to the occupation and the
settlement policy as well as to the crimes perpetrated
by Israeli settlers, bringing the perpetrators to justice.
All illegal actions must stop, including those targeting
holy sites, the killing of and detention of Palestinians,
the confiscation of their land and the destruction of
their homes.
Resolving the Palestinian question can come about
only on the basis of internationally accepted norms,
namely, the two-State solution and the creation of an
independent and viable Palestinian State on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side in peace and security with an Israeli State,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the Arab Peace Initiative, the return of refugees,
respect for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and the end of the Israeli occupation of all
occupied Palestinian lands.
Any attempt to impose a policy of fait accompli on
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights represents not only
a breach of international law and resolution 497 (1981)
and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, but is
also null and void, can have no legal consequence and
undermines efforts to bring about peace in the Middle
East.
Everyone recognizes the fact that peace can be
achieved only if the Palestinians regain their inalienable
rights to life, safety, self-determination and dignified
living conditions in their own independent State. It is up
to the Council to take the steps necessary to implement
those resolutions and bring about peace by taking all
measures necessary to provide international protection
to the Palestinian people and to launch credible
negotiations on all aspects of a final solution, in order
to bring to an end the Israeli occupation of all occupied
Arab territories, put a total and immediate stop to all
settlement activity, lift the Gaza blockade, and rebuild
all that was destroyed by the Israeli war machine.
Qatar is fully convinced of the importance of the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and of the positive
impact thereof. We have therefore promised to provide
$1 billion in aid towards the reconstruction of Gaza. In

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

fulfilment of that promise, we have already built 1,060
housing units in Sheikh Hamid bin Khalifa Al-Thani
city, in Gaza, and work on 1,200 other units is under
way. We have also built a hospital and carried out 45
domestic road projects.
Regarding Syria, despite the efforts deployed
by the international community, represented by the
International Syria Support Group, and Council
resolution 2268 (2016), the Syrian regime continues to
carry out violations and attacks against civilians and
civilian targets. It continues to carry out massacres,
including that of Deir al-Asafir, in which dozens
of people were killed, including children. Civilian
facilities were clearly targeted there. It also continues
to hamper humanitarian convoys and to block access to
the various areas under its control, which causes great
difficulties for United Nations personnel.
The only way to put a lasting end to the violence
is through the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015), which reaffirms that the only lasting solution
to this crisis will come through an inclusive, Syrianled political process, so as to achieve the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people fully to implement
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
enable the creation of a transitional entity, the freeing
of prisoners, the lifting of the blockade and access for
humanitarian convoys.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting and to thank your
friendly delegation for your presidency of the Council
during this month. I should like also to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing at the beginning of
this important debate.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms its firm stance
in support of the Palestinian question and of the efforts
made to achieve the aspirations of the Palestinian
people, so as to bring about a comprehensive and lasting
peace through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on the June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The question of Palestine has become more
complicated because of the intensification of the
settlement process, the siege and the repeated acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people and their holy

16-1084931/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sites. These illegal actions undermine the prospects
for peace and give rise to a climate conducive to the
escalation of extremism, hatred and violence, which
goes against the values of all religions and those of
peaceful societies that promote coexistence.
His Majesty the King of Bahrain, King Hamad
bin Isa Al Khalifa, in his address to the thirteenth
summit of the Islamic Conference, convened in Turkey,
noted that the peace process in the Middle East has
become much more complicated and has even reached a
standstill because of the persistence of Israeli practices
that oppose peace, the expansion of settlement activity,
the confiscation of land, the continued siege of the
Gaza Strip and the repeated acts of aggression carried
out against the Palestinian people and Islamic shrines,
especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The King of Bahrain rejects and condemns such
Israeli practices and calls upon the international
community to put an end to them, as they have
undermined the peace process and promoted hatred
and terrorism in the region. His Majesty stressed the
importance of reviving the peace process on the basis
of international law and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The challenges are daunting, but our stance remains
firm, especially concerning the right of the Palestinian
people to build their independent State on their national
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Sincere
efforts to find a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution of the situation in the Middle East should be
based on ending the illegal Israeli occupation of Arab
territories by Israel, including the Syrian Golan, lifting
the illegal blockade against Gaza and the complete
withdrawal of Israel from the remaining Lebanese
territory, according to relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, resolutions of the Arab
Peace Initiative and decisions by the Quartet, as well
as on finding a solution that would ensure the return
of Palestinian refugees to their homeland, in line with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to take all the measures necessary to
provide international protection for the Palestinian
people and to end the Israeli occupation of all Arab
territories so as to achieve lasting and comprehensive
peace. We also stress the need to intensify efforts in
support of our Palestinian brothers and their aspirations
to achieve their inalienable rights.
32/37

18/04/2016

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Chinese presidency for convening
this open debate. It is somewhat reassuring that the
Palestinian question is being discussed in the Security
Council at certain intervals against the backdrop of its
continued inability to act on this seminal concern for
the maintenance of international peace and security
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made today by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and by representative of Kuwait
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The overriding message is that the world expects
the Council to act in a determined, visible and
sustained manner to find a just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian question. The continued occupation
of Palestinian territories, the systematic human rights
violations, the indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and the expansion of illegal settlements by Israel, the
occupying Power, constitute an affront to the values and
principles that the Organization stands for. The Council
must demonstrate its resolve to address the Palestinian
question as a matter of urgency. Immediate priority
must be given to ensuring international protection
for the Palestinian people, who have been suffering
for decades.
The
continued
breaches
of
international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territories
have given rise to an egregious culture of impunity.
In the absence of any international accountability
or sanctions, the occupying Power continues to kill
Palestinian citizens, especially youth and children,
imprisoning and abusing scores of Palestinians in its
detention centres and injuring and displacing thousands
of Palestinian families through its construction and
expansion of illegal settlements. It is obvious that
the policy of settlements and the construction of
the wall in and around occupied East Jerusalem are
being deliberately pursued in order to fundamentally
change the character, status and demography of the
occupied Palestinian territories. That will only serve
to indefinitely postpone the Middle East peace process,
and thus to destabilize the prospects for a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders.
The Council has a moral obligation to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlement
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

regime in the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the
blockade in the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms
of occupation. Immediate priority must be given to
ensuring international protection for the Palestinian
people, who have been suffering for decades from
Israel’s policy of collective punishment.
We have stated a number of times here — and we
will continue to do so — that the continued injustice
around the Palestinian question remains at the root of
a number of scourges that bedevil international peace
and security. Among a host of potential scenarios, the
resolution of the Palestinian question will help dry
up the ideological reservoir that many international
terrorist and violent extremist groups tend to draw on.
The moral and ethical issues involved in the Palestinian
question need to be unequivocally upheld in order to
defeat the twisted and corrosive messaging used by
violent extremists to serve their own vested agenda.
In line with our constitutional commitment, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh maintain
unwavering support for the just and legitimate struggle
of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel. Our
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has consistently
articulated this message in her annual addresses to the
General Assembly.
We continue to urge all key actors to remain
seized of efforts to pursue a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and
the principle of land-for-peace. In that context, we
take this opportunity to reiterate our support for a
Council resolution to revive the political efforts aimed
at achieving the desired two-State solution and the
convening of an international conference to address the
multidimensional aspects of the Palestinian question in
a focused, structured and holistic manner.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and to
commend your initiative in organizing this open debate
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, during China’s presidency of

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

the Security Council this month. This is a clear sign of
your country’s commitment to accord the subject the
importance it deserves under the current circumstances.
My country notes with deep concern the
unprecedented deterioration of the situation in
Palestine at a time when the international community
has shifted its attention to other developments. Despite
the importance of those new developments, the
question of Palestine should be the focus of attention
by the international community, not only because it is
a central issue for the Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims
all over the world, but because it is one that concerns
all peace-loving people and advocates for peace across
the globe.
The settlement of the situation in the Middle East
hinges on the solution of the Palestinian question, which
is the central question and the key to the resolution of
all issues in the region. Any delay in finding a just and
lasting solution for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, would complicate
the issue at the expense of Palestinian patience. For
the Palestinian people are pinning their hopes on
peace and and looking forward to the fulfilment of
their aspirations.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose Head of State,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, chairs the Al-Quds
Committee, feels the pain of the Palestinians in general
and is pained at the situation in Jerusalem given the
continued deterioration of the state of affairs in
Palestine as a result of the Judaization, the continued
policy of building settlements, the forcible transfer
of people and repeated attacks against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem and the worshippers. The impasse
that international efforts reached in this area has
complicated all potential solutions.
The international community now has the duty to
use all its efforts and innovative methods in order to
bring back the Palestinians and Israelis to the negotiating
table, not for the sake of negotiations but to achieve the
two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as the capital of a Palestinian State. Such
negotiations should be based on good faith, according to
pre-established timelines in order to restore confidence
between the parties, according to the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, in his capacity as Chair
of the Jerusalem Committee, in his address to the fifth

16-1084933/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Extraordinary Summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, held in Jakarta last month, supports
all serious initiatives aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation and to achieve the independence of the State
of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Morocco also supports the initiative of France to
find a solution to the Palestinian question, including
through the convening of an international conference.
During the thirteenth session of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, which was hosted by Turkey last
week, the King of Morocco said,
“We can only stress our support for the invitation of
our brother, President Mahmoud Abbas of the State
of Palestine, to convene an international peace
conference aimed at ending the Israeli occupation,
as that is a basic step towards ending the catastrophic
and volatile situation in Palestine and restoring
the hope that a peaceful, just and lasting peace on
the basis of the two-State solution can be reached.
We also support the French initiative, which aims
at bringing the Israeli and Palestinian parties to
the negotiating table and at ending the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory, according to a
clear timeline.”
The King also called for the adoption of an approach
that would merge political actions and diplomatic
efforts, while highlighting legitimate rights and work in
the field. The Holy Jerusalem Endowment Trust Fund
would implement specific projects aimed at supporting
the inhabitants of Jerusalem and saving the city that
is at the core of the conflict. In that regard, because
Morocco remains committed to supporting work on
the ground that benefits Palestinians, we have assumed
responsibility for more than 85 per cent of the Trust
Fund’s budget in order to continue the implementation
of projects on Palestinian territory.
The only sound and viable path towards the
resolution of the Palestinian question is not one of war,
bloodshed and the killing of innocent civilians. Rather,
the parties should return to the negotiating table in good
faith within clear-cut parameters in order to achieve the
solution of two States coexisting in peace, harmony,
security and cooperation. Morocco continues to base its
position with regard to the Palestinian conflict on the
Arab Peace Initiative and the principles of the Madrid
terms of reference, which seek to achieve peace through
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
34/37

18/04/2016

with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the borders
of June 1967.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
international community is called upon more than
ever before to revive the peace process with a specific
timeline and on the basis of the norms and principles
set forth in United Nations resolutions. Morocco stands
ready to fully participate in all efforts and initiatives
aimed at advancing the peace process with a view to
reaching a settlement that consolidates peace and
stability in the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like
to extend thanks to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for the briefing he presented at the beginning
of this meeting on his recent visit to a number of
countries, including Tunisia, and the most recent
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Once again we meet, as we have done for
decades, while the Israeli settlers and the forces of the
occupation continue their daily acts of aggression and
violations against the unarmed Palestinian people and
their Christian and Islamic holy sites in Jerusalem,
in particular Al-Aqsa Mosque, in blatant violation of
international legitimacy, charters and laws.
The occupation authorities continue their settlement
campaign despite the growing rejection of it by the
international community. We are all in agreement that
such a campaign constitutes a violation of international
law. There is no longer any doubt that Israel continues
to impose a policy of fait accompli in order to gain
more time to change the status quo by force and impede
any attempts or initiatives aimed at achieving peace
based on the two-State solution. That solution has
been undermined by the settler colonialist expansion.
It is therefore time for the international community, in
particular the Council, to assume full responsibility
for bringing an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territory and the Israeli practices against
the Palestinian people.
We are all in agreement that both the occupation
and the practices are illegal and illegitimate. It is time
to effect a genuine change with regard to how the
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council deals with the question of Palestine. Today,
there is no option for diffusing the tension and ending
the continued turbulence other than to put an end to
the unprecedented settler colonialism and occupation,
which is the crux of the problem. There must be a serious
and responsible movement, before it is too late, with the
goal of arriving at a peaceful, just and comprehensive
solution that guarantees the Palestinian people their
right to establish a sovereign viable, independent and
contiguous State on their territory — which has been
occupied since 1967 — with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
My delegation supports any genuine effort that
would contribute to achieving that goal, and therefore
welcomes the initiative mentioned this morning by
the representative of France. Tunisia also supports the
Palestinian request that the United Nations provide
international protection for Palestinian civilians within
the occupied Palestinian territories in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and international humanitarian law.
We also reiterate our goal to have the embargo imposed
on the Gaza Strip lifted and to secure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. The success of the
process to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East depends on the full withdrawal of Israel
from all occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Arab Golan, as well as
the territories still occupied in south Lebanon.
Before concluding, I must express Tunisia’s
satisfaction at the resumption of negotiations under the
auspices of the United Nations in Geneva for the political
settlement of the Syrian crisis and at the cessation of
hostilities, which was achieved thanks to the laudable
efforts of the United States and the Russian Federation.
Tunisia hopes that our Syrian brothers will seize this
important and historic opportunity and take advantage
of the support of the international community, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, and the International Syria Support Group,
in order to achieve a political settlement that puts an
end to the crisis and violence, preserves the territorial
integrity of Syria and promotes societal cohesion in
accordance with the aspirations of the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): At the outset, Nigeria aligns
itself with the statements delivered by the representative

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

of the State of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We wish to thank the Permanent Representative
of Namibia for delivering a statement on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People. We also wish to thank the
delegation of China for convening today’s debate, which
provides an opportunity for reflection on the seemingly
intractable situation in the Middle East. Furthermore,
we thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing and commend him for the moral voice that he
has lent to the search for peace in the Middle East. We
welcome his recent visit to the region, during which he
met with high-level officials in furtherance of his goodoffices efforts.
The surge in the violence and senseless killings
in the occupied Palestinian territory, perpetrated by
extremists and so well described by previous speakers,
is deeply worrying. Fears have been expressed that,
if the situation is not contained, there is a possibility
of further escalation, with its attendant predictable
consequences. The international community must
therefore work in a concerted manner to avert another
catastrophe in the region.
We condemn the indiscriminate killings in the
strongest possible terms. They are unjustifiable. We
must avert a scenario where extremists dictate the
political agenda, as that could provide fuel to the
conflict and complicate the difficult search for peace
even further. Provocations and hostile rhetoric must
be avoided. The status of all the holy sites must be
respected and protected against hostile actions.
Nigeria takes note of the latest report issued by the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process. We share the concern of
the Special Coordinator that the viability of a two-State
solution is in danger owing to the negative trends on
the ground, including the recent escalation in violence,
ongoing settlement activities, demolitions, incitement
and the absence of Palestinian unity.
It is evident that a departure from the current crisis
and a revival of the peace process are hardly achievable
without ending the policy of settlement expansion in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We believe that there
are a number of specific actions that are necessary in
order to foster mutual respect and compromise, build

16-1084935/37

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

confidence and pave the way for the realization of the
two-State solution. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, has the responsibility
to constructively address that issue before it is too late.
In that regard, we urge Israel to take concrete
steps to freeze all its settlement-related activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. The current stalemate
in the Middle East peace process is neither ideal nor
sustainable. Both sides must take concrete steps to
return to negotiations on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road map, the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the relevant agreements between the parties. Nigeria
supports the efforts of the international community
aimed at establishing an environment conducive to
a return to meaningful negotiations on ending the
occupation and resolving the long-running conflict.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) serves
to underscore that no one should be left behind in the
legitimate expectation of the enjoyment of the right to
development for all people. However, it is clear that the
Palestinian people will not benefit from that set of goals
without a viable land to call their home and country
and without a lasting peace to enjoy the fruits of their
labour and industry. The Security Council must, as a
matter of duty and necessity, ensure that the Palestinian
people are not left behind and alienated from the stream
of global peace, prosperity and the full enjoyment of
liberty, freedom and human rights.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Israel has requested the floor to make
a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): As we sit here today
debating, my country is being attacked. In fact, while
the Security Council has been deliberating on the
situation in the Middle East, we received word of yet
another terror attack in Jerusalem. A bus was blown
up in downtown Jerusalem, injuring dozens of people,
some of them critically. Shockingly enough, the only
Council members to even mention the attack in their
remarks were Ukraine, Uruguay and the United States.
We expect the Council to condemn the attack.
Also, just this morning, the Israel Defence Forces
revealed that it had discovered a tunnel from Gaza that
reaches into Israeli territory. That terror tunnel, which
is hundreds of feet below ground, is equipped with
electrical systems and lined with concrete. We have
36/37

18/04/2016

warned time and again that Hamas has been diverting
the cement that has been sent in for the reconstruction
of homes and schools to rearm and prepare for
the next round of conflict. Today we have another
piece of concrete proof. This fact was also almost
completely ignored.
The tunnel has one purpose and one purpose only:
to carry out terror attacks against innocent Israelis. A
bus bombing in Jerusalem and terror tunnels out of Gaza
have come to light, but in this Chamber it is business
as usual. Once again, many in this Chamber focus
solely on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict but ignore
terror against Israel. Some delegations even chose to
undermine the credibility of this important platform by
presenting false accusations, distorted information and
one-sided statements. To those States, and especially
those who sit in the Council, like Malaysia and
Venezuela, or to Saudi Arabia and others who wish to
position themselves as relevant players, I would like to
say the following.
You can either continue to falsely blame Israel for
all that is wrong in the Middle East in order to serve
your narrow, domestic political needs, or you can end
the zero-sum-game approach and take a constructive
approach instead. It is no surprise when countries
like Venezuela and Malaysia, with long histories
of suppressing freedom of speech and freedom of
expression at home, distort the reality here at the United
Nations. They do not let the facts get into the way of the
one-sided story.
I would also like to say that I find it odd that
Saudi Arabia, a country that has been accused of
indiscriminate bombing and war crimes in Yemen, has
the audacity to make reckless allegations against others.
Iran and Lebanon once again chose to falsely
criticize Israel. Need I remind you, Mr. President,
that Iran is the number-one sponsor of terror in the
region, whether it be with the Houthis in Yemen or
Hizbullah, which is starving people in Madaya, or
its recent outrageous plan offering to make payments
to Palestinian terrorists? Wherever there is terror or
instability in the region, Iran is at the helm. That is
the very same Iran that was recently condemned by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) for its
support of terror.
Turning to Lebanon, a country that has a terror
organization, Hizbullah, as an integral part of its
Government, the Lebanese Government recently
16-10849

18/04/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

become the sole champion and protector of Hizbullah,
while outside Lebanon that terror group is being
condemned for its destabilizing role in the region by
the United Nations, the Arab League and the OIC. And
yet Lebanon has no shame in criticizing Israel.
To my Palestinian colleagues, I would like to
say that there is no other way forward than by direct
negotiations. A mere two weeks ago, Prime Minister
Netanyahu repeated his call for direct negotiations.
He said,
“I am inviting President Abbas again. I have cleared
my schedule this week. Any day he can come, I will
be here. My door is always open to those who want
to pursue peace with Israel.”
We call upon the Palestinians to accept our call
for negotiations and fully condemn the incitement and
terror against Israelis. We call on them to publicly
renounce terror and join us on the path to peace
and reconciliation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of Malaysia has requested the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Abdul Razak (Malaysia): I take the floor,
unfortunately, to respond to the statement made by my
colleague from Israel.
First, my delegation categorically rejects the
allegations made. They serve no other purpose than to
divert the Security Council’s attention from the real

S/PV.7673 Resumption 1

matter at hand, which is the continuing situation in
Palestine, which is under occupation by Israel.
Malaysia’s position on Palestine is based on the
values and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, including international
human rights law and humanitarian law, as well as the
various resolutions of the United Nations, including
those of the Security Council. Yet Israel continues to
completely and flagrantly disregard international law
and disrespects international human rights standards.
Israel is in violation of countless resolutions and
decisions of the Council, the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and even the International
Court of Justice. Its lack of cooperation with United
Nations human-rights mechanisms, is described in
detail in the latest report (A/HRC/31/73) of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories.
With regard to terrorism, Malaysia’s long-standing
position is to condemn all acts of terror and the killing
of civilians, regardless of whether the victims are
Israelis or Palestinians. It is, however, unfortunate that
terrorism has become a convenient narrative that Israel
uses to portray itself as a victim, cover up its illegal
actions and mask its intention to destroy the possibility
of a two-State solution. We urge the Israeli delegation
to focus its energies on addressing the various concerns
raised by my delegation and other Member States today,
rather than attempting to divert our attention.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

16-1084937/37
