A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/83
27 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 92
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/54/579)]
54/83.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations1 and the action taken by the Special Committee in respect of that
information,
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General,2
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special
Committee to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e
of the Charter and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

1

A/54/23 (Part II), chap. VIII. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftyfourth Session, Supplement No. 23.
2

A/54/343.

00 26216

/...

A/RES/54/83
Page 2

Recalling also its resolution 53/60 of 3 December 1998, in which it requested the Special Committee
to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information
under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the
working papers on the Territories concerned,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations;1
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-SelfGoverning Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter,
the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the
Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible
information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum
period of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from
all available published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the
Territories concerned;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fifth session.
71st plenary meeting
6 December 1999
