S/2020/545

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 June 2020
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2499 (2019), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2020 and request ed me to report
on its implementation every four months. The present report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic since the previous report of
14 February 2020 (S/2020/124), including the impact of the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which was officially declared in the Central African
Republic on 14 March.

II. Political situation
Political developments
2.
The political environment was marked by increased mobilization ahead of the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for December 2020, contributing to
tensions between political stakeholders. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur Ndiaye,
with his good offices and political facilitation mandate, engaged with national
stakeholders and international partners to encourage constructive and inclusive
political dialogue to preserve fragile gains.
3.
On 11 February, 14 opposition parties formed the Coalition de l’opposition
démocratique with the proclaimed objective of ensuring free, fair, inclusive and
timely elections. The coalition includes the parties Union pour le renouveau
centrafricain of the former Prime Minister, Anicet-Georges Dologuélé; the Kwa Na
Kwa of the former President, François Bozizé; the Convention républicaine pour le
progrès social of the former Prime Minister, Nicolas Tiangaye; the Chemin de
l’espérance of the former President of the National Assembly, Karim Meckassoua;
and the Be Africa Ti E Kwe of the former Prime Minister, Mahamat Kamoun.
4.
The arrests, on 28 March and 3 April, of 31 individu als on charges of criminal
association, undermining State security, and conspiracy, including 11 members of the
Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, contributed to political tensions. The
arrests took place, respectively, at the residence of the M inister of Arts, Culture, and
Tourism, Dieudonné Ndomate, head of the Ngaïssona anti-balaka wing, and at an

20-07544 (E)

180620

*2007544*

S/2020/545

unoccupied residence of Mr. Bozizé. On 3 April, the public prosecutor of the Bangui
Court of Appeal clarified that he had not issued an arrest warra nt against Mr. Bozizé
as had been rumoured. The Kwa Na Kwa denounced the arrests as politically
motivated. In a joint communiqué dated 24 April, signatory armed groups
characterized the arrests as a violation of the Government’s commitments under the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
5.
Political tensions also increased following a legislative petition sponsored by
the ruling coalition to amend the constitution in the context of the COVID -19
pandemic, which was signed by 101 of 140 parliamentarians. The proposed
amendment was aimed at extending the tenures of the president and members of
parliament if elections could not be held within constitutional timelines owing to
unforeseen circumstances, or force majeure. The Government expressed support for
the bill, arguing the need to prevent institutional instability and a constitutional
vacuum. Many opposition parties and civil society groups voiced strong concerns,
insisting on adhering to constitutional timelines. On 5 June, the Constitutional Court
ruled that the proposed amendment would be unconstitutional, as would be a
transition, and emphasized that any slippage of the electoral calendar should derive
from broad national consultations seeking a consensual solut ion.
6.
In national addresses on 19 and 26 March, the President, Faustin Touadéra,
announced a series of mitigation measures to combat the spread of COVID -19, calling
for national solidarity, including a 21-day quarantine for people entering the country
and any suspected COVID-19 cases and their contacts, a temporary ban on gatherings
of more than 15 people, temporary closure of schools and entertainment spaces, and
restrictions on entering the country. On 27 April, authorities temporarily restricted
commercial and passenger movements on key axes from Bangui to the west a nd to
towns bordering Cameroon and the Ubangi river.
7.
A number of opposition parties rallied behind the announced mitigation
measures and suspended public events. National Assembly members made private
donations to the Government for the national pandem ic response. Interreligious
platforms welcomed the measures and announced restrictions of religious activities.
Despite agreement to address the pandemic apolitically, some opposition polit icians
criticized shortcomings in the Government’s response and per ceived the authorities
to be using the pandemic to advance a political agenda.
8.
On 15 May, 34 out of 42 parties associated with the presidential majority
launched the “Be Oko” or “Les coeurs unis” political platform to counterweigh the
opposition Coalition de l’opposition démocratique platform. The intention of the
United Hearts platform is to rally behind one candidate for the presidential elections
and agree on candidates for the legislative elections. Four political leaders announced
their candidacy for the presidential elections, specifically Martin Ziguélé of the
Mouvement de libération du peuple Centrafricain; Bornou Brigitte Hortense of the
Parti pour le progrès du peuple; Crépin Mboli-Goumba of the Parti africain pour une
transformation radicale et l’intégration des Etats; and Aristide Briand Reboas of the
Parti chrétien démocratie, which has since joined the “Be Oko” platform.
9.
The National Assembly in its first ordinary session of 2020, which concluded
on 30 May, adopted four laws, including on the status of military personnel, in
accordance with the 2017 national defence plan.
Peace process
10. While advances were made in implementing the Agreement, progress was
undermined by a resurgence of violence perpetrated by armed groups, particularly in
Birao, Bria, Ndélé and Obo.

2/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

11. The Executive Monitoring Committee of the Agreement held its seventh a nd
eighth sessions on 28 February and 22 May, respectively. Government, armed gro ups,
political parties and civil society representatives discussed issues related to special
mixed security units, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation,
and electoral preparations, and called for sanctions under article 35 of the Agr eement
against those violating their commitments, particularly to cease hostilities.
12. During an extraordinary session held from 19 to 28 February, the National
Assembly adopted several laws required under the Agreement, including on political
parties and the status of the opposition; the creation of the Commission on Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation; the status of former Heads of State; and the
first of a two-part law on local authorities and decentralization.
13. Following the call of the Secretary-General on 23 March for a global ceasefire
to fight the pandemic, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique
(FPRC), the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain and the Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation armed group publicly declared their adherence. The statements have
yet to translate into action on the ground. The Special Representative, amplifying the
call, engaged with signatory parties to encourage the immediate cessation of
hostilities.
14. Although many of the formal follow-up mechanisms of the Agreement were
suspended following the COVID-19 outbreak, the Government continued high-level
engagement with armed group leaders, supported by the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), th e Agreement’s
guarantors, as well as MINUSCA as a facilitator. The Government engaged with the
Sultan-Mayor of Ndélé on 25 March to address escalating tensions and violence. T he
Prime Minister, Firmin Ngrébada, also sought to mediate between the ethnic Gul a and
Runga factions of FPRC from 24 to 27 April in Bangui. On 17 April, he invited the
leader of the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC), Ali Darassa, to Bangui to
discuss restoring State authority, preparations for disarmament and demobilization
and establishment of special mixed security units in the south-east of the country. The
Prime Minister also met with FPRC military leader, Abdoulaye Hissène, in Bangui on
25 April, agreeing to deploy the national armed forces to Ndélé for the first time since
2013 on 13 May, start the disarmament and demobilization of FPRC armed elements
and establish a special mixed security unit.
15. The strategic committee meeting on the special mixed security units chaired by
the Prime Minister on 22 April decided on deployment sites for the units in the west,
specifically Bossangoa, Bouar, Koui and Paoua, and the next training site in Ndélé in
the centre. On 12 May, the President presided over a graduation ceremony in Bouar
for the second batch of 127 trainees for the units. On 5 June, the units started to be
deployed from Bouar to Paoua.
16. MINUSCA facilitated two videoconferences between the Minister for Territorial
Administration and Decentralization and prefects to enhance communication between
national and local implementation mechanisms of the Agreement, which were
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, the United Nations Development Pro gramme
(UNDP) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM). MINUSCA used
programmatic funding to implement projects in eight prefectures to strengthen the
role of women in advancing the Agreement.
17. In Vakaga Prefecture, the implementation and technical security committees
resumed activities on 19 March, after a seven-month suspension due to conflict. FPRC
appointed its representatives to these committees throughout the Prefecture.
18. On 8 June, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Secretary-General of ECCAS and
20-07544

3/20

S/2020/545

the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, held a joint videoconference with the President. Subsequently, they issued a
joint communiqué, in which they welcomed the progress made in the implementation
of the Agreement and called for further confidence-building measures by all parties.
They also encouraged the President to engage in political dialogue with national
stakeholders, including the opposition, to ensure a process conducive to peaceful
elections.
Electoral preparations
19. Preparations for the elections continued in a politicized context characterized
by scepticism about the four-month delay in launching the voter registration process
and concerns about COVID-19. International partners encouraged political
stakeholders to prioritize constructive dialogue and transparent messaging to citizens
of the Central African Republic.
20. On 16 March, the Prime Minister expanded representation in the strategic
committee on elections to include the ruling majority, political opposition and civil
society. The committee held monthly meetings, enabling progress on the electoral
calendar, refugee participation and National Electoral Authority operations.
21. The National Electoral Authority published a revised electoral calendar on
29 April that adhered to constitutional timelines. The electoral mapping exercise was
completed in April, resulting in about 3,500 voter registration centres that will also
serve as polling stations. Out of 144 Authority branches, 126 were established as at
1 June. Opposition parties protested irregularities in their establishment, pointing to
limited communication and consultation. The Council of Ministers has yet to refer
the law on the National Electoral Authority back to the National Assembly, following
the Constitutional Court’s rejection of a challenge by six opposition parties regarding
the constitutionality of two provisions of the electoral cod e.
22. The integrated electoral security plan, including national security forces and
MINUSCA, was presented to the President on 11 May. The plan outlines the
deployment of an additional 2,000 national security forces, which could be impacted
by the temporary suspension of recruitment and deployment owing to COVID -19.
23. On 29 April, the Prime Minister reiterated the Government ’s commitment to
ensuring the franchise of refugees, which would require host countries to allow
verification of the refugee population and the conduct of electoral operations. The
Government and ECCAS convened a meeting with ambassadors from neighbouring
countries on 11 May, during which the Government presented proposed legislation
that would allow refugees to vote, which the ambassadors committed to support.
24. On 20 May, the Government issued two decrees crucial for the timely holding
of the elections. The first set the voter registration period from 22 June to 28 July,
with the final voter list released in September. The second specified that the diaspora
of the Central African Republic would be allowed to vote in Belgium, Benin,
Cameroon, Chad, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, France, Morocco, the Sudan, Togo and the United States o f
America. On 8 June, eight main opposition parties filed a request for annulment of
the two decrees before the Council of State, arguing administrative irregularities.
25. As at 1 June, the UNDP basket fund of $41.8 million to support the presidential,
legislative and local elections through 2022 faced a funding gap of $10.5 million. In
March, the European Union disbursed $13 million of its $16.5 million pledge.
Separate contributions totalling $5.5 million were made to projects complementary
to the basket fund, including by the European Union and the United States.

4/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

26. MINUSCA coordinated international electoral assistance and provided
technical, security and logistical support, in addition to good offices and political
facilitation aimed at preserving the inclusiveness and credibility of the electoral
process. The impact of COVID-19 on election readiness is continuously being
assessed and precautionary measures are being taken to reassure stakeholders of the
safety of the poll.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
27. Efforts to resolve disputes and violence at the local level continued. In
Bangassou, persistent clashes by armed groups contributed to the displacement and
suspension of commercial activities, exacerbating intercommunal tensions. Local
authorities, communities and armed group leaders signed a local peace agreement on
10 March to restore the free movement of goods and people on the Rafai-DembiaZemio axis. A monitoring committee was established to restore trust between the
population and local authorities.
28. MINUSCA strengthened its strategic partnership with the African women
leadership network and jointly identified projects to reinforce the COVID-19
response while enabling reconciliation in the PK5 and PK12 districts of Bangui.

III. Security situation
29. As at 1 June, recorded violations of the Agreement decreased from 575 to 5 04
compared with the previous reporting period, although armed groups and militia
continued to pose serious threats to the civilian population and national stability.
Civilians were the target of more than half of the violations (286), followed by illegal
military activities (120) and movement restrictions (83). As at 1 June, FPRC had
perpetrated most of the reported violations (179), followed by the Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) (86), Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
(78), UPC (67), anti-balaka elements (58), and the national armed forces (27).
Rumours and disinformation relating to COVID-19 fuelled xenophobia, particularly
in Bangui, Bouar and Kaga Bandoro.
30. In the north-east, violent clashes involving armed groups continued. On
16 February, FPRC attempted to retake control of Birao from the Mouvement des
libérateurs centrafricains pour la justice. A robust MINUSCA intervention resulted in
FPRC withdrawing, having suffered 11 fatalities and several injuries. There were no
civilian casualties. A weapons-free zone established on 14 March contributed to an
improved security situation and, on 9 April, 142 national armed forces soldiers were
deployed to Birao. Internally displaced persons reportedly fled towards the Sudan as
a result of these incidents.
31. Tensions increased between FPRC factions, notably in Bria and Ndélé,
splintering the group along ethnic lines. On 11 March, FPRC Gula elements,
supported by the non-signatory Parti pour le rassemblement de la nation
centrafricaine, attacked Ndélé, targeting the Runga community and Arabs, killing at
least 29, including 18 civilians. Gula elements ambushed a MINUSCA patrol on
15 March, injuring a peacekeeper. On 25 March, Gula elements attacked the majority
Runga village of Yangougale, near Ndélé. Despite mediation efforts led by the
Government, Gula elements attacked Ndélé on 29 and 30 April, killing at least 27,
including 21 civilians. MINUSCA launched an operation that prevented further
violence and led to the arrest of nine PRNC elements, including its leader, on 19 May,
sending a strong signal regarding the fight against impunity and contributing to easing
tensions.

20-07544

5/20

S/2020/545

32. In Bria, tensions between the FPRC Gula and Runga factions escalated on
10 March following the death of a FPRC Fulani combatant while detained by the
FPRC Runga faction. The UPC leader, Mr. Darassa, travelled to Bria with heavily
armed elements without the approval of the Agreement’s local committees, where he
brokered a ceasefire between the FPRC factions on 18 March. He also reinforced the
UPC presence in Bria.
33. Tensions rose in Ndiffa, Vakaga Prefecture, following a violent dispute between
PRNC and Misseriya Arabs on 27 March, during which the Chief of Staff of PRNC
and six Misseriya were killed. On 18 April, Misseriya herders ambushed five Gula
merchants near Birao, killing three and seriously injuring two. MINUSCA facilitated
a conflict resolution process between the two communities.
34. On 9 May, MINUSCA reinforced its presence in Obo, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture,
following tensions between the national armed forces and UPC combatants, who had
moved into the town following allegations that soldiers had been involved in the
killing of three civilians on 10 May in Mboki, near Obo. On 20 May, MINUSCA and
the armed forces exchanged fire with UPC elements in Obo. No civilian casualties
were reported. The combatants were expelled from the town, while six were arrested
and detained by the armed forces before being transferred to Bangui on 23 May. On
20 and 28 May, Mr. Darassa issued communiqués in which he condemned alleged
armed forces abuses of the civilian population in Obo, denied UPC involvement in
the clashes and claimed that the violence reflected the local population’s reaction to
abuses committed by the armed forces. On 2 June, a national armed forces soldier
was arrested by local command for allegedly killing a civilian.
35. In February, FPRC, MPC and armed civilian traders allegedly from Chad
intensified activities around gold mines in the Kouki area, leading to c lashes on
29 March that resulted in the death of at least 1 person and the internal displacement
of about 100 persons. Capitalizing on tensions between MPC and FPRC, UPC
asserted control in the west, increasing its presence in Markounda, Ouham Prefecture,
in March.
36. The Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation armed group expanded its activities in
the west, particularly in Ouham-Pende, Nana-Mambere et Mamberei-Kadei
Prefectures, under the pretext of protecting Fulani herders. On 10 April, MINUSCA
launched an operation to mitigate expansion of the armed group. On 13 May, the
armed group, led by its leader, Abbas Siddiki, occupied the gendarmerie of Besson,
Nana Mambere Prefecture, forcing the gendarmes to vacate their post. In addition, in
May, the armed group sought to extend its area of influence in western Ouham
Prefecture to control gold mining sites. On 5 June, the leader of the armed group
issued a communiqué announcing the suspension of its participation in the follow -up
and monitoring mechanisms of the Agreement until further notice. On 9 June,
presumed elements of the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation attacked the training
camp of the special mixed security units in Bouar, injuring 14 of its members and a
member of the national armed forces. On the same day, armed individuals attacked a
joint MINUSCA and national forces checkpoint in Pougol near Paoua, injuring two
peacekeepers.
37. Reprisal attacks over cattle theft and crop destruction led to clashes, with 40
recorded incidents in the west from February until 1 June. Between 16 and
19 February, clashes between armed Chadian herders and local communities,
supported by anti-balaka elements, resulted in the death of at least four herders and
two civilians near Batangafo.
38. In Basse-Kotto Prefecture, the local anti-balaka, led by Dimitri Ayoloma
attacked the residence of the Sub-Prefect on 14 March. MINUSCA intervened to
restore order. During the exchange of fire, a peacekeeper was mortally wounded. On
6/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

4 May, MINUSCA launched an operation to neutralize the local anti-balaka group and
improve access to isolated areas.
39. In Bangui, crime levels in the PK5 neighbourhood increased by 18 per cent
between 1 February and 1 June due to criminal gang activities, fuelling feelings of
insecurity among the population. On 31 May, elements from the national armed forces
and the Groupement spécial chargé de la protection républicaine physically
threatened MINUSCA peacekeepers stationed at Camp de Roux in Bangui, injuring
one.

IV. Regional engagement
40. On 22 April, Mr. Touadéra undertook State visits to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Congo, facilitators of the Agreement. The United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the ECCAS secretariat prepared for a joint
assessment of subregional dynamics to form the basis for additional regional activities
to support implementation of the Agreement.

V. Humanitarian situation
41. Intercommunal tensions, clashes among armed groups and attacks against
civilians and humanitarian workers had an impact on the humanitarian situation. The
COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated the humanitarian crisis.
42. As at 1 June, there were approximately 697,000 internally displaced persons, in
addition to 616,000 refugees from the Central African Republic in neighbouring
countries. The United Nations and partners provided humanitarian assistance to
approximately 720,000 people.
43. Humanitarian challenges were particularly acute in Ndélé owing to clashes
between armed groups. In March, local authorities and FPRC elements allegedly
coerced approximately 8,000 internally displaced persons to vacate a site, despite
protection and security risks. In May, further attacks led to additional displacement
of nearly 17,000 persons, of whom over 13,000 sought refuge near MINUSCA
premises. Most humanitarian organizations temporarily suspended their activities in
Ndélé after 14 incidents targeting humanitarian workers; em ergency teams were
subsequently deployed to ensure humanitarian assistance for those newly displaced.
44. Humanitarian workers and facilities were also affected by security conditions in
Bangui, Batangafo, Birao and Kaga Bandoro. A total of 121 attacks aga inst
humanitarians were registered, including intimidation and aggression related to
COVID-19, resulting in two deaths and eight injuries. MINUSCA conducted patrols
and deployed quick reaction forces to protect humanitarian workers in Bamingui,
Birao and Ndélé.
45. National authorities have undertaken a series of mitigation measures to limit the
spread of COVID-19, with support from the World Health Organization and other
partners, including MINUSCA. As at 1 June, the Government had confirmed 1,069
cases of COVID-19, with 23 recoveries and 4 fatalities.
46. In addition to the health response, humanitarian actors identified priority
locations in affected areas, where the United Nations facilitated pre-positioning of
stocks, created isolation centres, including at displacement sites, and maintained
critical lifesaving assistance. In addition, the United Nations supported the
Government’s communication efforts to sensitize 1.2 million people to COVID-19
and assisted local-level crisis committees in implementing the national plan.
20-07544

7/20

S/2020/545

47. The impact of the pandemic on the population has been considerable. The partial
closure of the borders with Cameroon and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
contributed to a 31 per cent increase in prices for imported goods, inclu ding basic
food items. Social distancing measures resulted in a 67 per cent increase in the cost
of urban transportation.
48. The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification conducted in May revealed
increased food insecurity. Despite ongoing food assistance, nearly 2.4 million people
suffer from acute food insecurity, including 750,000 in the emergency phase.
49. Humanitarian activities remained acutely underfunded. As at 1 June, the 2020
humanitarian response plan was only 22 per cent funded, with a g ap of $428 million
out of $553 million, $153 million of which is required for the COVID -19 response.

VI. Protection of civilians
50. The Mission and United Nations country team, in coordination with
humanitarian organizations, worked to strengthen national capacity to protect
civilians by identifying risks, challenges and solutions to mitigate the spread of
COVID-19 and implement contingency plans.
51. MINUSCA adjusted how it implements its protection mandate, while continuing
a robust protection presence to deter possible threats. The approach included
suspending the deployment of surge teams in locations without a permanent civilian
presence and in-person protection training for civilian and uniformed personnel;
virtual protection coordination mechanisms, with minimal impact on capacity to
provide timely and appropriate response to threats; the reorientation of programmatic
funding to support the Government’s community outreach regarding COVID -19 and
communication efforts. MINUSCA and national authorities trained more than 600
civil protection volunteers and 1,690 social mobilizers to educate the population
about the pandemic.
52. MINUSCA continued to provide physical security to displaced persons seeking
refuge near its bases. The Mission reinforced early warning mechanisms, which
improved understanding of protection needs and response to threats in some areas.
53. Projects aimed at mitigating transhumance-related violence were implemented
in various regions by UNDP, IOM and the Food and Agriculture O rganization of the
United Nations (FAO), facilitated by MINUSCA. In Batangafo, a transhumance
hotspot, MINUSCA encouraged local communities to resolve disputes between
transhumant pastoralists and local populations through transhumance management
committees.

VII. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
Extension of State authority
54. Government continued to implement its restoration of State authority strategy
with the support of MINUSCA. From 17 to 19 March, the Ministry of Territorial
Administration and Decentralization conducted predeployment training for 44 newly
confirmed local authorities, including prefects, sub-prefects and prefectural
secretaries-general, as well as training for mayors.
55. Since January, the Government has continued to roll out a pilot initiative in
Bambari, Bouar and Bossangoa to pay civil servant salaries through mobile networks
in order to minimize absences from duty stations, improve service delivery and
increase trust in State representatives.
8/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

Security sector reform
56. MINUSCA continued to advocate with authorities to make progress towards
integrating former combatants into the defence and internal security forces or towards
creating a commission on rank harmonization, including within the framework of the
special mixed security units. The Mission continued to support the establishment of
stronger accountability mechanisms for the defence and internal security forces. On
27 February, the Government adopted a memorandum recommending the
establishment of a national vetting mechanism for new recruits and employed
uniformed personnel. On 15 May, MINUSCA provided equipment to the central
inspectorates of the defence and security forces to facilitate the effective functioning
of the military justice system.
National armed and internal security forces
57. As at 1 June, the national armed forces had a total strength of 8,244 soldiers,
including 619 women; 1,924 soldiers were deployed in 23 locations, representing an
increase of 547 since the previous report. The armed forces were also newly deployed
to Birao, Ndélé and Obo in addition to rotating troops in Alindao and Bangassou. The
effectiveness of the deployments was compromised by logistical and financial
challenges, as well as poor command and control.
58. On 18 February, national authorities, supported by MINUSCA, initiated the
recruitment of 2,600 members of the national armed forces; the c ampaign was
suspended on 27 March owing to COVID-19. On 20 May, national authorities
expressed the wish to resume the recruitment campaign. The European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic trained 267 troops and the Russian
Federation trained 355 troops before suspending operations in March and April,
respectively, owing to the pandemic.
59. As at 1 June, 1,162 police officers and gendarmes, including 39 women, were
deployed in 69 locations, representing an increase of 38 person nel since the previous
report. A total of 1,000 recruits, nearly 26 per cent of them women, continued training,
with the support of MINUSCA. On 2 March, national authorities integrated 200
auxiliary police personnel, including 98 women, within the police f orces, while 50
young people (37 male and 13 female) were integrated into the gendarmerie following
training in Angola. They are undergoing training in both police and gendarmerie
academies. In line with the human rights due diligence policy, MINUSCA is no t
providing support to these recruits prior to proper vetting. The European Union
Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic put on hold its deployment in the
light of the pandemic.
60. The Mine Action Service completed the construction of a regional ammunition
depot in Bouar and rehabilitated an armoury in Bangui. A total of 30 defence and
internal security forces were trained in weapons and ammunition management and
explosive ordnance disposal. MINUSCA has provided temporary storage facilities for
weapons and ammunition in Paoua and Bouar for the special mixed security units.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
61. No disarmament and demobilization operations were carried out during the
reporting period. The resumption of operations is contingent upon the lifting of
COVID-19-related restrictions on travel and on large gatherings and upon the
cooperation of armed groups. On 11 May, the President instructed the responsible
national institutions to plan for the launch a disarm ament and demobilization
operation in the centre of the country. On 29 May, the consultative and follow -up
committee of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme

20-07544

9/20

S/2020/545

discussed a new calendar for operations, aiming to launch operations in the north-east
by mid-June.
62. MINUSCA, IOM and the United Nations Office for Project Services continued
to implement community violence reduction projects. As at 1 June, 4,014
beneficiaries, including 1,570 women, were engaged in income-generation and
community projects. A total of 41 weapons of war, 1,640 artisanal weapons and 913
ammunitions have been collected since August 2019. Since 1 April 2020, projects
have been reoriented to support the COVID-19 response while still achieving the
objective of reducing violence, including the production of hygiene materials, access
to water and the refurbishment of isolation facilities.
Justice and rule of law
63. Operational first-instance and appellate courts increased from 16 to 17 and
deployed judicial personnel decreased from 129 to 119 owing to insecurity, limited
judicial infrastructure and a decrease in judicial missions to armed group -controlled
areas. Capacity-building activities were suspended on 20 March following the
outbreak of COVID-19. MINUSCA and UNDP assisted the Ministry of Justice to
prevent the spread of the virus while ensuring respect for rights and judicial
procedures and maintaining the basic functioning of the justice system.
64. As at 1 June, there were no reported COVID-19 cases in prisons. The Ministry
of Justice, with the support of international partners, finalized a COVID -19
prevention and mitigation strategy for penitentiary establishm ents on 23 April.
Following presidential decrees issued on 24 and 30 April, national authorities, w ith
the support of MINUSCA, identified detainees eligible for release. Out of the total
number of 1,482 detainees, 676 were released. MINUSCA worked with aut horities to
prevent the inadvertent or unlawful release of high-profile detainees or perpetrators
of serious crimes, including crimes of sexual violence.
65. In May, MINUSCA strengthened security measures at the Ngaragba central
prison and its Camp de Roux annex, following threats of possible attacks and escapes
of anti-balaka-affiliated detainees. On 28 May, the reconstruction of a secure section
of Camp de Roux was completed with financial support from the United States
through a joint MINUSCA and UNDP project.
66. The Special Criminal Court continued to investigate eight cases, including an
investigation announced in May into suspected war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Ndélé. Under its urgent temporary measures mandate, MINUSCA
arrested 59 persons suspected of having committed crimes.

VIII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
67. MINUSCA documented 213 incidents of human rights abuses and possible
violations of international humanitarian law. The majority related to attacks on
civilians perpetrated by armed groups, which affected at least 391 victims (238 men,
48 women, 54 boys, 27 girls, 9 unidentified victims and 15 groups of collective
victims), a decrease from the 256 incidents affecting 455 victims during the previous
reporting period. A total of 48 conflict-related civilian deaths were reported.
Signatory armed groups continued to be the most prevalent perpetrators, responsible
for 201 incidents affecting 376 victims. State agents, primarily members of the
national armed forces, were involved in 10 incidents, affecting 12 victims.
68. On 4 and 5 March, the Central African Republic participated in a session of the
Human Rights Committee, which recommended that all victims be afforded an
effective remedy, including before the Special Criminal Court, and that the
10/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation be enabl ed to begin
operations.
Transitional justice
69. On 7 April, the President promulgated the law establishing the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, as called for in the Agreement. The
Commission will be responsible for, inter alia, truth-seeking and identifying root
causes of human rights abuses; dignifying the experiences of victims; proposing a
reparations programme and measures to fight injustice; and pursuing national
reconciliation. MINUSCA and UNDP will provide technical a nd operational support
to ensure the Commission’s independence, including to develop its rules of procedure
and budget and to train staff in human rights investigations.
Conflict-related sexual violence
70. MINUSCA documented 80 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence
affecting 109 victims (53 women, 54 girls and 2 men, including 72 rapes or attempted
rapes, 1 of which resulted in death, 6 forced marriages and 2 sexual slavery cases).
Incidents were most prevalent in transhumance areas where women and girls were
attacked by armed herders possibly affiliated with ex-Séléka. Local authorities, with
the support of MINUSCA, organized 10 awareness-raising sessions for 78 women
and girls on access to justice.
71. An assessment of local capacity for monitoring and investigating sexual
violence in Bria conducted by MINUSCA in February identified fear of reprisals and
stigmatization as the main obstacles to victims reporting incidents. The Mission is
intensifying awareness-raising activities, particularly in rural communities along the
Bria axis.
Children and armed conflict
72. On 27 February, the National Assembly adopted the child protection c ode,
which awaits promulgation by the President. The draft bill criminalizes the
recruitment and use of children by armed groups, as well as other grave acts against
children, and designates children associated with national armed forces and groups as
victims.
73. A total of 186 children (64 girls and 122 boys) were separated from armed
groups to enter reintegration programmes run by the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF). An additional 127 self-demobilized children (39 girls and 88 boys)
formerly associated with anti-balaka militias in villages around Kaga Bandoro were
enrolled in reintegration programmes.
74. School closures resulting from the pandemic increased the vulnerability of
children. MINUSCA and UNICEF developed radio announcements targeting armed
groups, communities and children on child protection issues.

IX. Socioeconomic situation
75. According to a rapid study conducted jointly by the Government and donors,
the gross domestic product (GDP) of the Central African Republic is projected to drop
by 6.2 percentage points, leading to a growth rate of negative 1.2 per cent, if the
COVID-19 pandemic persists for at least six months. Gross domestic product is
expected to be severely affected by the contraction of the productive sectors and the
decline in exports, causing public revenue to fall and weakening the State’s capacity
to meet expenditures. The contraction of economic activities, including the closure of
20-07544

11/20

S/2020/545

small and informal businesses, has been amplified by the pandemic and has already
led to the deterioration of living conditions, particularly as prices for basic goods have
increased. The World Bank has estimated inflation at 3.5 per cent.
76. An estimated $222.5 million will be required for the national COVID -19
response. As at 1 June, development partners committed an additional $87.1 million
in direct budget support for 2020. The United Nations developed a COVID-19
socioeconomic recovery and response plan of $138.9 million, with immediate
initiatives financed through reprogrammed funds.

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
77. As at 1 June, the MINUSCA military component stood at 11,370 (4.1 per cent
women), out of an authorized strength of 11,650 personnel, including 311 staff
officers (51 women) and 153 military observers (40 women). It compris ed 11 infantry
battalions; 1 high-readiness battalion; 1 battle group; 1 special forces company;
1 quick reaction force company; and enabling units, specifically 1 military police
company, 5 engineering companies, 1 heavy transport company, 3 level II hosp itals
and 1 level I hospital with a forward surgery module. There were also three helicopter
units, including an aviation unit whose advance party was deployed on 29 May. The
MINUSCA force had a gap of an armed aviation unit and a quick reaction force; the
latter is under deployment.
Police component
78. As at 1 June, the MINUSCA police component stood at 2,008 personnel
(11.75 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 2,080, including 332
individual police officers, 1,676 personnel in 11 formed police units and 1 police
support unit. The police support unit and six formed police units are in Bangui under
the joint task force. Five formed police units are deployed in Bambari, Berberati,
Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro. Part of the Kaga Bandoro unit is deployed in
Batangafo. On 16 May, part of the formed police units from Bangui and Bambari were
temporarily deployed to Ndélé.
Civilian personnel
79. As at 1 June, 1,425 civilian personnel (26 per cent of whom were women),
including 215 United Nations Volunteers, and 102 government-provided corrections
personnel, served with MINUSCA, representing 91 per cent of the 1,559 authorized
positions.
Status of forces agreement
80. On 14 April, 15 trucks transporting cement for a MINUSCA contractor were
impounded by the customs office but released on 7 May following discussions
between MINUSCA and the Government. On 17 April, national customs and
gendarmerie insisted on inspecting two containers of a MINUSCA military unit, on
the grounds that they contained ammunition. The containers were released on 18 May,
following MINUSCA intervention.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
81. A total of 115 security incidents involving United Nations personnel were
recorded. Three personnel were killed: one during a hostile attack; one after being
12/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

kidnapped; and one accidentally. A total of 36 personnel were injured: 3 in a hostile
attack, 1 by stabbing, 5 in mob attacks and 27 in road traffic accidents. In February,
MINUSCA was faced with a misinformation campaign to incite violence against four
international and local staff members, including through social and local media.
United Nations system personnel were targeted eight times. Movements were
restricted countrywide owing to security risks and COVID-19 prevention measures.
As at 1 June, 21 cases of COVID-19 among Mission personnel had been confirmed,
including 2 in which the affected personnel had recovered.
82. National authorities, with the support of MINUSCA, opened 21 investigations
into cases of attacks against peacekeepers; 18 are under police investigation, while 3
are before investigating judges.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
83. Seven allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were reported, six against
military personnel and one against a civilian contractor. A total of nine sexual
exploitation and abuse allegations have been recorded in 2020.
84. MINUSCA continued to prevent misconduct through robust preventive
measures and stronger coordination efforts between Mission components. Training
sessions on the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse were conducted
online owing to COVID-19.
85. As a result of intensive outreach activities, the training of 75 sexual exploitation
and abuse focal points, and a country-wide network of 27 community-based
complaint mechanisms comprising 625 members, the population has become
increasingly aware of the standards of conduct expected of United Nations personnel,
in addition to available reporting channels.
86. The Field Victims’ Rights Advocate continued to coordinate support for victims
with relevant United Nations entities to ensure that victims received appropriate and
timely assistance. Services for victims were, however, affected by COVID -19
restrictions.
Support considerations
87. MINUSCA continued to reduce its environmental footprint, including
wastewater risk, by installing 2 treatment plants in addition to the 46 already
operational. The Mission has installed 172 meters to monitor usage of the atmo spheric
water generator plant in Obo. Composting, incineration of solid waste and
remediation of the Kolongo landfill continue, coupled with a pilot waste segregation
project at the logistics base in Bangui. MINUSCA developed a master waste
management plan that includes development of waste management yards and
composting to reduce waste-related risk. The Mission continued to install meter
readers to expand monitoring of power consumption.
Action for peacekeeping and performance optimization
88. MINUSCA continued to enhance its performance in line with the Action for
Peacekeeping. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, MINUSCA has adapted its approach
to implementing its prioritized mandate, including through increased use of
technology, with an emphasis on protecting civilians and maintaining stability;
preserving gains in the peace process and viability of the Agreement; assisting in the
timely holding of elections and maintenance of the rule of law; facilitating
humanitarian access; and protecting United Nations personnel.
89. The Force Commander completed three evaluations of contingents, of which
two were satisfactory and one was commended for exemplary performance. The
20-07544

13/20

S/2020/545

Mission evaluated one sector headquarters with satisfactory results. Identified
challenges included gaps in intelligence gathering, including as a result of language
barriers with the population, scattered deployment owing to the number of temporary
operating bases and insufficient perimeter security. Each evaluated unit and
headquarters received specific recommendations and instructions to improve
performance, including military skills, language capacity, the reduction of road traffic
accidents and the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. Evaluations have been
suspended since 22 March owing to COVID-19 and are expected to resume when
related mitigation measures are lifted.
90. The police component re-evaluated 10 formed police units and the police
support unit. Ten units were rated as satisfactory overall, while one formed poli ce unit
was rated as needs improvement owing to equipment maintenance, availability and
serviceability. Performance improvement plans were drawn up for each unit to
address identified shortfalls, including major equipment and self -sustainment,
expiration of life and non-lethal ammunitions of some units and insufficient perimeter
security.
91. MINUSCA continued to implement the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System to improve performance assessment, coordination and integrated
planning. A range of intended impacts and outcomes aligned with the mandate and
priority objectives were adopted.

XI. Financial considerations
92. The General Assembly, by its resolution 73/312 and decision 73/555,
appropriated the amount of $910.1 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020. As at 1 June 2020, unpaid assessed
contributions to the special account for MINUSCA amounted to $159.8 million. The
total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date
amounted to $2,099.5 million. Reimbursement of the costs of troop and formed police
personnel, as well as of contingent-owned equipment, has been made for the period
up to 31 December 2019, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

XII. Observations
93. I am encouraged that the people and Government of the Central African
Republic continue to make progress in advancing the peace process, even as the
country battles the COVID-19 pandemic. In the months ahead, and as the country
responds to the health emergency while also continuing to advance the political
process, implement the Agreement and prepare for elections, all stakeholders have to
demonstrate resolve and resilience and work in solidarity to address those challenges.
94. Despite challenges to its implementation, the Agreement remains the primary
framework for restoring and sustaining peace in the country. I commend the efforts
made by the Government and other signatories to utilize the implementation
mechanisms of the Agreement. I also welcome the proactive and constructive
engagement between the Government and some armed group leaders to address their
concerns through peaceful means, which is necessary for building trust. I welcome
the efforts of MINUSCA to strengthen the participation of women in the local
monitoring and implementation mechanisms, which is essential for sustained peace.
95. Authorities of the Central African Republic have made important progress in
advancing essential political reforms in line with their commitments under the
Agreement, including the passage of related legislation. I particularly welcome the
14/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

law establishing the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparations and Reconciliation,
which will provide a mechanism for national reconciliation. It is important to
maintain the momentum created by the establishment of the Commission in order to
catalyse public support for the Agreement and contribute to local stability and social
cohesion. Pending legislation on decentralization and the financing of local
authorities should be passed expeditiously to address historical grievances linked to
exclusion and marginalization.
96. While the continuing decrease in violations of the Agreement is encouraging, I
am deeply concerned about ongoing violent confrontations involving armed groups,
resulting in violence against civilians, humanitarians, national armed forces and
peacekeepers, which may constitute violations of international humanitarian la w. The
clashes risk deepening intercommunal tensions and fragmentation of some signatory
armed groups along ethnic lines. I am also concerned by the public rejection of the
Agreement and the expansionist actions by some armed groups, which are in direct
violation of the Agreement. I encourage all signatories to enhance dialogue and seek
options for building confidence, with the support of international partners,
particularly the guarantors and facilitators, while ensuring accountability for
violations. In particular, I call upon all parties to comply with the Agreement, end the
use of sexual violence and hold perpetrators accountable.
97. It is particularly urgent that all parties adhere to my call for a global ceasefire
so that efforts may be concentrated on combating the pandemic. I welcome the
positive response of some armed groups to my call, and I encourage them to
immediately translate it into a cessation of violence. The time has come for
stakeholders to take a firm, unequivocal stance regarding the ap plication of sanctions
under article 35 of the Agreement, as lasting peace requires justice for the victims of
violence and accountability for serious crimes. I welcome the robust response of
MINUSCA to protect civilians from armed group violence, as well as the continued
support it provides to national authorities pursuing accountability for serious crimes
and human rights abuses, including through its urgent temporary measures.
98. I am concerned that no progress has been made in advancing the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme since November 2019, a
core requirement of the Agreement. While I welcome the Government’s efforts to
engage signatory armed groups, including in the operationalization of the special
mixed security units, I urge all parties to participate earnestly, including through the
creation of reintegration opportunities for former combatants and the harmonization
of ranks.
99. I welcome the progressive operationalization of the special mixed security units
and urge all stakeholders to work together in good faith to facilitate their long-awaited
deployment before the elections. Support by all partners is crucial, including
appropriate advice to the authorities regarding the management of the weapons and
ammunition. At the same time, I am deeply troubled that some participating armed
groups continue to violently undermine ongoing efforts to restore State authority, in
flagrant violation of the Agreement.
100. The elections on the horizon will be affected by the chal lenges of organizing a
sensitive political process in the midst of a global pandemic. I am encouraged that
stakeholders across the political spectrum remain committed to constitutional order.
An approach comprising inclusive, transparent dialogue and polit ical consensus has
to guide major strategic decisions in order to maintain an environment conducive to
peaceful elections. I appeal to all political actors to resist any temptation to politicize
the pandemic.
101. All citizens of the Central African Republic have a stake in the electoral process.
It is therefore important to proactively engage with civil society, including religious
20-07544

15/20

S/2020/545

leaders, women and youth. The Prime Minister’s decision to include the political
opposition and civil society in the strategic committee on elections is an important
step forward. However, national authorities have to expedite the establishment of a
consultative framework through which political parties can engage in dialogue and
resolve differences.
102. Maintaining a conducive environment for the holding of free, timely and
peaceful elections mainly relies on the respect of political parties for a consensually
adopted code of conduct to promote the peaceful resolution of electoral disputes
through dialogue and applicable rule of law mechanisms. Equal political rights, as
well as the unequivocal prohibition of hate speech and any form of collusion between
political leaders and armed groups in the run-up to elections will be instrumental for
successful elections across the country.
103. I commend the national electoral authority for publishing a revised electoral
calendar adapted to the challenges posed by the pandemic while adhering to
constitutional timelines. I also welcome the important progress made in preparing for
the voter registration process, as well as advances in amending the legal framework
to ensure the franchise of refugees and other citizens in the diaspora. I call upon host
countries to facilitate the participation of refugees from the Central African Republic
in the elections. It is critical for the electoral process to be fully inclusive, and I
therefore call for enhanced efforts aimed at encouraging the active participation of
women, both as voters and candidates. I welcome efforts under way to ensure safe
and contamination-free voter registration and balloting, and to explain those measures
to the population.
104. I welcome the generous support already provided by the European Union, the
United States and other partners to the UNDP basket fund for elections and ap peal to
international partners for their support in filling the remaining gap. The timely
availability of required resources is important for the holding of free, fair, timely and
credible elections.
105. Important progress has been made in extending the authority of the State, and I
welcome the further deployment of authorities and magistrates, as well as national
defence and internal security forces. Continued efforts are required to support
personnel in their areas of deployment in order to reduce absenteeism and misconduct,
including exactions against the population which fuel discontent and conflict.
106. The Government has made commendable efforts to improve the accountability
of security forces. The people of the Central African Republic have to see that the
State is increasingly assuming its responsibilities to protect them and that it holds
itself to account for failures to do so. Authorities of the Central African Republic have
to continue their efforts to operationalize the military justice system and develop
professional, accountable and inclusive forces that uphold the rule of law. It is also
important for international partners to provide unified and coordinated support to the
defence forces of the Central African Republic.
107. A shared respect for the rule of law is essential for lasting peace. In order for
the people of the Central African Republic to have confidence in national authorities,
all State actors have to demonstrate transparency and consistency in the application
of the law and build trust in this challenging context. The criminal justice system
should continue to effectively fight impunity. I therefore welcome the decision of the
Special Criminal Court to investigate allegations of serious crimes committed during
recent violent clashes in Ndélé.
108. I remain deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, further compounded by the pandemic, which requires continued urgent
support by international partners. I welcome the Government’s quick action to c urb
16/20

20-07544

S/2020/545

the pandemic, which the United Nations and other partners have been closely
supporting. I call for full respect for the humanitarian principle of non -discrimination
and urge all stakeholders to continue to pursue an apolitical approach to the COVID -19
response and refrain from misinformation or hate speech.
109. I strongly condemn continued attacks against aid workers and non-governmental
organizations, as well as the targeting of peacekeepers, which may amount to war
crimes. I am optimistic that enhanced collaboration between MINUSCA and
humanitarian partners in Ndélé will strengthen the protection of civilians and
humanitarian workers in the city. International partners working in the Central
African Republic should not be the target of any act inciti ng violence or spreading
misinformation. I call upon the authorities of the Central African Republic to uphold
the rule of law in this regard.
110. Sustained support by countries of the region is essential to achieving lasting
peace in the Central African Republic. I therefore look forward to the resumption of
the joint bilateral commissions and other initiatives to improve the bilateral
relationships with neighbouring countries. I also welcome the collaboration and
cooperation that characterizes the international community’s engagement in the
Central African Republic. While strong partnerships remain key, the responsibility
for building a brighter future ultimately rests with the people and Government of the
Central African Republic.
111. MINUSCA will continue to carefully balance the good offices and political
engagement of the Special Representative and a robust security posture to protect
civilians and facilitate conditions conducive to peace and stability, particularly during
the electoral period. It is therefore a concern that MINUSCA is still facing gaps in
operational requirements for discharging its core mandated tasks, including an
aviation unit. I appeal to troop- and police-contributing countries to consider
deploying this essential capability and to work closely with the Secretariat to ensure
the deployment of police officers with the requisite expertise and profile. I welcome
the ongoing efforts of MINUSCA to meet the highest standards of performance,
including by being at the forefront of initiatives aimed at optimizing resources.
112. Finally, I would like to express my deep appreciation to the Special
Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur
Ndiaye, for his dedicated leadership. I further express my gratitude to the United
Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for their tireless efforts to deliver on the
Mission’s mandate in difficult and unforeseen circumstances. I also thank all troop and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and multilateral
organizations, non-governmental organizations and all other partners for their
invaluable support in contributing to peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. I also wish to express my gratitude to the African Union and ECCAS, and
to the regional partners, for their continued pursuit of sustainable peace for the people
of the Central African Republic.

20-07544

17/20

S/2020/545

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic: military and police
strength as at 1 June 2020
Military component

Police component

Military
observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed police
units

Individual police
officer

Argentina

–

2

–

2

–

–

Bangladesh

12

18

999

1 029

–

–

Benin

3

5

–

8

–

20

Bhutan

2

2

–

4

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Brazil

3

5

–

8

–

1

Burkina Faso

–

4

–

4

–

32

Burundi

5

6

745

756

–

–

Cambodia

5

6

200

211

–

–

Cameroon

3

5

746

754

279

20

China

–

2

–

2

–

–

Colombia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Congo

5

10

–

15

139

2

Côte d’Ivoire

–

4

–

4

–

20

Czechia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

–

3

Egypt

8

22

982

1012

139

7

France

–

9

–

9

–

3

Gabon

–

–

450

450

–

–

Gambia

4

4

–

8

–

5

Ghana

4

10

–

14

–

7

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

16

Indonesia

6

7

200

213

140

5

Jordan

3

7

–

10

–

18

Kenya

7

8

–

15

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

1

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

16

Mauritania

8

7

450

465

280

–

Mexico

–

1

–

1

–

–

Morocco

2

16

750

768

–

–

Nepal

5

13

720

738

–

–

Niger

1

4

–

5

–

32

Nigeria

0

3

–

3

–

–

Pakistan

9

30

1 213

1 252

–

–

Paraguay

2

1

–

3

–

–

Peru

6

9

204

219

–

–

Country

18/20

20-07544

S/2020/545
Military component
Military
observers

Staff officers

Philippines

2

1

Portugal

–

9

Moldova (Republic of)

2

1

Romania

–

–

Russian Federation

3

Rwanda
Senegal

Police component
Total

Formed police
units

–

3

–

–

179

188

–

16

–

3

–

–

–

–

–

7

11

–

14

–

–

9

18

1 360

1 387

420

17

–

6

10

16

279

37

Serbia

2

3

72

77

–

–

Sierra Leone

4

1

–

5

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

3

Sri Lanka

–

1

110

111

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

4

Togo

4

6

–

10

–

20

Tunisia

2

–

–

2

–

20

United Republic of Tanzania

–

5

450

455

–

–

United States of America

–

7

–

7

–

–

Uruguay

–

2

–

2

–

–

Viet Nam

1

5

–

6

–

–

Zambia

8

14

909

931

–

–

Zimbabwe

2

–

–

2

–

–

Total

152

314

10 749

11 215

1 676

332

Country

20-07544

Troops

Individual police
officer

19/20

S/2020/545

Map
20/20

Annex II

20-07544
