S/2004/526

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 25 June 2004 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I write with reference to the letter dated 14 June 2004 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Immigration of Papua New Guinea, The Rt Hon. Sir Rabbie
Namaliu, addressed to me regarding the peace process in Bougainville and the
request contained therein for the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) (see annex).
Since the Security Council’s last meeting on 6 May 2004, UNOMB has
reported further progress by the parties in the implementation of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement. As of 21 June 2004, the ex-combatants have destroyed 1,651 or
85 per cent of the contained weapons. Six of Bougainville’s ten districts have now
completed the weapons disposal programme. UNOMB continues to receive requests
to supervise weapons containment in the so-called “No-Go-Zone”.
At the end of July 2004, 50 new police recruits are due to graduate and join the
Bougainville Police Force, which has now been issued a distinct uniform. The
expected deployment in Bougainville of 19 Australian federal police officers will
further contribute to strengthening policing on the island.
The Bougainville Constitution Commission is close to finalizing the third and
final draft of the constitution. The Commission has indicated its determination to
complete its assignment by the end of June 2004. It is expected that the constitution
would be adopted by the Bougainville Constituent Assembly in mid-July and soon
thereafter be approved by the Government of Papua New Guinea. This, in turn, will
set in motion preparations for the election of the first autonomous Bougainville
government. The Government of Papua New Guinea has expressed its firm
commitment to mobilize the required resources for the completion of the electoral
process. It is the intention of the parties to hold elections by the end of 2004.
Starting in September 2004, the United Nations Development Programme, in
close consultations with UNOMB, will, in its rehabilitation activities on the island,
focus on good governance and sustainable livelihood. Meanwhile, the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) has provided educational materials to 600
primary school students in various villages of Bougainville, including the “No-GoZone”. UNOMB has facilitated UNICEF activities through the provision of office
space and logistical support to its locally hired programme manager.
Given the above progress and the crucial role of UNOMB in building
confidence among the parties, as well as the need for it to complete the remaining

04-40966 (E) 010704

*0440966*

S/2004/526

mandated tasks as reflected in the attached letter of the Foreign Minister, I
recommend the extension of the UNOMB mandate for a further six-month period,
from 1 July to 31 December 2004.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
