United Nations

S/PV.6425

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6425th meeting
Tuesday, 16 November 2010, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hague . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spindelegger
Mr. Alkalaj
Mr. Patriota
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Matsumoto
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Ajumogobia
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Okello Oryem
Mrs. Rodham Clinton

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-64056 (E)

*1064056*

S/PV.6425

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karti
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome Mr. Karti.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Amum to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan.
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Mr. Mbeki, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Johannesburg.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

2

“The Security Council emphasizes that the
situation in the Sudan represents one of the most
urgent challenges facing the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
peace and stability of the Sudan, and to a
peaceful and prosperous future for all Sudanese
people, and underlines its support for the
Sudanese parties’ full and timely implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
including the holding of the referendums on the
self-determination of the people of Southern
Sudan and on the status of Abyei, and of the
popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile, and for a peaceful, comprehensive and
inclusive resolution of the situation in Darfur.
“The Security Council recalls that the
Sudanese parties have full responsibility for the
implementation of the CPA, reaffirms its support
for and encourages their further efforts to that end
and welcomes the leadership of the African
Union and the support provided by the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under
the leadership of President Thabo Mbeki, and by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
“The Security Council recognizes the
parties’ commitment to CPA implementation,
remains actively seized of the matter and
expresses its readiness to act as necessary in
support of full implementation of the CPA by the
parties. The Council underlines the importance of
close coordination between international actors
involved in assisting the Sudanese peace
processes.
“The Security Council urges the CPA
parties, while working to make unity attractive
and recognizing the right to self-determination of
the people of Southern Sudan, to take urgent
action to implement their commitment,
reaffirmed at the High-Level Meeting on the
Sudan held in New York on 24 September, to
ensure peaceful, credible, timely and free
referendums that reflect the will of the people of
Southern Sudan and Abyei, as provided for in the
CPA.
“In this regard, the Security Council
welcomes the start of registration for the
Southern Sudan referendum on 15 November and

10-64056

S/PV.6425

encourages further efforts to ensure that the
referendums are held on 9 January 2011 in
accordance with the CPA and as scheduled in the
timeline published for the Southern Sudan
referendum by the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission.
“The Security Council is concerned by the
continued delays in releasing to the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission the full funding
needed for preparations to continue to move
forward. The Security Council calls on the parties
and all Member States to respect the outcome of
credible referendums, held in accordance with the
CPA, that reflect the will of the people of
Southern Sudan and Abyei. It requests all parties
to refrain from unilateral action and to implement
the CPA.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of the CPA parties’ making rapid
progress on a way forward for Abyei’s
referendum and outstanding CPA issues, and on
resolving critical post-referendum issues in a
peaceful, mutually beneficial manner, including
the border, security, citizenship, debts, assets,
currency and natural resources.
“In this context, the Security Council
welcomes progress in the negotiations, led by
President Mbeki, towards a framework for
resolving outstanding issues relating to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the future relations of North and
South Sudan, on which agreement was reached on
13 November. The Security Council urges the
parties to resume negotiations on Abyei
expeditiously and to reach agreement on all
outstanding issues without further delay.
“The Security Council underlines the need
for the CPA parties to promote calm, including by
providing immediate and ongoing reassurance to
people of all nationalities in the Sudan, including
southerners in the North and northerners in the
South, that their rights, safety and property will
be respected whatever the outcome of the
referendums. The Security Council calls for an
immediate end to statements threatening the
security of vulnerable populations. The Security
Council also emphasizes that protection of
civilians is primarily the responsibility of the

10-64056

Sudanese authorities. The Security Council urges
the parties to work actively with local leaders to
mitigate tensions in Abyei and other border areas.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and reiterates its call for all parties to
cooperate fully with the Mission in the discharge
of its mandate in this crucial period, in particular
by ensuring full, unhindered access and freedom
of movement for UNMIS personnel and
equipment, and for the delivery of referendum
materials. The Security Council welcomes and
encourages the United Nations work in
contingency planning around the referendums and
calls on Member States to support UNMIS
efforts.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations Secretary-General’s Panel
for the Referendums led by President Benjamin
Mkapa. The Security Council underlines the
importance of close coordination between the
Panel and all domestic and international
observation missions.
“The Security Council underlines that,
whatever the outcome of the referendums,
continued cooperation between the CPA parties
will remain essential for managing the transition
process, implementing the post-referendum
arrangements and maintaining peace and
prosperity, and stresses the mutual benefits of
partnership in this regard. The Council
encourages the international community to
support these efforts. The Council urges the CPA
parties to respect their obligations.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union/United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar,
the work of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé
and the principles guiding the negotiations. The
Council strongly urges all rebel movements to
join the peace process without further delay or
preconditions, and all parties immediately to
cease hostilities and engage constructively in
negotiations with a view to finding a lasting
peace in Darfur. The Security Council expresses
concern about attacks on civilians by militias and
calls for all support to such groups to cease. The
Security Council expresses its willingness to

3

S/PV.6425

consider measures against any party whose
actions undermine peace in Darfur.
“The Security Council expresses deep
concern about the increases in violence and
insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire
violations, attacks by rebel groups, aerial
bombardment by the Government of the Sudan,
increased inter-tribal fighting, and attacks on
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers, which
have restricted humanitarian access to conflict
areas where vulnerable populations reside. In this
context, the Security Council calls on all parties
to protect civilians and maintain full, safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian workers to
the population in need of assistance. The Security
Council notes the need to support efforts to halt
arms flows into Darfur in contravention of the
arms embargo strengthened by resolution 1945
(2010). The Security Council recalls the
importance it attaches to an end to impunity, and
to justice for crimes committed in Darfur.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and reiterates its call on the
Government of the Sudan and all relevant parties
to cooperate fully with the mission in discharging
its mandate, and to provide full unhindered
access and freedom of movement, as well as its
call for an end to impunity for those who attack
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.
“The Security Council welcomes improved
relations between the Sudan and Chad and
encourages them to cooperate further in order to
contribute to peace and stability in Darfur and the
wider region.
“The Security Council encourages full
implementation of the Eastern Sudan Peace
Agreement, including the provisions regarding
rehabilitation, recovery and development, and
welcomes the initiative of the Government of
Kuwait to hold a conference on investment and
development in Eastern Sudan in December 2010.
“The Security Council calls for respect for
international law, international human rights law
and humanitarian law; protection of freedom of
expression; humanitarian access across the
Sudan, including in the border areas; and an end
to all harassment of civil society. The Security

4

Council underlines the importance of increased
participation of women in the Sudanese peace
processes.
“The Council notes the considerable
humanitarian, early recovery and peacebuilding
needs of the Sudan and encourages the Sudanese
authorities and international donors to fulfil their
pledges to address them.
“The Security Council underlines that full
and timely implementation of the CPA is essential
to peace and stability in the Sudan and the region
and to future cooperation between the Sudan and
the international community, and recognizes that
enduring cooperation between the parties will be
essential for the benefit of all Sudanese people.
The Council affirms that the core objective of the
international community and all stakeholders in
the Sudan is the peaceful coexistence of the
people of the Sudan, democratic governance, rule
of law, accountability, equality, respect, human
rights, justice and economic development, in
particular the establishment of the conditions for
conflict affected communities to build, strong,
sustainable livelihoods.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/24.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Council at a moment of
critical importance for the Sudanese people and for the
subregion. In less than two months, the people of
Southern Sudan will exercise their right to vote on the
future of the South, as provided for in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) of 2005 and
as supported by this Council and the international
community.
The registration process for the referendum has
begun throughout Southern Sudan, as well as in 165
locations in the North and eight foreign countries. I
commend
the
Southern
Sudan
Referendum
Commission for this achievement. With the
commencement of this process, the referendum is on
track.
To ensure that the referendum is conducted in an
orderly fashion and that the Sudanese people

10-64056

S/PV.6425

peacefully accept the outcome, it is imperative that the
process be credible and transparent, and that it reflect
the aspirations of the population.
I remain concerned by delays in the preparations,
partly resulting from considerable national funding
shortfalls. All remaining obstacles should be removed
so that the Referendum Commission can finance its
operations; appoint, train and deploy the necessary
personnel; and take key decisions without delay.
The international community, including the
United
Nations
family,
non-governmental
organizations and donors, stands ready to provide
further assistance. The United Nations Mission in the
Sudan continues to give technical and logistical
support to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and is deploying additional staff to assist
the process. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will contribute
aviation assets, and the United Nations Development
Programme and the International Organization for
Migration are assisting in the procurement of materials
and out-of-country voting.
I have also established a Panel, chaired by former
President of Tanzania Benjamin Mkapa, to monitor the
referendums for Southern Sudan and the Abyei area.
The Panel is in the country to monitor the first week of
the registration process. I call on the Sudanese parties
to make the most of its presence.
In addition to this direct support to the process,
the humanitarian community has developed a
contingency plan to provide timely assistance in the
event of referendum-related violence. Approximately
$63 million are needed to pre-position humanitarian
assistance near potential hotspots. We will also need to
ensure access to the contested border areas. The
Council’s support in these efforts would be welcome.
Notwithstanding the international community’s
good will and support, the referendums are Sudanese
processes. The commitment of the international
community cannot supplant the willingness of the
parties to meet their responsibilities. The Government
of the Sudan, the Government of Southern Sudan and
the referendum Commissions must rise to this
challenge.
The CPA parties have reiterated their
responsibility on several occasions, not only for the
organization and conduct of the referendums, but also

10-64056

for the preservation of security and the creation of an
environment conducive to the exercise of civil and
political rights. In this regard, the protection of
Southern Sudanese who live in the North, and of
northerners who live in the South, is of major concern.
So, too, is the possibility of a return to the suffering
and loss of life seen during the long war between the
North and the South.
I welcome the recent statement by ministers of
the Governments of the Sudan and Southern Sudan that
a return to war is not an option. Yet, we have also
heard hostile public statements and accusations of
ceasefire violations, which risk heightening anxiety
and provoking isolated security incidents that can
escalate into a wider conflict. The potential for an
unintentional conflict is especially high in Abyei,
where the Misseriya will soon begin their annual
southward migration with emotions running high and
where little progress has been made in finding a
solution to the political impasse.
We are working with both parties on options for
possible augmentation of United Nations troops to
increase referendum and post-referendum security as
well as to increase our capacity to verify and monitor
possible ceasefire violations and to protect civilians
throughout the mission area. However, the presence of
United Nations troops will not be enough to prevent a
return to war should wide-spread hostilities erupt. Only
a demonstrated commitment by the parties to refrain
from inflammatory statements, uphold the CPA
ceasefire mechanisms and reassure the population of
their willingness to work together will succeed in
maintaining peace.
To that end, negotiations on post-referendum
arrangements are vital in order to address the
apprehensions of the Sudanese population. The need is
particularly acute in Abyei, where confusion and fear
about post-referendum citizenship, grazing rights,
access to water points and oil revenue sharing are
contributing to a political and security minefield.
I am encouraged that the CPA parties are
discussing these and other issues through negotiations
facilitated by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan. I urge them to break
the deadlock on Abyei, move towards holding a
credible referendum in Southern Sudan and design a
peaceful and prosperous future for Northern and
Southern Sudan in which the protection and security of

5

S/PV.6425

minority populations is assured, irrespective of the
outcome of the referendum.
This brings me to the situation in Darfur, where
there remains an urgent need to reach a comprehensive
and inclusive settlement. The Joint Chief Mediator,
with the support of the Government of Qatar and other
partners, has made progress. He is consulting with the
parties on possible compromises on outstanding issues,
the most important of which is the administrative status
of Darfur.
The Doha settlement has been designed so that
other movements — particularly the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM) and Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA)-Abdul Wahid — can join the process.
Mr. Bassolé continues to consult with them with a view
to engaging them in the negotiations. I welcome steps
taken by JEM to rejoin the process and their recent
high-level presence in Doha.
Unfortunately, renewed clashes are taking place
on the ground between the Sudan armed forces and the
JEM, and hostilities are continuing between the Sudan
armed forces and SLA-Abdul Wahid in Jebel Marra.
I am deeply concerned at the impact of those
hostilities on innocent civilians, which is completely
unacceptable, and stress again the urgent need for full
access to eastern Jebel Marra, where the humanitarian
situation is reportedly dire. I urge members of the
Council to join me in demanding that all restrictions
placed by the parties on the movement of UNAMID
and the humanitarian community be lifted. The
disturbing implication of that fighting is that the parties
have not yet decided to give up the military path.
I therefore make four specific requests of the
Council.
First, encourage the Government and the
movements to show flexibility as the Joint Chief
Mediator searches with them for compromises. For any
agreement to gain traction inside Darfur, it must
address the roots of the conflict and end the
marginalization of the region. That will require
significant concessions in the areas of power and
wealth sharing, and genuine efforts to address
questions of national and international justice and of
truth and reconciliation.
Second, encourage movements outside of the
process to engage and demonstrate, through concrete
measures, their commitment to the peace process. It is

6

particularly important to urge the Government and
JEM to renew their cessation-of-hostilities agreement
and negotiate cease-fire protocols.
Third, support the outcome of the Doha process
and the work that will follow to generate a popular
consensus on the terms of peace.
Fourth, encourage the Government of the Sudan
to undertake concrete actions to address the demands
of the people of Darfur for security, particularly in
relation to criminality and impunity, respect for their
political and civil rights, and economic support to
rebuild their lives and return to their homes should
they wish to do so. To the same end, I call upon the
Sudan to act in accordance with the Council’s decision
as outlined in resolution 1593 (2005).
The coming months are likely to be difficult for
the people of the Sudan and the international
community engaged there. The referendum has the
potential to change the future of the country and send
shockwaves throughout the region. The international
community and the CPA parties, having emphasized
the importance of making unity attractive during the
past five years, must now respect the right of the
population of Southern Sudan to decide.
As we move forward, we must recall that the
referendum, as momentous as it may appear, is one
element of an agreement that ended a bitter war. That
same agreement also paved the way for deepening
democratization and development inside the Sudan, as
well as improved regional stability. The Sudanese
parties must recognize that the vision of a new Sudan,
articulated in the CPA, remains as valid today as it was
half a decade ago, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum.
By renewing the trust achieved in 2005, the
parties can develop productive models of association
and cooperation. Doing so will also have a seminal and
positive impact for the final resolution of the conflict
in Darfur.
The role of the Council remains essential. I urge
you to help build bridges between the north and south
and, in the same spirit, to ensure that the fundamental
imbalances fuelling conflict elsewhere in the Sudan are
addressed so that Darfur can be brought into a stable,
prosperous and equitable future for the Sudan.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

I look forward to continuing to work closely with
the Security Council as the referendums draw near and
as we seek to help the Sudan meet those critical tests.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I am now hoping to give the floor to Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan. We cannot see him on
the screen since there has been a power failure in
Johannesburg, but I believe he can hear us and that we
may be able to hear him.
Mr. Mbeki: I can assure you, Mr. President, there
is no problem in Johannesburg; the failure is in the
lines.
The African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel for Sudan would like to thank the Council for
giving us the opportunity to address the Council for the
second time this year.
As the Council is aware, three of the urgent
challenges facing the Sudan are, one, the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA); two, negotiating the postreferendum arrangement; and three, achieving a just
and lasting peace in Darfur.
With regard to the first challenge, we would like
to confirm that the registration of voters for the
Southern Sudan referendum started yesterday. We are
convinced that everybody concerned is determined to
ensure that the entire referendum process proceeds in a
manner that will contribute to the credibility of the
referendum. As part of this process, the political
parties, including the National Congress Party (NCP)
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM),
have acceded to the code of conduct prepared by our
Panel, which binds them to ensure free and fair
referendums and popular consultations. At the same
time, they have committed themselves to respecting the
outcome of the referendum.
To support the referendum process, the Panel will
sustain its close contact with the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), the NCP, the Government of
the Sudan, the SPLM, the Government of the Southern
Sudan, the United Nations monitoring panel headed by
His Excellency Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and the Political
Parties Council which is responsible for the
implementation of the code of conduct.

10-64056

Secondly, during the week beginning Monday,
22 November, our Panel will facilitate negotiations
involving Their Excellencies President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva Kiir Mayardit
to resolve the Abyei matter. These principals have
agreed that, with the assistance of our Panel, they will
do everything possible to reach an agreement on this
issue as a matter of urgency. In this context, we would
also like to take this opportunity to commend the
Sudan Council of Churches for the initiative it has
taken to convene an important meeting of the leaders
of the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya, which will be
held in about 10 days.
Thirdly, the Technical Ad Hoc Border Committee
will begin immediately to demarcate the North-South
border. Similarly, the political committee of the NCP
and the SPLM is ready to begin discussions on the five
disputed areas along the border.
Fourthly, partners remain committed to
maintaining peace and are therefore using the
structures created by the CPA that involve UNMIS to
address all matters relating to the task of sustaining
peace and security. To assist in this regard, our Panel
maintains regular contact with the parties, as well as
with UNMIS.
As members of the Council know, our Panel
serves as the facilitator of the negotiations to conclude
the post-referendum arrangements, which we launched
on 10 July. And as the Council also knows, the
negotiations include such matters as security,
citizenship, oil and water resources, currency matters,
assets and liabilities, international treaties and
agreements. The parties have indeed been engaging
each other on these issues. However, our Panel is
concerned that the discussions are not proceeding at a
satisfactory pace. We will therefore convene a special
meeting with the parties before the end of this month to
agree on the ways and means by which we can
accelerate and better coordinate the negotiations.
In this regard, we would like to inform the
Council of the important meeting of the parties — the
SPLM and the NCP — that our Panel convened in
Khartoum between 7 and 13 November at the request
of the parties, and which Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios and United States
Special Envoy Scott Gration and Ambassador
Princeton Lyman attended as observers. The meeting
agreed to a seminal document that contains, first, a

7

S/PV.6425

framework of principles that will guide the work of the
parties on all issues and inform the relations between
the North and Southern Sudan regardless of the
outcome of the Southern Sudan referendum. Secondly,
it contains decisions relating to the implementation of
the outstanding CPA matters, to which I have referred.
Thirdly, it contains decisions that will guide the
content of the negotiations relating to the postreferendum arrangements.
The document, entitled “Framework for
Resolving Outstanding Issues Relating to the
Implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the Future Relations of North and
South Sudan”, will be completed, signed and published
once the negotiations on Abyei, which I have
mentioned, have been concluded.
Recent and current events in Darfur, especially
relating to the clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the rebel Justice and Equality Movement,
which the Secretary-General mentioned, have
underlined the need urgently to bring peace to Darfur.
In this context, I am certain that the Council is aware
of the decisions adopted at the 6 November meeting of
the Sudan Consultative Forum in Addis Ababa. I refer
here specifically to the decision that our Panel and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), supported by the Government of
Qatar, should, in December and ahead of the Southern
Sudan referendum, initiate a political process in Darfur
that would lead to the convening of an inclusive
Darfur-Darfur conference. The conference will base its
discussions on the outcomes of the Doha negotiations
and on other relevant documents, such as the report of
the African Union Panel on Darfur. It will take the
necessary decisions that would contribute to the
earliest possible conclusion of a global political
agreement on Darfur.
We have also agreed with the Government of the
Sudan that, in the meantime, it should take all
necessary action, in cooperation with UNAMID, to
improve the security situation in Darfur, to facilitate
the voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their places of origin, and
therefore to begin to address issues of recovery and
development, and to address the issue of justice and
reconciliation. We believe that we will see progress in
all of these areas in the next few months.

8

We are pleased to inform the Council that both
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva Kiir
Mayardit have continued to extend full cooperation to
our Panel, driven by a shared determination to do
everything possible and necessary to address the
various Sudanese challenges. We trust that the Council
will convey a firm message of encouragement to them
as they work jointly and severally over the next few
months, which will be critical in determining the future
of the Sudan and, to that extent, the future of Africa.
As we have done in the past, we commend both
UNMIS and UNAMID for the valuable work they are
doing and reiterate our appreciation of the excellent
cooperation they consistently extend to our Panel.
Accordingly, we trust that the Council will continue to
provide them with such support as they may need.
The President: I would like to thank Mr. Mbeki
for his briefing and for all of the work that he is
undertaking, and particularly for speaking to the
Council from such a distance. Although we could not
see him, let me assure him that we listened very
carefully to what he said. I take back everything I said
about a power failure in Johannesburg. We will blame
New York, instead, for all of the technical difficulties.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan.
Mr. Karti (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate all peace-loving peoples
and countries of the world on the occasion of Eid
al-Adha. We meet today while the Islamic world and
Muslims everywhere celebrate this important holiday. I
also congratulate you, Sir, on your keen determination
to organize these deliberations on the Sudan at this
opportune time. I also would like, through you, to
congratulate and commend Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, my brothers the Ministers and in the
delegation of the Government of the Southern Sudan. I
had hoped they would be sitting next to me rather than
on the other side of the table. We shared the same title
in the meeting in Addis Ababa and in a meeting
sponsored by the Government of Austria.
I truly hope that the Council’s deliberations today
will lead to a reasonable and wise approach that will
assist the two parties in achieving comprehensive
peace in a manner that will realize our objective of
sustainable peace and security without returning to war
and conflict.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

As I am addressing the Council for the first time,
I wish to assure members of my Government’s total
commitment to completing the final stages of the
requirements of the Agreement, including the holding
of the referendum on the right to self-determination of
the Southern Sudan, as well as the referendum on the
situation in the Abyei region. Should the Council recall
the efforts made to implement the Agreement over the
past years and the obstacles that have been overcome,
it will see that both parties are capable of arriving at
political settlements to the pending questions, which
will enable us to undertake a just, impartial and
credible referendum that will allow our brothers in the
South to express their genuine will, free of undue
influence.
The referendum is a commitment that must be
honoured, and we are willing to do so. However, we
must all understand that the referendum is not an end
in and of itself, but a means that must lead us to peace
and stability.
The agreement to grant Southern Sudan the right
to self-determination is among the more daring
decisions adopted anywhere on the African continent.
It was taken with a view to ending the civil war and
finding a peaceful conclusion to one of the most
protracted conflicts on the continent. At the national
level, it is the most daring decision taken by any
national Government since independence. Here, I
would like to draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that the leadership that adopted these decisions must be
appreciated and commended rather than pressured,
maligned or falsely accused.
Before this Council, I reaffirm the commitment of
the Government of the Sudan to holding the
referendum as scheduled and to accepting its outcome,
be it in favour of unity or secession. The Government
of the Sudan accepted the referendum in order to settle
all pending issues peacefully. This choice should
therefore be brought to a clear conclusion.
Accordingly, the holding of the referendum should
enhance peace and stability in the Sudan and serve as a
prelude to a bright future and a new tomorrow for the
whole of the Sudan, South and North alike.
Allow me in this context to raise an important
issue, which is the financing of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission. As members of the Council
may well know, it was agreed that the Commission
would be financed in the following proportions: 48 per

10-64056

cent by the two parties to the Agreement and 50 per
cent by the international community. The Government
of the Sudan has honoured this commitment as agreed,
and apportioned its share against encumbered
obligations provided by the Commission. The
Government of the Sudan has paid, to date, a total of
$8.5 million as a first instalment. The Government had
actually begun payments even before the Commission
prepared the referendum budget. We will continue to
work accordingly and to honour our financial
commitments every time the Commission provides us
with a schedule of costs.
Since our Government has committed itself to
paying its dues in full, we call on the international
community, and the donor community in particular, to
honour their commitments in order to avoid any
disruption in the Commission’s work. I would point out
that when some talk of the failure of the Government
to commit to financing, it is simply an attempt to
expedite the actual expenditure, which should be
decided by the Commission’s programme of action.
With regard to the status of Abyei, it should be
recalled that when we talk of Abyei, we are talking
about two separate ethnic groups that have coexisted in
the region since time immemorial; we are not talking
about oil or wealth, which will eventually be depleted.
We are talking about the legitimate and inalienable
rights to citizenship and self-determination of two of
the largest ethnic groups in the region, and about the
status of the region in which they live. It therefore
behooves us to rely on reason and to be inspired by
wisdom if we seek to guarantee continued stability and
ensure the age-old peaceful coexistence of the people
of the region.
We recall these positive factors because we fully
understand that arriving at an objective settlement
accepted by both parties is our ultimate aim. We do not
want to rush into imposing solutions that would only
lead to further conflict. We therefore look to the
Security Council to adopt a comprehensive approach to
addressing the question of Abyei and the
implementation of the pending aspects of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).
I wish to stress the need for the international
community to grasp the significance of the
achievements made so far in implementing the CPA.
The Council must assist both parties to the Agreement
in working towards rapprochement and promoting

9

S/PV.6425

confidence between them so that they can overcome
the obstacles to implementing and honouring their
remaining commitments effectively and peacefully.
While we continue to make intensive efforts to
settle the aforementioned issues before the holding of
the referendum, we also continue to address with the
same determination questions relating to wealth,
citizenship and security, as well as post-referendum
legal international agreements and instruments. I have
come to New York after participating in a meeting
hosted by the Government of Austria at which we
discussed with our brothers from the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement the scope of the relationship
between North and South and the post-referendum
situation. We stressed the fact that integration between
the North and the South should continue regardless of
the outcome of the referendum.
I would like to update the Council on the major
progress that has been made recently towards the
conclusion of a framework agreement to govern
relations between the North and the South. Both parties
to the CPA read and discussed the draft framework
agreement endorsed last night by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel led by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, former President of South Africa. This
historical agreement sheds light on the strategic
choices between the North and the South, the most
important of which is their shared resolve never to
return to war. The historic framework agreement sets
forth a blueprint for a very special and distinguished
relationship between North and South in which peace,
understanding and harmony prevail and both parties
can work for a better future. We will inform the
Council of the details in due time.
The achievement of the framework agreement
places a major responsibility on the shoulders of the
international community that is no less weighty than
the commitments of both parties. Translating this
agreement into reality will require tireless efforts and
continuous encouragement, as well as a continued flow
of resources. I would therefore appeal to the Council to
grant particular attention and care to this issue.
With regard to the situation in Darfur, our
position on the comprehensive political settlement is
indisputable. Our Government has always been the first
to implement all its commitments with regard to
negotiations. It has been willing to discuss issues in
good faith so as to achieve peace and stability

10

throughout Darfur. Moreover, from this very seat, I
would like to commend the Doha mediation efforts
under the auspices of the fraternal Government of
Qatar, the League of Arab States, the African Union
and the United Nations under the guidance of
Mr. Bassolé, and supported by the countries of the
region. Peace in Darfur is our highest priority and the
strategic objective for the Government of the Sudan at
this stage. However, the realization of peace and the
signing of an agreement require a partner that would
negotiate in good faith. It also requires a clear vision
and determination to achieve peace.
Therefore, the much-reported positions of two of
the rebel leaders, who oppose the political settlement
in Doha and opted for the military option as the sole
option, require the Council to send a serious and
decisive message. That message should compel both
sides to sit down at the negotiating table in Doha.
It is unreasonable and unacceptable for peace to
be held hostage to controversial and arrogant positions
that are not related to the desires and expectations of
the people of Darfur, who chose peace and who hope
that it will become a reality for them in different areas
of the region. They made that choice despite
irresponsible military actions and violations, including
kidnappings and attacks against humanitarian
assistance convoys and peacekeepers. Such destructive
acts by the rebels who reject peace are aimed at
distracting the Government and pushing it towards a
military confrontation and the creation of instability in
the region.
As the Council knows, the Government of the
Sudan, while making every effort to promote security
and stability in Darfur, has adopted a strategy that is
currently being implemented through the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) while according special priority to
development,
reconstruction
and
quick-impact
recovery projects. We therefore believe that one of the
first duties of UNAMID in the upcoming phase is to
assist in the implementation of these projects,
particularly since the Government of the Sudan has
allocated a budget of $1.9 billion for that purpose over
the next four years.
We hope that the Security Council will play a
pioneering role in supporting the implementation of
those projects by calling on donors and international
partners to contribute to their realization. We also

10-64056

S/PV.6425

believe that the Council can assist in the direct
implementation of the projects, which will pave the
way for the return of internally displaced persons to
their villages and enable them to once again engage in
normal activities, with a stable security situation
ensured in over 90 per cent of Darfur. The Government
has actually started to implement those projects by
concentrating on infrastructure and on building
bridges, roads and other public facilities.
We therefore hope that the Council’s deliberations
today will be an opportune occasion to launch an appeal
to international and other partners to contribute to the
implementation of these development projects, which
are being carried out in the framework of a new
strategy that has been adopted to address the situation
in Darfur. The strategy includes five major elements:
establishing security; resettling internally displaced
persons; improving their humanitarian situation;
achieving internal settlements and reconciliation; and
promoting a political approach that aims at arriving at a
political settlement through actions based on the will of
the people of Darfur and through their representatives
to the legislative and executive organs that were chosen
in the recent elections.
We have also taken measures to implement
development projects on the ground. This includes
focusing with local communities on the creation and
implementation of projects that will contribute to
balanced development in the region, as well as
providing resources for shepherds who live in the area.
I must stress to the Council that the new strategy
gives priority to fighting impunity, including the
impunity of those who target peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. These workers are essentially
our guests. We must protect them and facilitate their
work, which, in essence, is focused on helping us to
achieve peace and stability in Darfur. Our ongoing
efforts will not end until saboteurs are brought to
justice. We know that it is sometimes difficult to
identify them, because they hide behind the lines of the
rebel movements.
In the light of what the Secretary-General said
concerning the need to implement resolution 1593
(2005), I must recall here that this was one of the
resolutions that elicited the most disturbance in the
Sudan. I would have hoped that the situation in the
Sudan since the adoption of that resolution would have
given the Council reason and courage to reconsider its

10-64056

position. The resolution opened the door to evil and
instability and targeted the leadership on which we
must depend to conclude the peace agreements and
honour our commitments. Despite all the pressure that
was brought to bear and the attempts to isolate us, the
Sudanese people entrusted us, through the general
elections in April 2010, to undertake this task. The
support of the people of Darfur for President Al-Bashir
was unprecedented and overwhelming in the history of
our country. I therefore believe that the resolution
should be reconsidered.
With regard to the peace process, I would like to
share with the Council the fact that, since the signing
of the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement, the national
unity Government has sought to implement the
Agreement on the ground. In doing so, it has worked
alone and without any outside assistance whatsoever.
I would like to recall to the Council that, in the
framework of the implementation of the Eastern Sudan
Peace Agreement, the Government is trying to organize
an international donors and investor’s conference, to be
hosted by the fraternal country of Kuwait. We would
like to thank Kuwait for the efforts it is making to
promote stability in Eastern Sudan. I therefore call on
all members of the international community to support
the conference through either direct support or
investments in the reconstruction of Eastern Sudan. I
urge all Member States and international organizations
to participate in the conference.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
meeting. I would also like to thank the ministers and
representatives of members of the Council. We hope
that the Council’s deliberations will serve as a positive
element in helping us to overcome our challenges by
promoting confidence, helping us to arrive at a
rapprochement and by renewing the determination to
complete the last leg of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in a civilized, smooth and safe way, in
conformity with the core of the Agreement and its
purposes.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pagan
Amum.
Mr. Amum: I am very grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
present the views of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) and the Government of Southern
Sudan. I also want to thank you, Mr. President, and the

11

S/PV.6425

United Kingdom, for taking the initiative to call this
meeting at this important moment. I am particularly
grateful to you, Sir, for inviting me to this meeting.
Your presidency during this Council meeting today, as
the very fact of this meeting, sends a very strong signal
of support for the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, for the referendums
to be conducted on time and, above all, for peace to be
maintained. I would also like to take this opportunity to
convey to the Council the greetings of President Salva
Kiir Mayardit, and to thank the Council for visiting the
Sudan last month. Its visit reassured the Sudanese
people, and especially the people of Southern Sudan,
that the world is watching and that it is determined to
keep the peace in the Sudan and to prevent another
return to war.
I wish to underline, first and foremost, that the
SPLM and the Government of Southern Sudan will
never waver in their commitment to implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The signing of the
Agreement was the key to ending civil war between the
South and the North. Its full implementation is the
guarantee of lasting peace in the Sudan. The core of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is the provision for
holding two referendums on self-determination, in
Southern Sudan and Abyei. We very much welcome the
beginning of voter registration for the Southern Sudan
referendum yesterday and today. The turnout was
impressive and peaceful. This is a clear sign that the
Southern Sudan referendum will take place on time on
9 January 2011. It is essential that all parties hear an
emphatic and firm message from the Council today that
the referendum must be conducted on time and its
results must respected, and that the parties to the CPA —
the National Congress Party (NCP) and the SPLM —
fully cooperate to that end.
The Government of Southern Sudan has made,
and will continue to make, tremendous efforts for the
referendum to take place on time. We are making sure
that every logistical arrangement is in place. We have
made our share of funds available, and more, and
would ask Council members to use their good offices
to ensure that our partners in the NCP and the
Government in Khartoum do the same.
We are working with the United Nations to
enable all eligible Southern Sudanese to register and
vote in a free and fair environment and peaceful
process. In the end, it is for the people of Southern
Sudan to decide and determine their future, choosing

12

between unity and secession. All voices for unity or
separation must be heard in the campaign, so that the
people’s view can be clearly determined. Any
intimidation or harassment of those campaigning for
separation or unity in the South or the North should not
be tolerated. In the South, we are committed to
protecting everyone, but especially those campaigning
for unity. We thank the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan and other United Nations agencies, as well as
the international community, for the support they are
providing to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. We welcome their continued engagement
in this process.
All signs point to the fact that the people of
Southern Sudan are likely to vote for independence in
January. We call on the Council and all United Nations
Member States to respect the choice of the people of
Southern Sudan as reflected in the outcome of the
referendum.
We welcome the timely appointment by the
Secretary-General of the monitoring panel led by
President Mkapa. We also welcome the work of the
panel in actively monitoring both registration and
voting. We call on the panel to be proactive in raising
any issues with the parties to ensure that the vote is
free and fair and that the results reflect the will of the
people of Southern Sudan. We also call on the panel to
authenticate the results quickly, in order to ensure
stability and a smooth transition to the next phase of
the process.
At the same time, the Government of Southern
Sudan is ready to negotiate and agree on final postreferendum arrangements, to ensure stability and the
clarity of the relationship between Southern and
Northern Sudan. The Government of Southern Sudan
has just negotiated a framework agreement with its
northern Sudanese partners that lays out the general
principles that would govern the future relationship
between Southern and Northern Sudan as two
sovereign States, if the choice of the people of
Southern Sudan is separation.
We are grateful for the support of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Thabo Mbeki, as well as the support of the
United States of America, the United Nations, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Norway, Egypt and other partners, who have
recently engaged the parties and convened numerous
meetings to facilitate these negotiations.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

The people and Government of Southern Sudan
strongly desire a peaceful and collaborative
relationship between the South and the North, a
relationship that benefits and protects all of our
peoples. We share a common history. Even though we
are sitting on opposite sides of the Security Council
table, and even though the people of Southern Sudan
may choose to secede, we shall always be neighbours.
We have no choice but to be good neighbours. We are
economically interdependent. We therefore have to be
partners, too. We need to work out the foundation and
details of that partnership. Both North and South must
be viable entities or States that cooperate for the
mutual benefit of their peoples.
One of the issues of crucial importance,
especially given the long-standing historical ties
between Northern and Southern Sudan, is the question
of citizenship rights. The Government of Southern
Sudan wishes to reiterate that the rights of all Northern
Sudanese in the South will be fully respected and
protected. Additionally, the property rights of
Northerners, as well as foreign investment in Southern
Sudan, will be completely respected and protected by
the Government of Southern Sudan. No Northern
Sudanese rights will be violated or activities
obstructed, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum. All we ask is that the rights and
livelihoods of Southern Sudanese in the North be
protected and treated in exactly the same way.
The second issue that the parties agreed to
address is that of border demarcation. There are only
five areas of disagreement or dispute between the
parties on the border. We have recently agreed, in the
latest discussions led by President Thabo Mbeki, to
demarcate the agreed-on areas of the North-South
border and to settle the areas in dispute through
dialogue and negotiations, including recourse to
international arbitration, if necessary. We thank the
United Nations for offering support for the
demarcation of the border. We especially thank the
United Kingdom for its pledge to support the border
demarcation process. If we cannot reach a solution
jointly, we have agreed that we will have recourse to
binding and international arbitration, with no return to
conflict.
Another critical outstanding issue between North
and South is Abyei. We call on the Council to support
the full implementation of the Abyei Protocol, which
defines Abyei as the area of the nine Ngok Dinka

10-64056

chiefdoms. We also call on the Council to support the
full implementation of the ruling of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration tribunal on the Abyei boundaries.
As the Council knows, the parties agreed in recent days
to have the presidency of the Sudan resolve the
impasse on Abyei. We are hopeful that next Sunday the
parties may reach agreement on that matter.
We see two options. The first would be a
referendum in which members of the Ngok Dinka
community would be allowed to vote on whether they
wish to remain part of the North or rejoin the South,
while giving guarantees for the protection of grazing
rights to the Misseriya and other nomads who go to
Abyei and cross through it to Southern Sudan for
grazing purposes. The second option would involve the
transfer of Abyei to the South by a Sudanese
presidential decree, in the same way as Abyei was
transferred in 1905 by an administrative order.
The SPLM is ready to discuss the matter and to
resolve the impasse on Abyei. We are ready to put
together, with our other partners in the international
community, the necessary package to set the Abyei
process free.
We know that we cannot change our geography.
The referendums may change the nature of the
relationship between the South and the North. But
whatever happens, we shall remain committed to a
peaceful, stable and prosperous future for the people of
the Sudan, whether in one country or as two separate
States.
In the South yesterday, all political parties
reaffirmed their support for a road map that provides
for a stable and democratic dispensation in Southern
Sudan and for peaceful development for our people in
the South in the post-referendum period. That is a very
positive development.
We are ready to engage in discussions on a full,
rich and peaceful relationship with our CPA partners,
and we are desirous to build an enhanced partnership
between the South and the North. To the National
Congress Party, our partners and the leading party in
the Government in Khartoum, we say, please join us in
the positive politics of peace, reconciliation, respect
and the pursuit of mutual interest. Let us together
present a good example for our Sudanese people,
Africa and the world that, after failure and many years
of conflict in the Sudan, we can succeed even in
separating peacefully and can be good neighbours.

13

S/PV.6425

I thank Council members for this meeting and for
their concern and interest at this critical time in our
history. I sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this meeting and for your own personal interest
and support for peace in the Sudan.
Such sentiments are often expressed with pious
words but insincere hearts. But my heart could not be
more sincere when I say to Council members and the
world, please ensure that every letter of the CPA is
fully implemented. Let there be peace in the Sudan and
no return to war. The Security Council was established
for moments such as this.
The President: I should point out for those
watching the video screens that we have been joined by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and the Joint Special
Representative for the African Union and the United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, and that they will join in the consultations to
take place after the meeting of the Security Council.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I regard this meeting as the most important event
of the United Kingdom’s presidency of the Security
Council this month, and I am pleased that we have
agreed the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/24)
that I read out earlier.
This is a defining moment for the Sudan and its
people as they enter the final stages of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is a period
of great risk and, therefore, a situation that the Security
Council cannot ignore, but it is also a time of
opportunity and a chance to achieve greater stability in
the Sudan that the world cannot let go by. It is vital that
the international community stand united and steadfast
in its support of the CPA.
In the United Kingdom, we are therefore very
grateful for the outstanding international leadership
being provided by President Mbeki, the United Nations
Secretary-General, Special Representative Menkerios
and Joint Special Representative Gambari. I welcome
the intense interest shown by all those who have
travelled long distances to be present today and the
enthusiasm that I have encountered in other Security
Council members to hold this meeting.

14

We are all only too conscious of the tragedy of
the Sudan’s past — over 50 years of suffering, more
than 2 million people dead and many millions
displaced, not only in the South but also in Darfur,
where conflict continues, in Eastern Sudan and other
marginalized areas of the country.
The 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement
brought the Sudanese parties together in an
unprecedented manner. They put aside their differences
and ended 40 years of civil war, opening the prospect
for a new stage in the Sudan’s history. The
international community must now come together and
support the parties as they work to cement the gains
achieved in the past six years.
A stable Sudan will help build security and
prosperity in the region. It will mean that the Sudan
does not again become a base for terrorism or a source
of refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries. Most
important, it will help the Sudanese people receive the
tangible benefits of peace that have eluded them for so
long.
Britain’s Secretary of State for International
Development visited the Sudan last week. He made
clear that we are determined to help improve the lives
of the Sudanese people, but only if peace is kept and
conflict avoided will development succeed and those
lives be truly improved.
We are now in the final stages of preparation for
the referendums. As we have heard from the SecretaryGeneral and President Mbeki this morning, there has
been progress in recent weeks. I welcome the arrival of
the Secretary-General’s high-level monitoring panel in
Khartoum to monitor the process so far and the work of
the domestic and international observers.
Voter registration began as scheduled yesterday,
the first of a series of essential steps. Early indications
suggest that registration is proceeding in an orderly
manner, and we must all encourage the timely and calm
completion of that process.
We have also been encouraged by political talks
between the parties over the past few weeks. Good
progress is clearly being made. Today, President Mbeki
summarized for us his invaluable work to bring the
parties together to address issues of fundamental and
long-term importance to the North and the South,
including citizenship, security arrangements, natural
resources, assets and liabilities and the border.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

Success depends on the actions of the parties
themselves, and I welcome the commitments made by
both parties at the high-level meeting here in New York
on 24 September, in the framework agreement that
President Mbeki is helping to negotiate, and in their
statements here today.
In recent weeks, both sides have made
concessions and stated their determination to avoid a
return to war. We should not underestimate how
difficult this process is for the parties involved, but I
do not believe that any of the remaining differences on
the key issues cannot be bridged. We will continue
strongly to support President Mbeki’s efforts to help
the parties reach agreement.
As we have heard, that must include an
agreement on Abyei as a matter of urgency. Tensions
there have been rising. We must ensure that it does not
become the flashpoint it has been in the past. The
United Kingdom urges the parties to work with the
communities on the ground to reassure them that their
rights will be protected whatever political agreement is
reached. We urge both the North and the South to
ensure that their military deployments in the area do
not contribute to instability.
The international community must also be ready
to support the parties’ work on the long-term issues
affecting each side beyond the referendum, and
whatever its outcome. The United Kingdom, with
others, has taken a leading role on the handling of the
Sudan’s international debt. The United States has made
a series of bold and imaginative offers of early action
towards normalization of its relationship with
Khartoum, which we welcome strongly.
The African Union continues to play a vital role
in helping the North and South to bridge their
differences. The Arab League and the InterGovernmental Authority on Development are also
making important contributions. The United Nations,
with over 30,000 peacekeepers on the ground in
Darfur, the South and along the border, is central to the
international community’s work in the Sudan. Its role
is vital, giving political support to the negotiations,
practical support to the referendum process and
protection to civilians. I welcome the United Nations
planning to prepare for humanitarian contingencies
around the referendum, and I encourage the Sudanese
authorities actively to support those preparations.

10-64056

Much international attention is understandably
focused on North/South issues in the Sudan. But we
must not lose sight of the situation in Darfur, where
hundreds of thousands have suffered and died. We must
work intensively with all the parties involved towards a
peaceful and inclusive political settlement, addressing
the violence and insecurity, including by combating
impunity and supporting the peace talks in Doha.
I welcome the role played by the Joint Chief
Mediator, Djibril Bassolé, and the support of the
Government of Qatar. I urge all parties to participate in
peace talks to put a definitive end to the misery in
Darfur. Access for humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers must be improved and kidnappings in
Darfur must end.
In the coming months, there will be few greater
challenges for the international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council than the Sudan. What
we have heard today from our four briefers convinces
me that there can be peace and stability in the Sudan if
the parties commit to peace. They will receive the
strong support of the international community if they
do so. The United Kingdom stands ready to play its
part, based on our historic and enduring commitment to
all the people of the Sudan, to seize the opportunity for
the secure future their country deserves.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency the
Honourable Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State
of the United States of America.
Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States of
America): Thank you, Mr. President, for that excellent
statement. I want to commend the United Kingdom for
calling this important meeting, which gives us the
opportunity to help chart a way towards a durable
peace for all of the people of the Sudan. I want to
commend the Security Council for its recent visit to the
Sudan, which was extremely important. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent briefing
and his personal involvement in the efforts to find a
durable peace, as well as Special Representative
Menkerios for his skilful efforts on behalf of the people
of the Sudan. I commend the work of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, as well as the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and
especially those of Joint Special Representative

15

S/PV.6425

Gambari and Joint Chief Mediator Bassolé. I
particularly appreciate the excellent presentations by
His Excellency Minister Karti and Mr. Pagan Amum. I
thought that, if we could translate their words into
action immediately, both of them would have
demonstrated unequivocally the commitment to find a
way towards the durable peace that we seek.
Yesterday marked a milestone in the history of
the Sudan. Voters from Southern Sudan began to
register for the referendum by which they will decide
their own future. Holding this referendum and
resolving the status of Abyei and all of the conditions
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
represent the promise of self-determination made to the
Sudanese people under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2005. The United States believes that
those are promises that must be kept.
It is critical to peace and stability — not only for
the Sudan but also for its neighbours, some of whom
are here today, and the rest of Africa, represented by
others — that the referendum for Southern Sudan be
held peacefully on 9 January. Regardless of the
outcome, the will of the people must be respected by
all parties, in the Sudan and around the world.
We have already seen the alternative. The
unacceptable alternative is the Sudan’s past: more than
four decades of recurring conflict and 2 million people
dead and millions more displaced; and simmering
tensions that stall development and perpetuate poverty,
then erupt again to darken the lives of another
generation of Sudanese children. In the next 55 days,
the Government of the Sudan can ensure a brighter
future, one that offers peace, opportunity and hope.
But there is a huge amount of work to be done in
the next 55 days. I agree completely with Minister
Karti and with Mr. Amum. Each Member State must to
do its utmost to help. None of us should look back and
wish that we had done more. As President Obama has
said, although no outsider can dictate events on the
ground in the Sudan, it is up to the political leaders of
the Sudan whether they will choose peace or
confrontation. But it is up to all of us to help them —
not only to make the right choice but then to
implement it to the benefit of all their people.
It was particularly heartening last week to see the
defence ministers from Khartoum and Juba hold a rare
joint press conference to say that, no matter what
differences and disputes might arise from the

16

referendum process, they will be resolved through
political dialogue. The ministers said that “there will
be no return to war”. We all fervently hope that is the
case.
But to fulfil that promise the North and South
must promptly forge agreements on the crucial issues
that will arise in 2011, namely, oil-revenue
distribution, border demarcation, international treaties,
security arrangements, citizenship rights and the
protection
of
vulnerable
civilians,
including
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South.
The fate of 44 million Sudanese depends on their
leaders’ willingness to work together to resolve these
issues.
Most urgently, the parties must make the tough
compromises necessary to settle the status of Abyei.
They must find a way forward that both upholds the
rights of the Ngok Dinka and the other residents of
Abyei as well as those of nomadic peoples, such as the
Misseriya, who regularly pass through the area. They
must do so promptly, because preparations for the
referendum on Abyei have fallen behind schedule, and
tensions will continue to rise.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement, agreed to
by both parties, calls for this referendum. It also states
that the parties themselves can agree to change it.
However, unless the parties reach a mutual agreement
that is acceptable to all the people of Abyei, the United
States and the international community will continue to
hold them to their commitment to an on-time
referendum, as promised in the CPA.
But even as we focus on the future of Southern
Sudan, Abyei and all of the Sudan, we remain deeply
concerned about Darfur. Violence is intensifying,
human rights violations continue and arms flow despite
the embargo. Journalists and activists are arrested,
some merely for speaking to members of the Security
Council. United Nations peacekeepers are kidnapped.
This is all unacceptable.
The United States stands ready to work with the
Council to support peace efforts in Darfur. We call on
all parties to participate in the Doha talks without delay
or preconditions. We urge the Government not to target
civilians, use proxy militia, support the Janjaweed and
other irregular forces, or prevent the freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel and aid
workers.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

In Darfur and elsewhere, the Government of the
Sudan must live up to its international obligations to
respect human rights, allow humanitarian assistance,
protect civilians — including victims of sexual
violence — ensure that refugees and internally
displaced people can return in safety and with dignity,
and bring those responsible for the atrocities to justice.
As President Obama said here in New York,
accountability sends a powerful message that certain
behaviour, including genocide, is not acceptable. In the
twenty-first century, we must uphold universal rules
and values. Officials throughout the Sudan — both
North and South — have a particular responsibility in
the run-up to the voting. They must avoid
inflammatory rhetoric, quell rumours and dampen
animosities. They must allow unfettered campaigning
by all sides and ensure that voters can travel safely to
their polling places. The voting must take place on
time, without violence and in an atmosphere of calm. I
commend the Sudanese people — North and South —
and the international community for working hard to
make that possible.
And we are beginning to see the results. Nearly
33,000 voter registration books have been printed and
delivered, enough to register nearly 5 million Southern
Sudanese voters in the North and the South. Booklets
to register another 350,000 voters believed to be living
abroad have also been shipped. More than 1,000
Sudanese election observers have been trained, and the
Carter Center and the European Union are also
deploying monitors. Russia has generously committed
to providing four helicopters that will be used to assist
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan in its many
critical tasks. But more must be done, and so we urge
all States Members of the United Nations to support
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, and we hope
that the Government of the Sudan will continue to
fund, with help from others, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission going forward.
As we plan this effort, it is essential to include
women. It is unusual that I am the only woman at the
table in the Security Council, so, speaking on behalf of
all women, let me just say that women are critical to
every step of building, negotiating and keeping the
peace in the Sudan. Lasting peace and prosperity will
not be achieved if half the population is excluded from
that process. As we discussed with respect to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in country
after country we have seen that the underlying issues

10-64056

that cause conflicts are more likely to recur and less
likely to be resolved if women are not involved at the
peace table. We certainly hope that women will be
brought into the highest levels of Government in both
the North and South.
The Sudanese people want peace, and the United
States wants to help them achieve it. We have engaged
in intensive diplomacy to help accomplish that. We
have spent more than $200 million to help mitigate
conflict, provide election security, create economic
opportunities, and fund voter registration, education
and observation. We have sent Special Envoy Scott
Gration, Ambassador Princeton Lyman, Ambassador
Barrie Walkley and a whole raft of people to try to
increase our presence in Southern Sudan, as well as to
work with both the Government in Khartoum and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) in Juba.
This month, the Chairman of our Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, Senator John Kerry, travelled to
Khartoum to deliver a special message on behalf of
President Obama. The message was this: If the Sudan
chooses the path of peace, the Government of the
Sudan can have a dramatically improved relationship
with the United States, including normalization of
relations between our two countries.
To demonstrate our commitment to improving
United States-Sudanese relations, the United States has
already taken two steps. First, we have changed our
policies to ease the sale of agricultural and irrigation
equipment to the Sudan, which will boost food
production and decrease the need for international food
aid. Secondly, to help the Sudan’s economy grow, the
United States has supported the creation of a group to
work on ways to ease the Sudan’s national debt,
consistent with international debt relief practices.
These are the steps we have already taken, but we
are prepared to do much more. If the Government of
the Sudan fulfils the Comprehensive Peace Agreement;
if it resolves the future of Abyei; if it holds Southern
Sudan’s referendum on 9 January and then recognizes
the will of the Sudanese people in the South, then the
United States is prepared to begin the process of
withdrawing the Sudan from its list of State sponsors
of terrorism, which would be done in accordance with
our laws on terrorism.
If the Government of the Sudan commits to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Darfur and takes
other steps towards peace and accountability, the

17

S/PV.6425

Obama Administration is prepared to offer the Sudan a
path to the ending of United States sanctions, working
towards international debt relief, increasing trade and
investment, and forging a mutually beneficial
relationship.
We are well aware that it takes not only skill but
courage for the Sudan’s leaders in both the North and
the South to implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, promote dignity and human rights, ease
suffering, work towards a durable peace, and include
Darfur in that peace. But the world will stand with both
the North and South if they can and do take these steps.
We think that the path to peace and prosperity, to
good-neighbourliness, to partnership and cooperation
for all Sudanese is clear. It is up to the Government of
the Sudan and to the SPLM in the South to decide
whether to walk that path. If they do, the United States
stands ready to assist them and, most importantly, to
assist the next generation of Sudanese children so that
they can have a future without war and conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Michael Spindelegger, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Austria.
Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and President
Mbeki for all their efforts and for briefing us today. I
also listened with keen interest to the statements by the
Foreign Minister of the Sudan and the Secretary
General of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement.
And, of course, I thank Foreign Secretary William
Hague for his initiative, which has given the Security
Council an opportunity to issue a strong message of
support for sustainable peace in the Sudan and in
particular the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA).
In the past few months, we have witnessed some
important positive developments. Let me mention two:
the elections held in the Sudan and the marked
improvement of relations between the Sudan and Chad.
Although the implementation of the CPA has been
laborious, much has been accomplished. We trust that
both parties will fulfil their commitments to
implementing the CPA, and in particular to undertaking
credible referendums and to abiding by their outcome.
A European Union observer team is deployed in the
Sudan this week.

18

Last week, at a conference that took place in
Vienna, high-level participants from Northern and
Southern Sudan demonstrated their consensus on one
core point: Whatever the outcome of the referendums,
both will have to strive for a mutually beneficial
coexistence.
We all know what is at stake and what
arrangements still have to be agreed upon. We
welcome the progress that has been achieved in the
preparations for the referendums. Still, further progress
is needed, in particular in the preparations for the
referendum in Abyei. Preparations also have to take
place for the popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states. The parties also need to
prepare in a timely manner for the post-referendum
phase. In that sense, we welcome the signing of a
framework agreement in Khartoum.
Strengthening the rule of law, ending impunity
and ensuring human rights for all will be important in
this process in order to guarantee lasting peace and
stability. The full inclusion of women in these
processes is also of utmost importance. Austria has
offered technical expertise in the area of citizenship
and, upon the invitation of the parties, discussed this
offer with interlocutors in the North and the South in
October. We are ready to continue working with both
sides in a transparent and open manner.
We must work to avert conflict, to ensure
regional stability and to protect civilians. Therefore,
contingency planning by the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) is important. We welcome the
implementation of the comprehensive strategy on the
protection of civilians. Increased patrolling, especially
long-range patrols, and an extended UNMIS presence
in remote areas and potential hotspots are very
important.
Freedom of movement is crucial if UNMIS is to
fulfil its tasks. We also believe that the participation of
UNMIS in the regional strategy for the protection of
civilians from attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army is
essential.
We are deeply concerned about continued
insecurity in Darfur, and we condemn the abduction of
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers and demand
their immediate release. We also condemn the violence
against civilians in and around camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs). We urge all parties to allow
free access to everyone in need of humanitarian

10-64056

S/PV.6425

assistance. We are also concerned about the recent
arrest and detention of human rights activists and
journalists.

challenges at this critical juncture. I also commend the
comprehensive statement of the Secretary-General and
his creative involvement and leadership in this process.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Dafur (UNAMID) has an important role
to play in protecting civilians and needs the full
support of the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties involved. The safe and voluntary return of the
high number of IDPs in Darfur must be ensured. We
need all parties to engage fully and constructively in
the peace process without preconditions. Also in this
context, I would like to highlight the importance of the
full participation of women in the peace negotiations
on Darfur, in line with resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as their adequate participation of civil society.

The parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) have implemented many of its
provisions, and now the time has come for the final
phase that will chart the future of the Sudanese people.
Therefore it is of crucial importance that the final CPA
provisions, including the referendums on the selfdetermination of the people of the Southern Sudan and
on the status of Abyei, are timely and fully
implemented.

Austria strongly supports the work of the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Djibril Bassolé, and the facilitation of the
African Union High-Level Panel under the leadership
of President Mbeki. We strongly support all efforts to
strengthen
mechanisms
to
promote
justice,
accountability and reconciliation, in particular the
International Criminal Court. Peace and justice must
go hand in hand.
The primary responsibility to act lies with both
partners of the Government of National Unity of the
Sudan. Enduring cooperation between the parties will
be essential for the benefit of all Sudanese people. Let
me also assure the Council that Austria and the
European Union stand ready to support every effort
towards a peaceful future for the Sudan. It is the goal
of the international community to create a win-win
situation for the North and the South.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Sven
Alkalaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom, led by the Right Honourable William Hague,
for convening this meeting, and the other members of
the Council for their participation at a very high level.
It is my pleasure to speak on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, striving to give our contribution to this
timely and important debate. I sincerely hope this
meeting, as a collective effort of the Security Council,
will bring positive energy and encouragement for the
people of the Sudan and help them overcome

10-64056

Time
and
again,
we
have
supported
comprehensive implementation of the CPA. We
consider that at this critical stage, it is of utmost
importance for the CPA parties to redouble their efforts
to address outstanding issues, in view of the fact that
full responsibility for implementation of the CPA rests
squarely with them.
For all the processes within the Sudan to succeed,
open and extensive negotiations between the parties to
the CPA on the post-referendum arrangements —
including border management, citizenship, migration
and security — are essential. Reaching an agreement
on those important issues will create an environment
conducive to the implementation of the final stage of
the CPA, primarily for the successful conduct of the
referendum and the implementation of its outcome. In
that context, I express our appreciation to the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur for the facilitation
of negotiations between the parties.
We are concerned over the fact that referendum
preparations are behind schedule. Our particular
concern is the delay in fulfilling the Southern Sudan
Commission mandate, as it could have a major impact
on preparing and conducting the referendum on time.
We urge both parties to prevent further delays in the
Commission’s work. The international community and
the United Nations should do their utmost to assist the
parties in their efforts. The engagement of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and its
technical and logistical support in the process of
preparing
and
conducting
referendums
is
indispensable.
With regard to preparations for the Abyei
referendum, the situation is even more urgent. The
parties therefore have to immediately address the issue
of establishing the Abyei Referendum Commission.

19

S/PV.6425

We welcome the role of the Secretary-General’s
Panel for the Referendums in monitoring and assessing
the referendums processes. Due consideration must
also be given to contingency planning for the
transitional post-referendum period. We are encouraged
that UNMIS and the United Nations country team have
already commenced preparations for United Nations
support in the post-referendum period.
During this critical time, we must not lose sight
of the humanitarian situation in Southern Sudan, which
deserves due consideration and the full attention of the
international community. The population of Southern
Sudan still needs the unwavering commitment of the
humanitarian community. Sufficient funding for
humanitarian needs must be put in place in order to
ease the suffering of the affected population. By the
same token, extensive development of the governance
capacities of the Government of Southern Sudan,
regardless of the outcome of the referendum, should
not be neglected. In that regard we commend the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
United Nations Development Programme for their
efforts in providing assistance to the Government of
Southern Sudan.
As for the situation in Darfur, we reiterate our
full support for the peace process in Doha led by the
United Nations and the African Union and the
mediation efforts of Joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Bassolé.
It is essential that all parties seize the opportunity
offered by the Doha peace process, and we urge them
to join that process without preconditions or further
delay. As there is no alternative for lasting and
sustainable peace in Darfur, the international
community has to exercise its pressure on those
refusing to do so.
We underline that it is essential to continue
working towards a comprehensive solution for Darfur
that would include a ceasefire and security
arrangements, fair representation at all levels of
government, reconciliation and economic development.
Addressing those aspects, together with the rule of law
and justice — particularly ending impunity and holding
all perpetrators of war crimes responsible — would
offer a solid basis for sustainable peace in Darfur.
There is no doubt that the upcoming period bears
extremely high risks but also offers opportunities.
Primary responsibility for the outcome rests with, and
is in the hands of, the Sudanese people. It is also

20

important to emphasize that at this decisive time, the
Sudan needs both the attention and support of the
international community.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our strong
belief that the Sudanese people have the strength and
the courage to overcome all challenges and choose a
better future for themselves and the entire region. As
far as the CPA parties and their leaders are concerned,
they must be fully aware of their responsibilities and
duties towards their people and must govern their
actions toward ensuring a safe and prosperous future
for the country.
Finally, on behalf of the country that will preside
over the Security Council in January 2011, I can assure
the Council that Bosnia and Herzegovina will do its
utmost to facilitate the efficient exercise by the Council
of its role with regard to the foreseen referendum
process.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Henry
Odein Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria.
Mr. Ajumogobia (Nigeria): I would also like to
begin by thanking the United Kingdom for convening
this important meeting to address the challenges facing
Sudan as it enters the most delicate phase of its tragic
history of conflict. Your decision, Mr. President, to
focus the United Kingdom’s presidency of the Council
on the Sudan is both timely and compelling. It
highlights your country’s genuine commitment to
peace in the Sudan.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks and tireless efforts to promote peace
in the Sudan. I also wish to express my appreciation to
His Excellency Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, and to Mr. Pagan Amum,
Secretary General of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM), for their heartwarming and
encouraging posture. I must of course also thank
President Mbeki for his briefing and his tireless efforts
as Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.
This meeting, which is taking place just days
after the second meeting of the Sudan Consultative
Forum in Addis Ababa and less than two months after
the high-level summit on the Sudan held here in New
York, complements the series of recent efforts to keep
international attention focused on the Sudan. The core

10-64056

S/PV.6425

message that emerged from both meetings, which is
being reinforced today, is that the international
community must sustain the momentum required to
anchor perhaps the most crucial component of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), that is, the
referendum in Southern Sudan and the referendum in
the Abyei region under the Abyei Protocol. A corollary
message is that the responsibility for achieving these
important outcomes is a collective one that falls
primarily to the parties to the CPA themselves — the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement and the National
Congress Party — but also to bilateral partners,
neighbouring countries, regional organizations and the
international community, and in particular the Council.
The Sudan is unquestionably at a critical
crossroads. On 9 January 2011, less than two months
from now, the people of Southern Sudan and Abyei are
to choose whether to remain part of a united Sudan or
whether independence will be their preference. There is
naturally much apprehension as to what lies ahead.
Several assessments and forecasts seem to indicate that
the people of Southern Sudan will go to the polls on
9 January 2011 and that the vote will take place in
Southern Sudan notwithstanding the delays in meeting
some pre-referendum benchmarks.
That unfortunately raises the prospect of
unilateral as opposed to mutual action, and has thus
served to heighten tensions amid questions about the
adequacy of the time left to organize credible polls. On
the other hand, there is the fear of renewed conflict
should the referendum be unilaterally postponed or the
CPA expire, thereby compromising the basis for
interaction and dialogue between the North and South.
This is the dilemma that faces the Council.
But neither the Sudan nor the international
community can afford a renewed conflict, which would
destabilize the region and undo the substantial progress
that has been achieved in the country since 2005. We
therefore deplore the growing state of insecurity and
heightened tension along the disputed North-South
border following recent bombings in the area. We urge
the SPLA and the Sudanese Army to cease all military
activities and stay committed to the permanent
ceasefire agreement.
At this critical moment, neither the postponement
of the referendum nor the unilateral declaration of
independence would serve the cause of international
peace and security. As we approach the scheduled date,

10-64056

the parties — and indeed all of us — must therefore
redouble efforts and commit to the full implementation
of the CPA, particularly with regard to the timely
conduct of free, fair and credible referendums. The
parties themselves have an obligation to seek a
peaceful,
equitable
and
mutually
beneficial
coexistence, no matter the outcome of the referendums.
To realize this goal, the people of the Sudan must
work together, with the international community
providing requisite support, to address the following
issues urgently. First, there are significant political,
technical, security and logistical challenges to
overcome in order to hold two free, peaceful and
credible referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei. As
with the April 2010 elections, civic education, the
registration and mobilization of voters, the provision of
security and preparing for international monitoring, as
agreed in the CPA, are important issues that should be
addressed. In this regard, I commend the SecretaryGeneral for appointing former President Benjamin
Mkapa as head of the international monitoring panel
for the referendums. I also commend United Nations
agencies for the measures they have put in place to
support the successful conduct of the referendums,
with more than 60 per cent of staff and logistics
already deployed.
To bolster confidence in the process, the parties
should utilize the remaining period before the vote to
address the core issues that fuel the uncertainty about
the
referendums.
Issues
of
insecurity
and
disagreements on the workings, composition and
funding of the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission should be addressed. The parties should
also ensure that the registration process, which —
happily — commenced yesterday, proceeds peacefully
and in a manner that assures the integrity of the
process. We must, however, emphasize that given the
limited time available for the preparations, the failure
by some donors to fulfil their pledges is one of the
impediments to the conduct of credible referendums on
9 January 2011.
Secondly, contingency planning at the country
and international levels is necessary to guarantee
stability, protect civilians and forestall violence. All
stakeholders, including the United Nations, civil
society groups and the parties, are urged to integrate
the various contingency plans with practical
implementation strategies. There is a need for greater
coordination and the involvement of local communities

21

S/PV.6425

in the planning and implementation of the contingency
arrangements. The arrangements should specifically
address the fate of Southern Sudanese in the North and
Northern Sudanese in the South, as well as potential
internal displacements.
Thirdly, a framework agreement on postreferendum arrangements should be concluded on
issues such as border demarcation, citizenship and
residency, natural resources, oil and economic
cooperation, grazing rights and security. In Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, the popular consultations
provided for by the CPA should be supported through
adequate funding. In Abyei, the Referendum
Commission should be established in accordance with
the Abyei Referendum Act of December 2009.
Nigeria believes that progress on these issues
before the referendums is not only desirable but also
necessary to obviate the prospect of post-referendum
conflict. We therefore welcome the consultative
process and the commencement of negotiations
between the National Congress Party and the Sudanese
People’s Liberation Movement on post-referendum
arrangements, facilitated by the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel for the Sudan. The
negotiations should now move from procedures to
substantive outcomes.
Fourthly, the ultimate decision on the future of
the Sudan lies with the Sudanese people. They and they
alone should determine the structure and shape of their
country. Nevertheless, whatever the outcome of the
referendums, the Sudan has reached a point of no
return. The ongoing process of State formation and
institution building in Southern Sudan will remain a
daunting task and will require international assistance.
In nurturing peace in the Sudan, we have an obligation
to balance the options before us by giving equal
emphasis to both the principle of referendum on selfdetermination and that of making unity attractive.
Above all, we must demonstrate our neutrality and
allow the people of the Sudan to freely determine their
own future.
Fifthly and finally, Nigeria believes that a
comprehensive peace agreement in Darfur is necessary
for sustainable peace and development in the Sudan,
and it should be pursued with renewed vigour. We
therefore fully support the Doha peace talks and
commend the multi-strand efforts of the African UnionUnited Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur. We

22

commend his efforts in facilitating the improvement of
the relations between the Sudan and its neighbours, in
particular Chad and Libya. We were pleased to learn
that the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) is back
in Doha to discuss the conditions under which it can
resume negotiations. Our expectation is that JEM and
the Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan Liberation Army
will unfreeze their boycott and fully rejoin the Doha
talks.
Nigeria commends the extensive support of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for the Darfur internal dialogue
process and welcomes the new political and security
strategy for Darfur. We believe that early recovery and
development initiatives would also meaningfully
contribute to the efforts to find lasting solutions to the
conflict there.
The United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), has a critical
role to play in providing security and the logistical
support required to ensure the success of the
referendums. We urge the parties to remove all
restrictions on the movement of UNMIS personnel. We
also urge donors to fully resource UNMIS and to
address the capability deficit created by the withdrawal
of six UNMIS utility helicopters. If UNMIS is to fully
discharge its protection of civilians mandate during the
referendums, it would be necessary for the Mission to
undertake preventive deployments in flashpoint areas
such as Abyei, Unity state, Upper Nile and Western Bar
El Ghazal.
Nigeria has been and will remain a reliable,
active partner in the efforts to resolve the Sudan’s
long-standing conflict. Through the Abuja peace
conferences, Nigeria helped facilitate the Darfur Peace
Agreement. Today, our peacekeeping forces are among
those deployed in UNMIS and UNAMID, facing the
daily challenges of maintaining peace and security in
the country. We remain absolutely committed to the
completion of the peace process in the Sudan.
With indications that the preparations are finally
under way, the international community should be
unrelenting in supporting the process. The United
Nations should lead the effort to secure the firm
commitment of all parties to respecting the outcome of
a credible referendum on Southern Sudan.
Last April’s elections saw our fears come to
naught in the Sudan. As we therefore resolve to lend

10-64056

S/PV.6425

our strong support to the CPA commitment of all the
parties to holding the referendum on the Southern
Sudan in January, as planned, let us do everything we
can to contribute to the achievement of that critical and
crucial milestone.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Henry Okello Oryem, Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs in charge of International Affairs of
Uganda.
Mr. Okello Oryem (Uganda): Permit me to add
my voice to those who that have spoken before me in
thanking the delegation of the United Kingdom, under
your leadership, Sir, for convening this timely and
important ministerial debate on the Sudan. I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the country, as well as President Mbeki
for his briefing. We welcome the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Ali Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of the Sudan, and His Excellency
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement. We are particularly
encouraged by their excellent interventions and
assurances.
The international community and the region in
particular are following with keen interest the
developments in the Sudan. The referendum in
Southern Sudan, scheduled to take place on 9 January
2011, will be a critical milestone in the implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is
important that it take place on time in a free, fair and
transparent manner and that the results be respected by
all. We commend the parties for their continued
commitment to conducting the referendum as provided
for in the CPA.
It is important, however, that this commitment be
followed up by concrete steps to ensure a credible
referendum. In the run-up to the referendum, it is
important that both parties exercise maximum restraint.
We call on the international community to fulfil the
financial pledges made and to provide logistical
support for the referendum. The role of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) remains
critical to the support and conduct of the referendum.
We welcome the progress made so far by the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. In
particular, we are pleased to note that voter registration
started yesterday and expect that the other steps in the
timetable will be fulfilled. We encourage the

10-64056

Commission to work with cohesion, unity of purpose
and focus for the accomplishment of its mandate.
We remain concerned over the lack of progress in
the organization of the Abyei referendum, and
especially the failure to establish the Abyei referendum
commission. We note the challenges the parties face in
resolving this issue, and stress the importance of
reaching an amicable solution consistent with the
existing agreements.
On a related note, it is important that the parties
accord equal attention to the popular consultations in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, as well as postreferendum arrangements in Southern Sudan. In this
regard, we welcome the efforts of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan, under
the chairmanship of President Thabo Mbeki, in
bringing the parties together to agree a framework
agreement on outstanding CPA-related issues. We
welcome the cooperation the parties have extended to
the Panel thus far, and urge them to make full use of
this mechanism.
It is essential that the African Union maintain its
engagement on these issues, with the support of the
international community. In this regard, the decision of
the African Union Peace and Security Council of
28 October to extend the mandate of the High-Level
Panel for another year is a welcome and timely
development.
We
commend
the
Chairman
of
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, His
Excellency Mr. Meles Zenawi, for the important role
he is playing in assisting the parties to reach agreement
on post-referendum arrangements.
The security situation in Darfur remains fragile.
We are concerned by the continuing hostilities and
violence, kidnappings and restrictions on the
movement of the staff and peacekeepers of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), as well as of humanitarian workers. We
commend the efforts of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril
Bassolé in facilitating the ongoing negotiations for a
peace process and for the participation of all key
stakeholders. We welcome, in this regard, the meeting
between the Justice and Equality Movement and the
mediation team in Doha. We urge all rebel groups that
have not yet joined the Doha talks to do so.

23

S/PV.6425

We commend Joint Special Representative
Ibrahim Gambari and UNAMID staff, as well as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios and UNMIS staff for the important work
they continue to do in challenging circumstances.
In conclusion, the implementation of the CPA has
now reached a critical stage. We call upon the parties
to remain committed, and the international community
to render them its total support to ensure the full
implementation of the CPA.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Takeaki Matsumoto, State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Matsumoto (Japan) (spoke in Japanese;
English interpretation provided by the delegation): At
the outset, I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
The Right Honourable William Hague for convening
this ministerial meeting in his capacity as President of
the Security Council for the month of November. It is
indeed timely for the Security Council to discuss the
issue of the Sudan at this very critical juncture for the
country. I would also like to welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General,
United
Nations
staff
and
peacekeepers, His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
Chairman of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan, the African Union
(AU) and the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) to achieve peace and security in the
Sudan. We listened to their statements concerning the
very faithful implementation of the CPA and the
organization of the referendum scheduled for January
2011, and I highly commend their commitment in that
regard.
The Sudan has endured the longest civil war in
the recent history of Africa, and the situation represents
one of the most urgent challenges facing the
international community. The Sudan is also a unique
case in which the United Nations and the AU are
closely collaborating in peacekeeping. Achieving peace
in the Sudan is thus an indispensable element in
achieving peace and stability in the whole of Africa.
If peace is to be achieved between the South and
the North, it will be first and foremost necessary for
the parties to advance the implementation of the CPA.
The most important task at this time is for the
referendums to be conducted as scheduled on 9 January
2011 in a free and fair manner. The Security Council
and the international community must diligently and

24

attentively see this process through. In this context, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, which is
supporting the implementation of the Agreement, will
play an important role.
It is essential that all interested parties accept the
results of the referendums, regardless of their outcome.
In addition, the parties must be encouraged to make
further progress in the dialogue between them. If
progress is to be made in the dialogue, the continued
assistance of the African Union, through the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan, led
by Chairman Mbeki, and the Intergovernmental
Authority of Development (IGAD) is critical. In this
context, I had the opportunity to meet with
Mr. Mahboub Maalim, Executive Secretary of IGAD,
on the occasion of his recent visit to Japan. In the
months to come, it will also be necessary to give
further consideration to the modalities of United
Nations engagement in the Sudan.
Peace cannot be achieved in the Sudan without
stability in Darfur. We therefore strongly urge all
parties to the conflict in Darfur to join the peace
process. At the same time, it is important that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur be enabled to pursue its mission.
The international community must continue to
actively support the Sudan in its efforts to build peace.
Since the signing of the CPA, Japan has extended
assistance to the Sudan in the amount of approximately
$440 million. For the referendums scheduled for early
next year, we have disbursed approximately $8.17
million in aid to support the procurement of voting
materials and voter education programmes, and are
currently preparing to dispatch an observation team to
monitor the Southern Sudan referendum. Japan will
spare no effort in providing cooperation aimed at the
achievement of peace and stability in the Sudan.
The Security Council’s unanimous message
issued today at the ministerial level is of high
importance. Japan will continue to appeal to the
Sudanese parties to recognize that only though efforts
to build mutual trust through a spirit of cooperation
and partnership will the true foundation for lasting
peace and a bright future for the Sudan be built.
I would like to conclude by reiterating once again
Japan’s determination, as a long-standing and true
friend of Africa, to continue its active support and

10-64056

S/PV.6425

engagement in the pursuit of peace and stability in the
Sudan.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Patriota, Deputy Minister of
External Relations of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking Foreign Secretary William Hague for
convening this meeting.
I warmly greet President Thabo Mbeki and
express Brazil’s appreciation for the invaluable work
he and his fellow eminent members have been doing in
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel for
Sudan. We are encouraged by the progress he reported
to the Council today. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and for the increasing
attention he has dedicated to Sudanese issues. I extend
my greetings to His Excellency Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, and
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement, for their remarks.
I also take this opportunity to express my
Government’s support to the work of President
Benjamin Mkapa and fellow members of the United
Nations panel tasked with monitoring the referendums.
Our appreciation also goes to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haile Menkerios, Joint Special
Representative for Darfur Ibrahim Gambari, and Joint
Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassolé.
The Sudan represents today one of the major
challenges posed to the Security Council. Peace in the
Sudan is essential to the future of the African
continent. While it should be careful not to interfere in
delicate matters upon which only the Sudanese people
can decide, the international community has important
obligations to fulfil in its support for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). As the final
phase of the CPA approaches, it is indeed desirable that
the Security Council keep the situation in the Sudan
high on its agenda.
Our primary concern is peace and stability, while
taking special care to ensure that a complex situation is
not made worse. Our primary common goal should be
to see to it that the referendums are conducted in a
cooperative atmosphere and in a timely, free and fair
manner. Of central importance in building a
prosperous, democratic and peaceful future for the
Sudanese people is the implementation of the outcome

10-64056

of the referendums. In this regard, we welcome the
beginning of voter registration yesterday for the
Southern Sudan referendum.
We support a strong message from the Council to
the CPA parties to the effect that all Sudanese,
including southerners in the North and northerners in
the South, have their rights respected and their safety
guaranteed, regardless of the outcome of the
referendums. To this end, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan has to be provided with adequate means to
effectively contribute to maintaining security in its area
of operation, in particular in Abyei.
We are confident that the Sudanese leadership
will rise to the challenge of overcoming mistrust and
reach the compromises that will promote reconciliation
and further strengthen social and economic ties among
themselves and with their immediate neighbours. It is
in the interest of all to nurture such ties. In this context,
I welcome the conclusion of negotiations on a
framework for resolving outstanding issues relating to
the implementation of the CPA and the agreement
between the parties to resume high-level negotiations
on 22 November, under the auspices of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel.
Regardless of the results of the referendums, the
mediation support and peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations will have to be undertaken in
cooperation with the Sudanese authorities. Possible
tasks in this regard will include the monitoring of
wealth-sharing arrangements, institutional development
and development assistance. A comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy should, in due course, be
discussed with the Sudanese. When the time comes, the
Security Council may wish to consider the role that the
Peacebuilding Commission can play in this regard.
In order to achieve durable peace, the efforts of
the international community and the Sudanese people
should also aim at overcoming poverty, fostering social
and economic development, and respecting human
rights. The referendums, if conducted in a transparent
manner, as is our expectation, should pave the way for
the normalization of economic relations between
members of the international community and the
Sudanese.
Brazil wishes to contribute to the economic and
institutional development of the Sudan, which will lead
to improvements in the living standards of all
Sudanese. Our bilateral trade has grown significantly

25

S/PV.6425

over the past few years. In agriculture and biofuels,
new partnerships are being forged. In March this year,
a mission of the Brazilian Agency for Cooperation
visited Khartoum and identified possible areas for
future work. We are also currently engaged in a
dialogue with the Sudan on ways to provide electoral
assistance.
The North-South civil war was, in part, a result of
long-standing power and wealth imbalances in the
Sudan. Such imbalances also contributed to the conflict
in Darfur. In this context, the Government of the
Sudan’s New Strategy for Darfur is a positive step, as it
seeks to deal with the root causes of the conflict and
involve local communities in the peace process. Efforts
currently undertaken in the context of the Doha peace
process to address those issues deserve our continued
support.
In Darfur, there are also urgent short-term
measures that need to be taken by all parties. Military
operations are not legitimate tools for increasing
bargaining power at the negotiating table, however. All
groups should join the Doha peace process, as there is
no military solution to the conflict. Of particular
concern is the persisting arms flow to Darfur. All
Member States should refrain from selling or in any
way facilitating the provision of weapons that could be
used in the conflict.
Other measures are necessary, including securing
humanitarian access to those in need and refraining
from hindering the mobility of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The parties
are, of course, expected to cooperate with and respect
the presence of the United Nations on the ground.
The Sudan is a vast and bountiful country, but its
ancient peoples face serious historical imbalances with
roots in its colonial past and in centuries of economic
and social exclusion. Brazil has enthusiastically
assumed its share of responsibility in joining forces
with Africans to consolidate an increasingly prosperous
and democratic continent, and we look forward to a
future of durable peace and sustained economic
development for all the Sudanese people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the constructive nature of
today’s discussion, which is in line with the Russian

26

approach. The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the efforts of the Sudanese parties to
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA), the main document for a settlement in Southern
Sudan. By encouraging the efforts of the parties to
ensure that keeping the Sudan unified is an attractive
outcome, the CPA stipulates the holding of a
referendum on self-determination for Southern Sudan.
In order to support peace and stability in the Sudan and
in Africa as a whole, it is now crucial to ensure the
timely and proper holding of the referendum.
The Sudanese people must determine the future
of their State on their own. The Russian Federation will
respect any outcome of the referendum. Irrespective of
its outcome, the referendum will pave the way for the
whole of the Sudan to make the transition to a
significant new level of development. It is important
for the parties’ representatives to continue their
bilateral efforts to implement their CPA obligations.
We welcome the fact that, in line with the timetable for
preparing for the referendum, the voter registration
process has started and is taking place in a peaceful
and organized fashion.
We note the active role of the African Union and
its High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan,
chaired by Thabo Mbeki, which will assist the parties
to achieve significant progress in agreeing upon the
fundamental principles of settlement, including the
issues of border demarcation, the distribution of
revenue from natural resources, finances, security,
citizenship and international legal instruments. The
agenda includes the issue of the organization of the
referendum on the Abyei region. A compromise must
be reached to resolve disagreements on Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states. The parties must make
maximum efforts to prevent an increase in inter-tribal
conflict in these regions and to keep the process within
the context of the negotiated decisions.
The pending issues should be addressed by the
parties exclusively in the political sphere. Further
assistance from the international community and
international and regional mediators to normalize the
situation in the Sudan should focus on supporting
constructive interaction among the Sudanese parties.
We welcome the work of the Secretary-General’s panel
to monitor the referendums. We trust that it will help to
build trust among the Sudanese parties.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

We attach particular significance to the role of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
helping to ensure security, protect the civilian
population and provide technical and logistical support
to the process of planning and holding the
referendums. In that respect, the main responsibility
for ensuring the security of the country’s civilian
population and the foreign citizens within the territory
of Southern Sudan lies with the Sudanese authorities.
In order to ensure the Sudan’s stability, it is
crucial to resolve the conflict in Darfur. The Doha
political process must therefore be comprehensive and
bring the main rebel groups on board. It is important to
influence in a coordinated manner those leaders of the
rebel movement who have doggedly remained outside
the negotiation framework. Early achievement by the
Darfur parties of substantive political agreements will
facilitate the holding of the referendums in the Sudan
and give impetus to the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Russia respects the sovereignty and independence
of the Sudan and will continue, in cooperation with the
Government of National Unity, including both parties
to the CPA, to assist Sudanese settlement politically
and practically. The President of the Russian
Federation, Dmitry Medvedev, has taken the decision
to deploy an additional Russian helicopter unit to
UNMIS. Russian representatives will participate in the
international observer team for the forthcoming
referendum in Southern Sudan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to welcome the Ministers to the Council
today. Like others, I thank Mr. Mbeki for his sustained
efforts and for today’s briefing. We commend his
efforts to bring the parties in the Sudan together to
agree on unresolved issues that remain in dispute. I
thank Mr. Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan, for his statement. I also thank Mr. Pagan Amum
for his statement.
The Council is meeting today as the Sudan is at a
decisive juncture that could change the situation in the
region. The region is two months away from the
referendums on the fate of Southern Sudan and the
Abyei region.

10-64056

Today more than ever before, we must reiterate
the importance of pursuing direct dialogue between the
parties and adopting negotiation as the preferred
manner to resolve disputes and differences. In this
respect, we welcome Mr. Mbeki’s briefing, in
particular his statement on a framework agreement
among the parties — the National Congress Party and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement — providing
for open borders between the North and the South,
whatever the outcome of the vote, in order to facilitate
the free movement of goods and persons and to help
ensure a peaceful transition after the referendum.
The agreement provides for negotiated conditions
to address a broad range of subjects, including wealthsharing of the oil revenue, citizenship, water resources
and debt. We are grateful for the commitments of both
parties to implementing the provisions of the CPA and
not to backtrack or return to a climate of civil war. That
is why cooperation and coexistence between the North
and the South is unavoidable, irrespective of the
outcome of the referendum. We hope that the
Presidency will reach an agreement as soon as possible
on the Abyei region.
The referendum must also take place in fair and
peaceful conditions. We must create a peaceful
environment in which to hold the referendum by the
deadline, taking into account the need to make the
choice of unity attractive, whatever apparent
difficulties may be involved, in line with the general
provisions of the CPA. We also welcome the start of
the voter registration process and the launch of the
electoral campaign, as well as the efforts on the ground
of the panel appointed by the Secretary-General to
monitor the referendum.
As for Darfur, we are concerned about the recent
military confrontations that have spread to the
Kordofan region and hope that the efforts of the State
of Qatar and Mr. Djibrill Bassolé will lead to a return
of the Justice and Equality Movement and other
movements to the Doha negotiating table. We urge
Abdel Wahid el-Nur, leader of the Sudan Liberation
Movement, to join the negotiations in order to reach an
agreement as soon as possible, given the positive
impact this would have on the situation in the Sudan as
a whole.
We also applaud the improved relations between
the Sudan and Chad, which will help to enhance
stability in the region. We naturally welcome the work

27

S/PV.6425

of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in the Sudan, and in this respect we note that
the agreement of all parties concerned must be
obtained before the number of international
contingents can be increased. We welcome the efforts
of Mr. Gambari, Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Bassolé,
Mr. Mbeki and others, including the African Union and
the League of Arab States, to work together in support
of the Sudan during this difficult but fateful time.
The President: I
representative of France.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for having organized
this debate.
In 2005, the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) enabled the Sudan to emerge from a deadly
20-year civil war. Today, we must implement the Peace
Agreement in order to avoid a return to violence and
civil war. The Peace Agreement must be implemented
comprehensively, which means that the referendum on
self-determination for Southern Sudan must, as all
have said before me, be conducted in appropriate
conditions on the planned date — 9 January 2011. To
that end, certain actions and initiatives are necessary.
For the Government of the Sudan, the establishment of
the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission this
summer was a first step. Today, the Sudanese
Government’s contribution to the budget of the
Commission must be paid. Respect for the freedom of
expression must be ensured.
Preparing for the referendum also means
preparing for the post-referendum process to ensure
that, irrespective of the referendum’s outcome, the
Southern Sudanese will be able to live in peace with
the northern Sudanese. In this respect, we welcome the
advance in discussions between the North and the
South conducted under the aegis of Mr. Mbeki. We
encourage the parties to continue in their constructive
efforts and to make concessions where necessary in
order to come to an agreement as soon as possible. It
must be kept in mind that the cost of any such
concessions will be dwarfed by the incomparable gains
represented by the possibility of lasting peace in the
Sudan. The issue of Abyei in particular needs to be
resolved as soon as possible.
It is also incumbent upon the United Nations to
play its full role in the referendum process and to

28

support the efforts of the parties. We welcome the work
carried out by Special Representative Haile Menkerios
and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS). The expertise and logistical support
provided will be crucial over the coming months.
We also welcome the establishment of the panel
chaired by President Mkapa, which will be able to give
us, in coordination with the other observation missions
deployed in the Sudan, feedback on the conditions of
the preparations for and the holding of the
referendums.
For its part, the European Union began deploying
its first personnel to the field yesterday to participate in
the observation of voter registration. We must also
ensure that the military aspect of the UNMIS mandate
can be fulfilled under the appropriate conditions. We
took note that there has already been some
redeployment, as well as of the additional needs
described by Mr. Menkerios to allow for better
coverage of the territory, especially those areas where
tensions may arise. Because the stakes are considerable
and the United Nations cannot afford to fail, France
supports the reinforcement requested by the
Secretariat.
In the current context, we must continue to
devote our full attention to Darfur. The war between
the Sudanese armed forces and the rebel groups is
continuing, as the deadly fighting with the Justice and
Equality Movement at the beginning of the month
showed. A political solution is indispensable. In this
context, we need to continue to provide our support to
the Doha joint mediation efforts. It is unacceptable that
the two main rebel groups continue to remain outside
of this process. We call on them to join the discussions
without delay and without preconditions. To refuse to
do so is to refuse peace and to encourage war; it is
criminal.
The United Nations, for its part, needs to
continue its efforts to protect civilians, as its mandate
demands. We are concerned that the military contingent
is not meeting the targets set, as the Secretary-General
recalled in his last report (S/2010/543). We therefore
encourage the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to strengthen its
posture and implement its protection-of-civilians
strategy in all circumstances and at all levels with
renewed determination. This means that all limitations
on the freedom of movement of UNAMID need to

10-64056

S/PV.6425

cease completely. This also means that the attacks that
the Force continues to be subject to, which constitute
war crimes, need to end. It is unacceptable that
peacekeepers and civilian personnel of UNAMID
continue to be taken hostage on a regular basis.
I should like to conclude by recalling, as
underscored in President Mbeki’s report a year ago,
that there can be no peace without justice in Darfur.
The crimes that have been committed there cannot go
unpunished. We therefore call on all States to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you and your delegation,
Mr. President, for having organized this timely debate
on the Sudan, which is undoubtedly one of the most
sensitive topics on the agenda of the Security Council.
We thank the Secretary-General and former President
Thabo Mbeki for the information they presented to us
today. We also welcome the presence of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti,
and the Secretary General of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement, Mr. Pagan Amum, and thank
them for their statements.

Agreement, including the status of Abyei. The progress
described by President Mbeki is encouraging in this
regard. We reiterate our full support for his work and
that of those directly involved in the negotiations.
At the same time, there is a need to speed up the
preparations for the holding of the referendum in
keeping with the dates agreed by the parties. The
delays observed need to be overcome as soon as
possible, including the release of funds to the
Referendum Commission. The launching of voter
registration efforts, which has already been mentioned,
is a step in the right direction towards a process that
needs to credibly reflect the will of the population of
the south of Sudan.
Without a doubt, the role of the United Nations in
this context is of vital importance. We are pleased to
note that the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) continues to extend its capabilities to provide
assistance in the political process and in logistical
preparations for and security during the voting. At the
same time, while we are fully aware of the physical
limitations of the Mission, we would like to underscore
the importance of the protection of civilians and
unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance.

By signing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
in 2005, the Sudanese mapped out the road that would
lead their country to a new stage of stability and
political dialogue. That commitment was only achieved
after more than two decades, the loss of more than
2 million lives and the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of people, who urged their political leaders
to bring the armed conflict to a definitive end.

The objectives of protecting the civilian
population and meeting the needs of thousands of
people, especially women and children, must never be
overlooked for any reason. In this context, we request
UNMIS not to neglect its work in that area. We urge
the parties to remove all restrictions on the freedom of
movement of United Nations missions and
humanitarian organizations present in the country.

Today, we are meeting to ensure that this
commitment to dialogue and coexistence continues to be
respected by its signatories. Only weeks away from the
date set for one of the key elements of the Agreement to
be met — the holding of the referendum — the situation
constitutes an immense challenge not only for the Sudan
but also for the international community, which has a
responsibility to facilitate the political process and
avoid a reversal of progress, which would mean nothing
other than a return to violence and war.

At the same time, we reiterate that the
Organization and the international community must be
fully prepared to respond swiftly to any scenario. The
United Nations must be equipped with the appropriate
tools to face any eventuality. Mexico expresses its
readiness to consider any relevant action by the
Security Council over the coming weeks that could
make a contribution in this regard.

The future of the Sudan will depend on the acuity
and effectiveness of the decisions that its leaders will
take in the coming days. Mexico therefore reiterates its
call to them to overcome their gaps in trust and to
conclude as soon as possible solutions to the
outstanding issues of the Comprehensive Peace

10-64056

Nor should we forget the situation in Darfur,
which is linked to the overall national situation. The
violence there is unacceptable and the security
conditions continue to be cause for concern, which
underlines the urgent need to bring hostilities to an end
and for all parties to the conflict to return to the
negotiating table.

29

S/PV.6425

We cannot dodge the need to tackle impunity in
the region. Those who perpetrate crimes against the
civilian population and the personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur must
face appropriate punishment. Mexico would therefore
once again recall the international obligations of the
Government of the Sudan in this respect, including the
provisions contained in resolution 1593 (2005) related
to cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
Peace and justice must go hand in hand if we want to
promote a bright future for the region.

Neither party must take unilateral action.
Whatever the outcome of the referendum, the overall
peace and stability of the Sudan, and of the entire
region, must be ensured. China hopes that Northern
and Southern Sudan will cherish the hard-won results
of peace and continue to engage in dialogue and
consultations on an equal footing, so as to reach
agreement at an early date on pending issues such as
border demarcation, Abyei and the distribution of
wealth. This is important for the maintenance of longterm peace and stability in the Sudan and the region.

The main message being sent by the Security
Council today through its political statement is simple:
a return to armed conflict is not an option. Given the
difficulties that will crop up over the coming weeks,
we must reiterate our call on the parties to fulfil their
responsibilities as the only option for bringing about
the stability and peace that the people of the Sudan
demanded five years ago and that they are demanding
today with equal determination.

China welcomes the important role played by the
African Union (AU) in the settlement of the question
of the Sudan. We appreciate the good offices of
Mr. Mbeki and the AU High-Level Implementation
Panel for Sudan, as well those of regional
organizations such as the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
deeply
gratifying
that
Council
members,
representatives of Northern and Southern Sudan,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Mbeki are
today together discussing the question of the Sudan.
Maintaining peace, stability and development in
the Sudan is in the interest of the Sudanese people and
beneficial to the peace and development of the region
and the African continent as a whole. The signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) has put an
end to decades of conflict between the Northern and
Southern parts of the Sudan. The comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement is the precondition
for — and guarantee of — long-term peace and
stability in the Sudan.
The South Sudan referendum is a key step in the
implementation of the CPA, but it is not an end in itself.
We hope that the referendum will be held in a peaceful,
free, transparent and fair manner, in accordance with
the CPA, that it will reflect the will of the Sudanese
people and that its outcome will be respected by all
parties. We hope that Northern and Southern Sudan will
try their utmost to expedite the preparations for the
referendum. We call on the international community to
create favourable conditions for the referendum, but not
to prejudge its outcome.

30

China welcomes the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan and the Secretary-General’s panel on the
South Sudan referendum and their continuing support
for the implementation of the CPA.
China supports the comprehensive and peaceful
settlement of the question of Darfur, especially the
resolution of its root causes. To achieve lasting peace
and stability in Darfur, it is necessary to continue to
uphold the dual-track strategy of promoting the
political process and deploying peacekeeping
operations, as well as to give full play to the role of the
Tripartite Mechanism, which includes the AU, the
United Nations and the Sudanese Government as the
main channel.
The serious delays in the political process are the
most prominent challenge facing the settlement of the
question of Darfur. China urges those Darfur parties
that have yet to do so to join the political process
immediately and without conditions. We appreciate the
new strategy presented by the Sudanese Government.
China supports the efforts of the United Nations in
seeking an appropriate solution to the question of
Darfur, as well as the work of Mr. Bassolé, Mr. Gambari
and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. We hope that the international community
will continue to push forward the political solution to
the question of Darfur while making greater
contributions to the early recovery, reconstruction and
development of Darfur.

10-64056

S/PV.6425

I would like to announce here that, in order to
support the political process in Darfur, the Chinese
Government has decided to make an additional
contribution of $500,000 to the United Nations trust
fund for the political process in Darfur.
China supports the presidential statement that has
been adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2010/24). We
hope that the contents of the statement will be
implemented comprehensively. China will continue to
work with the international community to contribute to
the peace, stability and development of the Sudan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Gabon.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
With the holding of the referendums in Southern Sudan
and Abyei on 9 January 2011, the Sudan will enter a
critical phase in its history. To reach that point,
numerous challenges must be overcome. The
atmosphere of trust between the parties must be
maintained and their commitment to respect the
timetable established by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) must be upheld. A credible and
transparent vote must be guaranteed and negotiations
on post-referendum arrangements must be pushed
forward. Meanwhile, it is crucial to achieve a peace
agreement in Darfur by the end of this year.
Where are we now, two months before the date
planned for these referendums? At what stage is the
peace process in Darfur today? The detailed statements
just delivered by the Secretary-General, former
President Thabo Mbeki, Sudanese Minister for Foreign
Affairs Ahmed Karti and Secretary General of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement Pagan Amum
were excellent, as they presented us with the real
situation on the ground. I would like to thank them for
this. Gabon’s evaluation of the situation is along the
same lines.
With regard to the referendums in Southern
Sudan and Abyei, my delegation is glad to note that the
international community is increasingly mobilizing its
efforts to ensure that they go smoothly. This
mobilization strengthens the commitment of the parties
to spare no effort to ensure that the referendums take
place on the dates that have been set. Moreover, it also
serves to encourage the parties to engage in dialogue,
thus creating the climate of trust necessary for the
pursuit of the implementation of the CPA.

10-64056

The statements just delivered by Minister Karti
and Secretary General Amum confirm the parties’
desire to reach an agreement. Gabon cannot fail to
welcome this, especially since the parties have also
undertaken, through a framework agreement, to
promote good neighbourly relations between the North
and the South whatever the outcome of the vote may
be. Gabon believes that this climate of trust would
benefit from being strengthened through the holding of
a meeting of the parties at the highest level, along with
international stakeholders, to reach agreement on all
points of disagreement, including the status of Abyei,
as planned by former President Mbeki.
The need for a credible and transparent vote in a
peaceful climate in Southern Sudan means that all the
electoral and security tools must be employed. From
this standpoint, the establishment of the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission, despite some
difficulties, and the start, yesterday, of the voter
registration process, represent significant progress.
These two arrangements, which will enable the
referendum process to go smoothly, must be supported,
protected and monitored.
As indicated by the Secretary-General, it is
against that backdrop that efforts to support the smooth
running of the preparations are being carried out by the
United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) and the
United Nations Development Programme, in particular
in the logistical, technical and security areas. Those
efforts deserve our praise and support. Tensions that
may develop along the line of demarcation must be
controlled, as well those that may result from
population movements. Gabon calls on UNMIS and the
Joint Defence Board to be more vigilant and to explore
every possible measure in order to cope with any
eventuality.
At the second meeting of the Consultative Forum
on the Sudan, held in Addis-Ababa on 6 November, the
parties agreed to establish, by the end of the year,
working committees to finalize the preparations. That
decision can only reassure us with regard to the
ongoing process. In order to ensure the best
developments, we call on the parties to move forward
with
the
negotiations
on
post-referendum
arrangements, particularly the prominent issues of
border demarcation between North and South, freedom
of movement, resource sharing and problems of
citizenship.

31

S/PV.6425

Unlike the preparations in Southern Sudan, it
appears that those in Abyei, unfortunately, have made
but little progress. From the statements of Mr. Karti
and Mr. Amum, it appears there are some difficulties in
implementing the Abyei Protocol, and the parties have
not yet managed to define appropriate measures to
ensure peaceful coexistence between the main
communities living in the region. That is why Gabon
encourages the parties to do all they can to establish
the Abyei Referendum Commission. We also urge the
Abyei Joint Committee to speed up the talks on the
pending issues in order to reach an agreement between
the parties that will take into account the rights and
interests of the peoples living in the region.
The special attention the international community
has given the referendums in Southern Sudan and
Abyei should not distract us from the situation in
Darfur. Gabon deplores the fact that Darfur continues
to be the scene of violent armed combat, particularly
between the Government forces and the Justice and
Equality Movement. We encourage the various actors
in the peace process to unite their efforts to end the
fighting. We support the Sudanese Government’s
efforts to promote peace in Darfur and reiterate our
support for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
On a completely different level, it is crucial that
the peace process in Darfur be completed. From now
on the efforts of both Mr. Bassolé, the Joint Mediator,
and the State of Qatar aimed at reaching an agreement
by the end of the year deserve our support. That
agreement should be as inclusive as possible.
In that connection, we are pleased that
negotiations with the Liberation and Justice Movement
are continuing. We call for the signing of a peace
agreement with the Government by December. We also
ask the Justice and Equality Movement, which has
already established contact with the mediation team, and
the Sudan Liberation Movement to join the negotiations.
Gabon hopes to see the Doha negotiations culminate in
an agreement in December — a critical milestone for
the launch at the beginning of 2011 of a Darfur-Darfur
conference, which should establish lasting peace in that
region via a global peace agreement.
The whole point of today’s meeting — and I am
grateful to you for it, Mr. President — is to underscore
that the future of the Sudan hangs in the balance now
and that the peace process that began in 2005 with the

32

signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
has reached a critical juncture in its implementation.
Today the fears of the past must give way to the
aspirations for peace for the Sudan of tomorrow. I am
delighted to hear the parties say that the time for war is
past.
Gabon reiterates its faith in the ability of the
Sudanese authorities to rise to this challenge. We
remain confident in the commitment of the various
stakeholders in the peace process and the guarantor
countries of the CPA to work to ensure that the chain of
international solidarity with the Sudanese people
remains active despite the scale of the challenges to be
met.
The President: I
representative of Turkey.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Much has been said today
about the critical juncture the Sudan finds itself at and
the challenges that remain. We welcome this
constructive discussion.
Over the past five years the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) have worked
together peacefully to address their issues and take that
historic agreement forward. There have been successes
and failures, but through the ups and the downs the
parties have stayed the course and stability has
prevailed. We commend them for their commitment to
peace and the courage they have shown under difficult
circumstances.
We have come to the final phase of CPA
implementation. At this point, all efforts must focus on
ensuring that the referendums in Southern Sudan and
Abyei are free, fair, transparent and credible, held on
time and in a peaceful manner. All parties concerned
should respect the outcome of the referendums. These
points are all crucial, since a result that can be
legitimately contested will be controversial, not just in
the Sudan but in the eyes of international public
opinion. In that context the commencement of the voter
registration process and the large turnout for it is a
noteworthy first step.
Let me underscore here that Turkey has, as a
matter of principle, always attached importance to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan since its independence in 1956. We also
fully support the CPA, which has brought peace to the
Sudan after decades of internal strife. Those two

10-64056

S/PV.6425

positions are not incompatible. Indeed, the CPA itself
reflects the same delicate political balance.
On the other hand, we do have concerns that
while separation is a legitimate choice, it is a difficult
one. However, in the end, that is a matter for the
Sudanese people to decide. In line with the main tenets
of the CPA, the future of the Sudan is very much in the
hands of the Sudanese. They are faced with a simple,
binary choice: either unity or separation. Their will is
the way forward, and their right to self-determination,
as manifested in free, fair and credible referendums,
will have to be respected.
Whatever the outcome of the referendums, all
Sudanese people, regardless of race or religion, and
whether in the North or the South, will continue to be
interdependent. In that regard, the future is not as
simple or binary. The need to find solutions that ensure
peaceful coexistence among diverse communities will
not change after January. Indeed, it will most likely
become more pronounced.
That is why comprehensively addressing all postreferendum arrangements is crucial, and we welcome
the progress made recently in that regard. The fact is
that while one is not a precondition for the other, there
is a mutually reinforcing link between the finalization
of post-referendum arrangements and the successful
holding of the referendums. Meaningful progress in
post-referendum arrangements can be translated into a
more positive working climate in the preparations for
and run-up to the referendums, as well as in their
aftermath. That is why more concrete progress is
needed, including with regard to Abyei.
The international community and the United
Nations stand ready to support all those efforts, but
peace must come from within. No amount of outside
support can replace or substitute for the political will
of the Sudanese stakeholders themselves to pave the
way to a future devoid of conflict. Ultimately, it is
those parties represented here today that had the
courage, foresight and wisdom to sign on to the CPA
five years ago. It is those parties that will make sure it
is implemented in full, and it is those parties that have
it within their grasp to together establish a peace
beyond the scope of the CPA.
Turkey is concerned about the recent military
clashes in Darfur and the overall deterioration in
security. We condemn all attacks on civilians,
humanitarian workers and the African Union-United

10-64056

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and call for the
perpetrators to be brought to justice. We urge all rebel
movements in Darfur to join the peace process in Doha
without further delay and without preconditions.
The humanitarian situation cannot be addressed
properly until a steady state of security is attained.
That is impossible as long as the rebel groups continue
to fight, rather than enter into political dialogue. There
have to be real consequences for rebel groups that
propagate conflict. Intransigence cannot be rewarded.
We must not lose focus in Darfur because of the
CPA or other considerations. A comprehensive and just
political settlement in Darfur is the only viable way
forward. Turkey fully supports the joint mediation
effort of the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, hosted by Qatar. We welcome the strategy for
Darfur announced by the Government of the Sudan. We
also welcome the continuing rapprochement between
the Governments of the Sudan and Chad.
It is not only the Sudan that is rapidly
approaching a critical juncture. The resolve of the
international community to maintain peace and security
is also at stake. We have a multitude of mechanisms,
processes and structures in place, as well as high-level
engagement, but translating that high-level effort into
success is the challenge before us. The CPA is not just
a series of timelines that need to be met. It is a political
path, charted five years ago, that will most likely lead
to the break-up of a very large country and its peoples
into two.
That is potentially a traumatic experience, the
benefits of which may only become apparent in the
long term. If history is any guide, even in the best
circumstances and with the ongoing commitment of the
parties to work together, we must shortly brace
ourselves for the same major turbulence ahead. As
such, insisting on strict adherence to the letter and the
spirit of the CPA will continue to be crucial. This
historic Agreement must be fully implemented and
brought to its culmination.
On the other hand, the Council and the
international community must also be prepared to
effectively manage the likely political, security and
humanitarian repercussions of CPA implementation,
especially in the aftermath of the referendums. That
will require carefully scripted, sound messages, as well
as putting in place the right tools, which include
genuine incentives.

33

S/PV.6425

As we move forward, in the light of the complex
and multifaceted national and regional dynamics, it is
clear that a detailed strategy is necessary to manage the
post-CPA period. In the final analysis, the Security
Council’s main responsibility is the maintenance of
international peace and security. We hope that its
continued political involvement in the process, and this
meeting today, will ultimately be helpful in advancing
that essential important goal.
In closing, let me express Turkey’s ongoing
commitment to peace and stability in the Sudan and the
region and our full support for the invaluable efforts of
the United Nations and the AU.

34

The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list.
I would therefore like once again to thank
Foreign Minister Karti and Mr. Amum for their
participation in today’s debate.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I should
now like to invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

10-64056
