United Nations

S/PV.6465

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6465th meeting
Wednesday, 5 January 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2010/658)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-20103 (E)

*1120103*

S/PV.6465

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Council
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council this year, I should like to extend my
very warm wishes for a fruitful new year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the new members: Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa. We look
forward with confidence to their participation in the
work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom will
be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council’s enormous responsibilities.
I would like to take this opportunity to express the
Council’s deep gratitude to the outgoing members —
Austria, Japan, Mexico, Turkey and Uganda — for their
important contributions to the work of the Council
during their term in 2009 and 2010.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, for her service as President
of the Security Council for the month of December
2010. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Rice
and her team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2010/658)
The President: I have received a letter from the
representative of Nepal, in which he requests to
participate in this meeting. I propose to invite that
representative to participate in this meeting, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant

2

provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Security Council, I should like
to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal.
It is so decided.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/658, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process.
Members of the Council also have before them copies
of a letter dated 5 January 2011 from the SecretaryGeneral, which will be issued as document S/2011/1.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: The Council has before it the
Secretary-General’s sixteenth and final report on
Nepal’s request for support to its peace process
(S/2010/658). Since the issuance of the previous report
of the Secretary-General of 2 September (S/2010/453)
and my briefing on 7 September (see S/PV.6377), the
Council has also heard two oral reports on this issue by
Under-Secretary-General B. Lynn Pascoe. The Council
decided on 15 September (see S/PV.6385) that the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) would terminate on 15 January 2011. Since
then, UNMIN has continued to encourage the early
resolution of issues that would contribute to the
Mission’s orderly departure and, furthermore, would
give the United Nations, the Council and above all the
people of Nepal confidence that the peace process is on
track.
Nepal’s peace process has remained largely
deadlocked following the resignation of Prime Minister
Madhav Kumar Nepal in June 2010. There has been
little progress on the most critical issues of forming a
new Government and integrating and rehabilitating the
personnel of the Maoist army. Some progress has been
made on the new constitution, but it may be difficult to
meet the promulgation deadline of May 2011.
Despite many problems, Nepal’s interim
Government between April 2007 and August 2008
reflected agreement to share power. Since the elections,
the parties have found it extremely difficult to maintain

11-20103

S/PV.6465

consensus and to find satisfactory power-sharing
arrangements. They recently floated the idea of a
rotational system of leadership, but did not reach
agreement. At issue is not merely whether a new
Government can be formed, but whether Nepal’s peace
process can move forward without it.
Voting for a new prime minister has been halted
since the President prorogued Parliament on
20 November, under circumstances described in the
Secretary-General’s report. Thereafter, the Government
was not legally obliged to reconvene Parliament, and
indeed Prime Minister Nepal had suggested that he
might not do so until the Maoist army came under the
effective supervision of the Special Committee. After a
special session of Parliament convened at the request
of over one-quarter of its members, it was agreed on
23 December to hold the regular session at the earliest.
Parliament has now been summoned for 9 January, and
it appears unlikely that a new Government will be in
place by the time UNMIN’s mandate expires.
Growing differences within the major political
parties continue to add to the mistrust between the
parties. In recent years, the internal processes of all
major parties have arguably become significantly more
open, participatory, inclusive and democratic, in line
with provisions of the interim constitution, but there is
divergence, within the parties on the peace process
itself. Strong voices in the traditional parties demand
an unambiguous embrace of multiparty democracy and
pluralism by the Maoists. Within the Unified
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M), there is
a perception of being marginalized and deliberately
excluded from a leadership role in Government.
The remaining tasks of the peace process, and
particularly the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist
army personnel, require collective political will. No
party on its own can identify and implement
satisfactory solutions. But the failure of the peace
process to advance has strengthened the hand of those
on all sides who deride it as unproductive or far too
slow. The Council will recall how close the Constituent
Assembly had come to a premature end last May for
similar reasons. Now, there is a real risk that the failure
of the peace process will become a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
The parties have not resolved the issue of the
future monitoring of arms and armies after UNMIN’s
exit. Restrictions on the formerly warring armies have

11-20103

been a cornerstone of Nepal’s peace, and as such the
monitoring arrangements are also a potential flashpoint
for failure. The independent, interim monitoring of the
armies was intended initially to help create confidence
for the election of the Constituent Assembly, and
thereafter for the completion of the remaining key
tasks of the peace process. The natural end to
monitoring would have come with the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel and the Army’s
democratic reform and rightsizing, both activities
which should have gotten under way with the interim
Government in 2007.
Despite many challenges, Nepal’s arms
monitoring regime has been strikingly successful.
There have been violations, as reported to the Council,
but these have been the exception. Based on a legal
agreement and a light presence of United Nations arms
monitors, the main ingredients have been the armies’
self-discipline and the United Nations-chaired Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee, a reliable
mechanism for building confidence, addressing
violations and resolving disputes.
Since March 2010, and as requested by the
Council, UNMIN has consulted intensively with the
parties on options for a transfer of monitoring
responsibilities. We put forward examples of
alternative arrangements — recalling, for instance, the
original joint monitoring teams of 2007, with
membership of the Nepal Army, the Maoist army and
UNMIN. At the same time, our strong advice to the
parties has been that, rather than simply replicating a
monitoring regime, they should move forward more
swiftly on finding solutions for the 19,000 Maoist army
personnel. UNMIN itself sought to generate discussion
and planning, and many potential donors have also
been active on this front.
Following September’s four-point agreement,
there has been some movement in the secretariat of the
Special Committee, as described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. But there is considerable confusion
and disagreement on how and by whom monitoring
will be conducted after UNMIN. Today, 10 days before
the end of the Mission, there is yet no consensus
mechanism to which UNMIN can hand over its
monitoring responsibilities. It is not clear what will
happen after UNMIN withdraws.
This situation presents potential risks, and I
would like to set out some legal, political and practical

3

S/PV.6465

considerations in this regard. The Agreement on the
Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies of
26 November 2006, witnessed by UNMIN, spells out
the role of the United Nations Mission as the monitor
of these arrangements, as does the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement of 21 November 2006, both referred
to in the interim constitution of 2007.
These agreements are binding on the parties, and
become no less so after UNMIN departs. All the
agreements can be revised by the parties, for example
to provide for an alternative monitoring agent, but they
have yet to do so. The departure of UNMIN, the
designated monitor, seems set to create a legal void. In
September, the Special Committee adopted a directive
for the supervision, control and direction, and code of
conduct for the Maoist army personnel. The directive
itself was not foreseen as substituting for the arms
monitoring Agreement, nor as making the Special
Committee the replacement of UNMIN. The arms
monitoring Agreement is carefully worded. The 24-hour
monitoring of weapons belonging to the Maoist army
and the Nepal Army is set out in some detail, as are the
permitted and restricted activities for both armies and
the mechanism for resolving any disputes that arise in
this regard.
Since October, I have raised repeatedly with the
parties the need for clarity on the monitoring
arrangements that will be in place after UNMIN’s exit.
On 13 December 2010, I wrote to Prime Minister
Nepal and UCPN-M Chairman Pushpa Kamal Dahal,
with copy to the relevant political parties. The Prime
Minister told me on 22 December that the Government
would draw up and present to the Maoists a separate
agreement covering the gaps between the Special
Committee’s supervisory regime and the existing arms
monitoring regime. This does not appear to have been
done, however, and on 3 January UNMIN received a
response to our letter from the Prime Minister’s Office.
I must state clearly that the positions presented in this
letter do not reflect consensus in the Special
Committee and appear to deviate significantly from the
interim constitution.
The Office of the Prime Minister states that the
Special Committee will, through its secretariat, take
charge of the monitoring functions currently carried
out by UNMIN, and any issues not covered by its
directives will be addressed by the Special Committee
as and when required. Secondly, the letter makes clear
that the Nepal Army will no longer be subject to

4

monitoring, as set out in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the arms monitoring Agreement, but
will be managed under other existing constitutional and
legal provisions. Thirdly, the Prime Minister’s Office
states that there is no longer a need for any dispute
resolution mechanism in connection with monitoring
arrangements, as any disputes will be resolved by
consensus in the Special Committee. And, finally, the
Government reiterates the request that all relevant
documents, United Nations equipment and logistics,
including the containers with arms and ammunition, be
handed over by UNMIN to the Special Committee or
designated mechanism.
The proposal for monitoring the Maoist army
presented by the office of the Prime Minister had
already been rejected formally by the UCPN-M, a
position repeated in a letter of 4 January 2011 from the
UCPN-M to UNMIN. These monitoring arrangements
are not agreed. Nor is there agreement to end the
monitoring of the Nepal Army.
This proposal would effectively abrogate critical
agreements, with potentially far-reaching political
consequences that should be well understood by the
Council. Expunging these agreements would create
grave uncertainties and can be expected to erode the
confidence that has been built up around arms
monitoring and through the important achievements of
the peace process so far.
UNMIN has consistently pressed for action by
the Special Committee on the supervision, integration
and rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel, as
constitutionally mandated. The Special Committee is a
political body, its nine appointees designated by six
political parties, four of which are members of the
current Government. Its reduced ability to work by
consensus reflects the hardened political divisions
overall. It is in no position to resolve highly politicized
disputes.
With respect to the request by the Prime
Minister’s Office for the transfer of UNMIN documents
and equipment, UNMIN has underlined its readiness to
provide all possible support to agreed follow-on
arrangements. UNMIN arms monitoring officers briefed
the Special Committee on the monitoring modalities
and equipment during their visit to main cantonment
site 3, in Chitwan, on 26 December 2010.
In numerous discussions with the Government
about the disposal of monitoring-related United

11-20103

S/PV.6465

Nations assets, UNMIN has set out the relevant United
Nations administrative procedures. It should be noted
that the stored arms and ammunition belong to the
parties. UNMIN’s responsibility has been to monitor it,
but the Mission has no authority for its disposal. We
have explained that the United Nations-owned vehicles
will, as a priority, be sent to other missions. If the other
equipment is not needed by other missions or United
Nations agencies, it may be available for donation or,
in the shorter term, for loan.

security forces; whether the combatants will be
integrated principally into the Nepal Army and Armed
Police Force or into other forces; and the value of the
proposed rehabilitation packages. The international
community has long been ready to provide support to
rehabilitation options. It is past time for addressing the
largely unproductive lives led by young people in
cantonments, notwithstanding the training provided to
many and their completion of school-leaving
certificates.

As we have underlined, however, the armsmonitoring function is based on agreement, and UNMIN
requires a clear and consensual response as to how the
monitoring equipment would be used. The Council has
consistently urged the parties “to agree and implement a
timetabled action plan with clear benchmarks for the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel”
(resolution 1921 (2010), para. 4), and decided that,
working with the parties, UNMIN should make the
necessary arrangements for its withdrawal, including
handing over any residual monitoring responsibilities. It
is not an option for us to hand over monitoring-related
United Nations equipment to the Government without
agreement between the Government and the UCPN-M
on the nature and form of future monitoring. UNMIN
alerted the parties in our letter of 13 December that
without such agreement, the Mission would dismantle
and remove valuable United Nations-owned assets from
the cantonments on 15 January, in line with standard
procedures.

The United Nations has also consistently pointed
to the importance of establishing the right size for the
Nepal Army and bringing it under democratic control,
as foreseen in the Interim Constitution. A Cabinet
meeting on 26 December decided to form a threemember defence directorate committee headed by the
Defence Minister to oversee the process of
democratization and civilian control of the Nepal
Army. The Chief of Army Staff is a member, and the
Defence Secretary is a member-secretary. This is the
first formal mechanism aimed at better coordination
between the Nepal Army and the Ministry of Defence.

Under the four-point agreement concluded last
September, the Government and the UCPN-M were to
basically complete the remaining tasks of the peace
process by 14 January 2011. UNMIN has long pressed
the parties to expedite solutions for the Maoist army
and the Nepal Army.
At a meeting of the Special Committee on
19 December, its secretariat presented a work plan for
the supervision, integration and rehabilitation of the
Maoist army. The meeting concluded without
agreement on the work plan, however, as Maoist
members lodged a written dissent, citing the need to
resolve the future of the Arms Monitoring Agreement
and the modalities and numbers for integration and
rehabilitation.
Major issues pertaining to integration and
rehabilitation remain unresolved. These include the
numbers, norms and modalities for integration into the

11-20103

The Council and UNMIN have urged the parties
to find a consensual way forward through flexibility
and compromise, while remaining true to their
commitments to the fundamental principles and goals
set out in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
including multiparty democracy, human rights, the rule
of law and the fundamental transformation of the State
to address the problems based on class, caste, region
and sex.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement remains a
lodestar for Nepal, pinpointing the issues that hold the
key to sustainable peace and development. Many
ethnic and traditionally marginalized groups now
anticipate their improved representation at all levels of
society and Government, and the benefits of greater
decentralization. The contestation over resources and a
share in decision-making is now heightened and can be
expected to be a source of future tension and potential
instability.
Issues related to ownership of land and property
are central to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
subsequent agreements. But land-reform efforts have
stalled, and the provision of land to economically
backward classes has been limited and incomplete, as
has the return of land and property seized by the
Maoists during the conflict.

5

S/PV.6465

The human rights situation continues to be
characterized by a general atmosphere of impunity and
lack of accountability. As the Council is aware, some
journalists have been killed, while others have been
threatened. Efforts to establish a truth and
reconciliation commission and a commission of inquiry
on disappearances have slowed.
Security in the Terai remains fragile and the
region has experienced a spate of extrajudicial killings.
Violent youth groups, including the Young Communist
League and the Youth Force, engaged in especially
significant violence between February and May 2010,
and reportedly remain embroiled in extortion activities.
Despite the stalemate over many critical matters,
there has been some encouraging progress in reducing
contentious issues in the new constitution. While the
high-level task force that helped achieve this was
dissolved in December, the 28 parties represented in
the Constituent Assembly have decided to meet
regularly under the leadership of the Speaker to
address the remaining 83 contentious issues in the
constitution-drafting process. The parties will seek to
amend parliamentary regulations in order to send
unresolved issues to the Constitutional Committee.
Time is short for these tasks to be accomplished before
the 28 May deadline for promulgation.
The political parties showed significant flexibility
in the high-level task force, chaired by UCPN-M
Chairman Pushpa Kamal Dahal, in rapidly resolving
several issues. Serious differences still remain,
however, on the names, numbers and boundaries of
federal states and on forms of governance.
Nepal’s new constitution is expected to reflect the
most important commitments of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, making that constitution perhaps the
single most critical milestone in the country’s
democratic transition.
As UNMIN prepares to leave Nepal after four
years, its work should be a source of pride to the
United Nations. The Mission’s rapid deployment came
about with strong support from regional and other
actors, notably the Governments of India and Norway.
UNMIN was fortunate in securing deeply dedicated
personnel, and was able to include among its national
staff a high proportion of traditionally marginalized
groups.

6

UNMIN brought expertise and impartiality to the
support of the elections; to the monitoring of arms and
armies and the convening of 134 sessions of the Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee, which has
resolved
many
issues
and
prevented
their
politicization; to the registration and verification of
Maoist personnel in cantonments; and to the
negotiation of the discharge of the disqualified.
UNMIN also maintained steadfast impartiality in
investigating and assessing reported violations of the
Arms Monitoring Agreement.
Cooperation between UNMIN and the United
Nations country team has been high. By the middle of
2008, responsibility for mine action had been
transferred to the country team, as had, by early 2009,
leadership of the United Nations Peace Fund for Nepal.
Child protection issues, especially the discharge of
Maoist army personnel disqualified as minors, has
involved solid coordination among UNMIN, the Office
of the Resident Coordinator, the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict.
Although the process is still incomplete, the
Mission has performed its mandated tasks and has, I
am convinced, contributed significantly to the peace
process. The Mission has faced high expectations from
the public and the parties, well beyond its limited
mandate, as core political disputes can be resolved only
by the parties themselves.
The primary objective of the Mission’s
establishment was the successful election of the
Constituent Assembly. Upon its completion, the
monitoring task was extended repeatedly, while
relations among the parties continued to erode. The
Mission would have benefited from a review of the
mandate after the elections. Stronger support to the
peace process overall, possibly including monitoring of
the peace agreements more broadly, as well as
technical support, particularly to the integration and
rehabilitation process, should have been considered
seriously. Some parties did ask UNMIN to take on
elements of these roles.
UNMIN has been an expression of the
international community’s support for and investment
in Nepal’s peace process. There has been
understandable frustration with an attenuated process

11-20103

S/PV.6465

far removed from the optimistic 12-month period
originally mandated by the Council. Four years on, it
should be recognized that Nepal has undertaken a
complex long-term project of peace, democracy and
State transformation.
The historic Twelve-point Understanding which
the warring parties signed in 2005 committed them to
establishing absolute democracy in Nepal, but
completing the course and managing the process have
now become acutely challenging. Deep divisions have
emerged over its direction and the sequencing of steps,
especially with respect to the future of Maoist army
personnel and the promulgation of the new
constitution.
While Nepal’s dramatic political gains are not
likely to be reversed, the risks have clearly grown.
There have at times been fears among many Nepalis
over the prospect of a “peoples’ revolt”, which remains
an explicit Maoist threat; of the President stepping in,
as recently called for by the Vice-President, should the
parties fail to find a way forward; or of an armybacked coup. Any such measures would sorely threaten
peace and Nepal’s fragile democracy.
Adopting the new constitution should close the
door firmly on any undemocratic governance
alternatives, of which the United Nations has also
repeatedly warned. Parties on both the left and the right
will need to show patience and remain faithful to the
core documents of the peace process. The traditional
parties need to demonstrate that their intention was not
simply to marginalize the Maoists through day-to-day
politics, while the Maoists must demonstrate
unambiguously that they intend to abide by democratic
politics.
This peace process can be brought to a close in
two ways: satisfactorily, through the negotiated
resolution of outstanding issues, or abortively, with one
or more parties reneging on their solemn commitments.
Setbacks and challenges are inevitable, but it is in the
interest of the country, the region and the international
community as a whole that the peace process be
maintained, respected and steered to a proper close.
UNMIN has continued to encourage dignified
negotiated solutions, which require a moderation of
positions on all sides. The parties can build on the
dialogue that has been their long-standing strength,
shun the demonizing of one another, and sidestep the
broad array of spoilers. At this moment, we encourage

11-20103

them to come to rapid agreement on the future of the
monitoring of arms and armies.
It remains vital that the international community
speak with one voice on the need for the peace process
to continue on the basis of dialogue and compromise,
for Nepal to have a new constitution by the end of May
as agreed by the parties, and for a smooth election
under the new constitution.
The matter of Nepal’s peace process will now
remain on the agenda of the Council for a further three
years. Consistent with the strong and sustained support
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations over
the past several years for peace efforts in Nepal,
principally through the United Nations Department of
Political Affairs, the United Nations will remain
engaged and continue to make its contribution to the
success of this process.
This is my final briefing to the Council on Nepal.
I would like to thank the Government of Nepal and the
political parties for their engagement with UNMIN,
and likewise the Nepal Army and the Maoist army for
their professional and profound commitment to our
cooperation, particularly in the Joint Monitoring
Coordination Committee. I want to acknowledge the
role played by sectors of civil society in Nepal’s peace
process and the knowledge and advice that they have
shared with the Mission. We have worked closely with
the national and international media in Nepal and
beyond, and I appreciate the interest they have taken in
UNMIN’s role in the peace process.
UNMIN has benefited from close consultation
and communication with the international diplomatic
and development community in Nepal, and especially
the Council members represented there. On behalf of
the Secretary-General, all my dedicated colleagues in
UNMIN, the United Nations family in Kathmandu, and
the Department of Political Affairs, I would like to
thank the Council and Member States, for the support
they have given UNMIN over the last four years and
will continue to give to Nepal’s remarkable peace
process.
Finally, I would like to express my profound
personal gratitude to all my devoted colleagues, and
especially to Ian Martin, Tamrat Samuel and UnderSecretary-General B. Lynn Pascoe, for our close and
supportive working relationships.

7

S/PV.6465

The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing.

They helped us move towards a post-conflict situation
on solid ground.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.

Now, we are preparing for the takeover after a
four-year contribution of UNMIN to Nepal’s peace
process. The Government of Nepal has made every
effort to ensure a smooth handover of all the works of
UNMIN to the Special Committee, which is formed
under the provision of article 146 of the interim
constitution of Nepal. Representation on the Special
Committee is comprised of major political parties,
including the Unified Communist Party of NepalMaoist.

Mr. Acharya (Nepal): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of January. I
would also like to acknowledge the presence of the
new members of the Security Council and wish them
all the best in their new responsibilities.
We have taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) contained in document S/2010/658, which
highlights his assessment of the situation of Nepal’s
peace process over the past four months. Likewise, I
wish to take note of remarks just made by Ms. Karin
Landgren, Representative of the Secretary-General.
The way it has been presented, it looks as if we
are moving towards a failure. I would like to state here
in no uncertain terms that we are not looking at the
failure of the peace process; we are working hard to
ensure the successful transition towards the
consolidation of peace. It is a natural shift from one
stage to another. That is why there are certain
complexities, which, I think, is only natural in any
post-conflict situation, especially when that postconflict situation is giving rise to an historic
transformation.
The United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
was established on 23 January 2007 through resolution
1740 (2007) as a special political mission to assist
Nepal in its homegrown peace process. The United
Nations was invited pursuant to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed on 21 November 2006
between the Government of Nepal and the thenCommunist Party of Nepal-Maoist. UNMIN’s planned
one-year term has seen seven extensions and now
extends to 15 January 2011.
I concur with the view of the Secretary-General
that UNMIN has been a positive factor in the difficult
context presented by the peace process during this
period. On behalf of the Government and people of
Nepal, we would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the United Nations, and in particular to
UNMIN and its dedicated staff, for their contributions
in the mandated areas to consolidating peace in Nepal.

8

Resolution 1740 (2007) mandated the UNMIN to
monitor the management of arms and armed personnel
on both sides, assist in the monitoring of the ceasefire
arrangements, and provide technical support for the
planning, preparation and conduct of the election of a
Constituent Assembly in a free and fair atmosphere.
UNMIN provided considerable assistance to the
national authorities in conducting the historic
Constituent Assembly elections and, prior to that,
assisted in monitoring the ceasefire. In the aftermath of
the successful elections to the Constituent Assembly,
UNMIN has monitored the arms and Maoist army
combatants cantoned in the 7 main and 21 satellite
camps in different geographic areas of the country, and
chaired the Joint Monitoring Coordination Committee.
After the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on 21 November 2006, Nepal’s peace
process has achieved historic progress on several
fronts. The promulgation of the interim constitution,
the election to the Constituent Assembly and the
declaration of a Federal Democratic Republic are
crucial milestones in the contemporary history of
Nepal. This has been possible with the courage,
determination and understanding of the people of
Nepal, led by the political parties, with the firm
support of the international community.
The release of approximately 4,000 disqualified
combatants in the beginning of 2010 was another
significant step forward in our peace process. Among
the released 4,008 disqualified ex-combatants, around
3,000 were identified as minors. I am happy to note
that the Security Council team led by His Excellency
Ambassador Claude Heller of Mexico visited Nepal in
November for the first field visit of the Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

11-20103

S/PV.6465

After the promulgation of the interim constitution
of Nepal in 2007 and the Constituent Assembly
election, Nepal’s peace process entered into the new
stage of peace consolidation. The Constituent
Assembly has the primary function of writing a
constitution for the Federal Democratic Republic of
Nepal that guarantees multi-party democracy, human
rights, a federal structure and inclusive governance for
the historic transformation of Nepal’s political,
economic and social landscapes. But at the same time,
the Constituent Assembly is also working as a
legislature-parliament and is therefore engaged in the
parliamentary business, including the formation of a
new Government.
Nepal’s peace process will reach its culmination
following the reintegration and rehabilitation of
combatants and the promulgation of a new constitution.
We are working hard on both these fronts. I would
therefore like to assure the Security Council that we
will be doing this with diligence and with devotion.
The high-level committee comprised of top leaders
from major political parties has succeeded in ironing
out many of the differences — in fact, out of 180,
already more than 130 have been taken care of — in
the thematic reports of the Constituent Assembly.
There are a number of issues that need to be settled in
the months ahead by the parties at the Constituent
Assembly. If it is taking more time, it is only because
of the historic task of transformation that the new
constitution is going to usher in the political, social and
economic spheres in the days ahead.
We are fully cognizant of the fact that there are
some concerns that Nepal’s peace process has
sometimes stalled or not moved forward as quickly as
possible. But we believe that, given the necessary
courage, maturity and flexibility, which the political
parties have exhibited in times of need in the past, all
the parties will muster a high level of maturity and
understanding and move towards the logical conclusion
of the peace process. This is so because the people of
Nepal, more than anybody else, look forward to the full
transition to a normal situation at the earliest possible
time. That would effectively stimulate rapid and
inclusive economic development and accelerate the
building of necessary infrastructure within a
consolidated atmosphere of peace and security. It
would also contribute to strengthening stability and
prosperity on a sustainable basis in the economically
vibrant neighbourhood of Nepal. We are aware that this

11-20103

is what the international community is looking forward
to in Nepal as well.
The Government has already made the necessary
preparations with a view to making the constitutionally
formed Special Committee a body capable of taking
over all the works of UNMIN in a seamless manner
after the Mission’s withdrawal. The Special Committee
will supervise arms and Maoist army combatants as per
the guidelines laid out in the directives for supervision,
control, direction and code of conduct for the Maoist
Army combatants, which were adopted unanimously on
17 September 2010. I repeat that these directives have
already been approved unanimously by the Committee.
The Special Committee will itself be a place to
settle disputes and any other issues that may come up
in the course of the peace process onwards. The
Government of Nepal has already sent a letter to
UNMIN and, through it, to the United Nations on
issues related to the monitoring of Maoist army
combatants and arms, on the Nepal Army and arms, on
the Agreement on the Monitoring of the Management
of Arms and Armies, on the dispute resolution
mechanism, and on the request for the transfer of the
updated records of Maoist arms and army combatants
and all the materials, equipment and logistics used by
UNMIN for monitoring tasks.
The Government and people of Nepal remain
grateful to the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, for providing continued support for our peace
process from the beginning. I wish to take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to the Council as a
whole and to each and every member of the Council
for extending excellent cooperation in Nepal’s peace
process.
I would like to express my Government’s
gratitude and sincere thanks to the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his personal
interest in the success of Nepal’s peace process. He
visited Nepal during UNMIN’s mandate in October
2008, and expressed his firm commitment to its
success. My sincere appreciation and thanks also go to
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
consistent involvement and several important visits
that contributed to consolidating Nepal’s peace
process. I would also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren
for leading her able team and for their dedicated
service in Nepal.

9

S/PV.6465

I also take this opportunity to thank her
predecessor, Mr. Ian Martin, for his contribution in
Nepal, first as the head of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Nepal, and later as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of UNMIN during the crucial phases of our
peace process. My thanks also go to Mr. Tamrat
Samuel for his contributions in his capacity as Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Director of the Asia and Pacific Division of the
Department of Political Affairs. UNMIN and its leaders
will be remembered for their contributions to Nepal’s
peace process and contemporary developments.
Finally, we are confident that we will continue to
enjoy international support and goodwill to consolidate
peace, stability and economic development in Nepal. It
is incumbent upon me, on behalf of my Government
and people, to assure the Security Council that Nepal is
committed to the path of peace, stability and
development and will remain fully engaged with the
international community in the days ahead. Peace,
development and human rights are indivisible, and they

10

need to be supported coherently to ensure the
sustainable progress of all countries around the world.
This is even more true for countries emerging from
conflict. We look forward to working together in the
days ahead to ensure a better and prosperous future for
all the Nepali people within a more peaceful and secure
world.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I would
like to express our gratitude to Ms. Karin Landgren,
who is today making her last briefing to the Council in
her capacity as Representative of the Secretary-General
in Nepal. We have appreciated her leadership of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal, and we wish her
every success in her future endeavours.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

11-20103
