United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8668th meeting

Tuesday, 19 November 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce/Mr. Allen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kende
Mr. Liu Zhiguo
Mr. Akiapo
Ms. Batista Díaz
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Gugel
Mr. Situmorang
Mr. Alajmi
Mr. Talavera
Mrs. Skowrońska
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Sithole
Mrs. Smith-Levy

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The role of reconciliation in maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 11 November 2019 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/871)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-37433 (E)
*1937433*

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to hear from all speakers
who are on the list this afternoon. If delegations have
longer statements, they are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a summarized version
when speaking in the Chamber. The red light on the
collar of the microphone will begin to flash after four
minutes have elapsed.
I now give the floor to the representative Rwanda.
Mr. Rutikanga (Rwanda): First and foremost,
I congratulate the United Kingdom on its presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I thank you,
Madam President, in particular for organizing today’s
open debate and the manner in which you have framed
this important topic. In sharing Rwanda’s experience
of reconciliation and lessons learned, my points will
touch on key elements conveyed in the concept note
(S/2019/871, annex).
In the case of Rwanda, the most important driving
force for reconciliation has been the genuine and
consistent political will of the country’s leadership to
ensure that unity and reconciliation form the bedrock
of all national reconstruction efforts. The first practical
lesson that we can observe is that political will is
indispensable to ensure that reconciliation efforts work.
After the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
the National Unity Government created the National
Unity and Reconciliation Commission, which has
subsequently played a leading role in establishing
various homegrown initiatives aimed at promoting
national unity and the fight against divisive ideology.
The reconciliation model in Rwanda is nationally
oriented and is both backward- and forward-looking.
It is a process through which a society moves from
a divided past to a shared present and future for the
country. All approaches to national reconciliation have
been developed with the deep understanding of the past.
Allow me to share a few key practical peacebuilding
approaches that contributed to reconciliation in
my country.
With respect to transitional justice, the concept
note rightly states that reconciliation has been closely
associated with transitional justice and its restorative
dimension. That is what Rwanda’s homegrown
restorative justice model, commonly known as Gacaca,
2/29

19/11/2019

aimed to achieve. Given the nature of the genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which perpetrators
turned against their closest neighbours, it was
imperative that justice for the victims be accompanied
by restorative aims.
With regard to the role of women, after the
destructive genocide of 1994, there was a great need to
mobilize and assist the population in rebuilding their
lives, as well as their communities and the country as a
whole. Rwandan women in different leadership positions
played critical roles in mobilizing fellow women and
men to live together and find common solutions to
their own problems and those of their country. Women
initiated and led community dialogues, which helped to
heal relationships among different groups, particularly
survivors and former prisoners.
Turning to the repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of refugees, after the genocide the
Government acknowledged that national unity among
the people of Rwanda could not be achieved without a
definitive solution to the problem of Rwandan refugees.
It should be acknowledged that the return of refugees
to their country and their proper reintegration is an
absolute right and represents a factor of peace, unity
and national reconciliation.
On the demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, the true reintegration of former combatants,
after being demobilized, in fact lied mainly within the
realm of the socioeconomic dimension. Demobilization
and reintegration in Rwanda reinforced reconciliation.
The process was conducted in a manner that built trust
and confidence among combatants and made them feel
accepted by the community. It was based upon building
capacity to earn a living or have assets that could form
a source of livelihood, so that they began to feel a part
of society.
In conclusion, let me stress the importance of
national ownership of the reconciliation process. All
communities have traditional mechanisms of conflict
prevention and reconciliation. Some may have been
eroded due to historical reasons, but it is important
that the international community support nationally led
initiatives based on domestic perspectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): We thank the United
Kingdom for convening this debate.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Reconciliation is fundamental to building and
sustaining peace and must be seen as central to Member
States’ sustaining peace agenda and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The Security Council and
the General Assembly decided in their twin resolutions
(Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council resolution
2282 (2016)) that sustaining peace is a shared task and
responsibility. It is to be fulfilled by Governments and
all other national stakeholders. It flows through all
three pillars of the United Nations engagement at all
stages of conflict and in all its dimensions.
Furthermore, all nations are working towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly SDG 16,
on the establishment, protection and maintenance of
peace, justice and strong institutions. That requires
putting reconciliation at the centre.
An inclusive approach to national conversations is
essential in efforts to build and sustain peace. Australia
prioritizes reconciliation when working with partners
in the context of its overseas development programme,
as well as in our own national policies and strategies,
bringing stakeholders and affected communities
together. Reconciliation is not just a concept or a practice
for countries with recent experience of conflict. It is a
work in progress in different contexts for all countries.
Domestically, Australia is walking the path of
reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous
Australians. Australia’s framework, which is known
as Closing the Gap, includes a number of measures to
bridge that divide, including economic opportunities
for indigenous Australians through an indigenous
procurement policy, which seeks to leverage the
Government’s annual multi-billion-dollar procurement
spend. This drives demand for indigenous goods and
services, stimulates indigenous economic development
and grows the indigenous business sector.
The private sector also plays an important role in
reconciliation. The Business Council of Australia and
major corporations are to be applauded for creating the
Raising the Bar programme, which is aimed at seeing
more than $3 billion Australian dollars spent by major
corporations with indigenous suppliers over the next
five years. The Australian Government also supports
work with the corporate sector to deliver reconciliation
action plans. These plans support organizations in
considering how they can contribute to reconciliation
between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
That delivers jobs, culturally aware workplaces and

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

businesses and helps to develop future generations of
indigenous leaders.
Reconciliation is a key focus of Australia’s
international efforts. An example of that is our support
to peacebuilding in Bougainville island, as part of our
bilateral partnership with Papua New Guinea. Working
in partnership, the role of community leaders and faithbased organizations, and ensuring women’s involvement
have been key in advancing reconciliation and building
and sustaining peace. For example, the Nazareth Centre
for Rehabilitation has been an important contributor
to the ongoing peace and reconciliation process, and
Australia has been proud to be a long-term supporter.
We urge that United Nations assistance to Member
States focus on and integrate reconciliation needs,
including in the context of comprehensive analysis,
which Member States have decided should be delivered
under the sustaining peace agenda and United Nations
reform. We welcome the use of the Peacebuilding
Commission and other United Nations forums to
learn lessons from national experiences and provide a
platform for the discussion of effective approaches to
reconciliation for the purposes of sustaining peace. We
look forward to continuing to promote reconciliation,
nationally and internationally, in partnership with the
United Nations, its Member States and civil society, to
further efforts to achieving Sustainable Development
Goal 16 and the sustaining peace agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): Estonia welcomes the
opportunity to explore the ways that contribute to
successful reconciliation processes. Estonia aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by observer of
the European Union.
Our intervention focuses on the role of justice and
international courts as a tool to reconcile communities
that must learn again to live together in a single society.
The need for reconciliation often follows a violent
armed conflict. Even when conflicts come to a physical
end, suffering, pain and humiliation continue to occupy
the minds and souls of those affected. The risk of
resurgence of conflict is especially high in cases of
large-scale human rights violations. A society can start
healing only when reliable and objective diagnoses of
the conflict are provided, the truth is told and justice
is served. Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan once
said that if we do not have justice and people do not

19-374333/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

feel that their grievances have been dealt with, it is
extremely difficult to get serious reconciliation.
In order to ensure justice, the Security Council has
established or assisted in the establishment of several
ad hoc international courts and tribunals to try those
responsible for the most serious crimes committed
during previous or ongoing conflicts. The establishment
of the International Criminal Court expresses
the equally strong conviction of the international
community that justice is an intrinsic part of building
peace, security and the well-being of society. Estonia
recognizes that these justice mechanisms can provide a
valuable platform for elucidating the truth of what has
happened, giving victims the opportunity to have their
voices heard and providing accountability. At the same
time, we recall that it is the primary duty of States to
prevent and respond to international crimes and that
international mechanisms must complement and not
replace national courts.
First, ensuring that perpetrators are held responsible
for the atrocities they have committed and delivering
justice to victims of their crimes, in particular sexual
and gender-based crimes, assists in tackling and
preventing the stigmatization of victims by the rest
of society. Justice and accountability mechanisms
offer victims an objective and public forum where the
atrocities committed are, perhaps for the first time, not
denied or even depicted as national victories. These
platforms give the victims an opportunity to have their
stories and grievances heard and to bring a lawful
closure to the conflict. We would also like to stress
here the need to fully include the gender perspective in
peace processes and reconciliation efforts.
Secondly, the ruling of an international court or
tribunal expresses the strong condemnation by the
international community of the crimes committed.
That kind of condemnation has the effect of stripping
perpetrators of their influence and power and thereby
preventing them from sustaining violence and hatred,
which could lead to further conflicts.
Thirdly, beyond the specific cases that are submitted
to international courts and tribunals, the authority of
those bodies contributes to establishing guidelines for
justice and respect for the rights of victims, which serve
as guidance for all States in the area of atrocity crimes.
That is how the work of international criminal justice
mechanisms contributes to strengthening peace and
security throughout the world.
4/29

19/11/2019

To conclude, Estonia recognizes the contribution
that justice in general, and the international courts
and tribunals in particular, can make to reconciliation.
We firmly believe that the delivery of justice creates
conditions that are conducive to reconciliation and that
the Security Council needs to play its role in ensuring
that justice prevails.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this open debate,
which is particularly relevant in the light of the
five-year review of the peacebuilding architecture that
will take place next year. That process will allow us to
review the functioning of the peacebuilding structure
and other components, such as the special political
missions. National reconciliation is fundamental to
conflict prevention and sustainable peace. Creating
favourable conditions for achieving peace, establishing
and consolidating democratic institutions, ensuring
that an independent and impartial judicial system
can flourish, respecting human rights and ensuring
the minimum guarantees for social coexistence all
constitute conditions that are crucial to national
reconciliation processes.
National reconciliation represents a complex phase
of mourning aimed at healing the wounds of societies
and give way to a new stage in the development of a
common and collective plan for the future. This process,
like any healing process, requires not only dialogue, but
also historical truth. That is where transitional justice
plays a fundamental role in reconciliation. Access to
truth and accountability are key to rebuilding the social
fabric, especially in post-conflict situations. Transitional
justice dictates that the respect for the rule of law
must be at the centre of the conversation, given that it
constitutes a fundamental element of sustainable peace.
In that regard, we recall the presidential statement on
the rule of law, adopted under the Mexican presidency
of the Security Council in June 2010 (S/PRST/2010/11),
in which this organ expressed its determination to fight
impunity and uphold accountability with all appropriate
means and drew attention to the full range of justice
and reconciliation mechanisms to be considered,
including national and international criminal courts
and tribunals, truth and reconciliation commissions,
national reparation programmes for victims and
traditional dispute resolution mechanisms.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mexico reiterates the provisions of the Declaration
of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on
the Rule of Law at the National and International levels,
adopted in 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1), on
the importance of having a comprehensive approach
to transitional justice that covers the full range of
judicial and non-judicial measures, aimed at ensuring
accountability, rendering justice, providing recourse
to victims, promoting reconciliation, establishing
independent entities to monitor security systems,
restoring confidence in State institutions and promoting
the rule of law. Accountability for those responsible
for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in conflict and post-conflict
situations is essential for preventing the repetition
of such violations and for seeking peace, justice and
reconciliation. Access to justice and support for victims
are central, interlinked elements that underpin genuine
national reconciliation.
Mexico acknowledges the contribution made by
criminal courts, in particular the International Criminal
Court, not only in fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes but also for their work to establish the truth for
posterity and restore victims’ rights and dignity. More
than courts of law, those institutions play a vital role in
cementing national reconciliation through justice.
There can be no national reconciliation without
development, and no development without national
reconciliation. Both elements are crucial for
transforming conflict into conditions for stability and
lasting peace. We acknowledge the intrinsic links
between the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and peace.
We hope that the review process of the peacebuilding
architecture scheduled for next year will produce
recommendations on ways to strengthen the role of
the United Nations, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in reconciliation processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative to convene this open debate on peacebuilding
and sustaining piece and the role of reconciliation in
maintaining international peace and security. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and all the
other speakers for the valuable statements this morning.

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

National reconciliation is very important as one
of the main factors that assists in achieving lasting
peace. This idea is at the heart of the two identical
resolutions — resolution 2282 (2016) and the General
Assembly resolution 70/262 — on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Both
resolutions highlight the shared responsibility of
Government and other national stakeholders to achieve
lasting peace with the assistance of, and support from,
the international community. The aim is to address the
root causes of conflict and help parties to conflict put
an end to hostilities, achieve national reconciliation
by launching inclusive national dialogue, and make
progress along the path towards recovery, reconstruction
and development.
Moreover, both resolutions consolidate the
comprehensive approach to ensure sustainable peace
and transitional justice in order not to relapse into
conflict. They both list many key measures that should
go hand in hand with reconciliation efforts, the most
important of which are operationalization of the system
of justice, accountability and the rule of law, prevention
of impunity, and security sector reform so that it can
play its role professionally, effectively and responsibly.
Equally, we must implement comprehensive
programmes to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
elements of armed groups into society and restore
legitimate State authority. In that context, the
peacebuilding review process is an important
opportunity to benefit from the best practices and
expertise of the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure
support for national reconciliation efforts in postconflict countries and to enhance the advisory role
of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting
those efforts.
Practical experience has led the United Nations
to play a leading role in supporting post-conflict
countries to achieve national reconciliation. On one
hand, the Security Council has on many occasions
entrusted peacekeeping operations and special
political missions with tasks that include promoting
comprehensive national dialogue in host countries in
order to achieve national reconciliation. On the other
hand, United Nations country teams have implemented
a range of activities and programmes to that end. The
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
have also played a fundamental role in support of the
national priorities of post-conflict countries, including
in terms of achieving national reconciliation. However,

19-374335/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to enhance the effectiveness of the support it provides
to national reconciliation processes, the United Nations
system must strengthen coordination among its various
bodies in order so make their roles complementary and
put an end to isolation among them. Furthermore, it is
important to strengthen partnerships and coordination
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the African Union.
As the Council is aware, post-conflict reconciliation
is a long-term process that requires constant support
from, and the commitment of, the United Nations and
the international community, while taking into account
the specificities of each context. There is no on-size-fitsall model that can be applied to all situations. National
reconciliation also requires political will on the part of
all stakeholders and taking accompanying measures that
create an enabling environment to ensure successful
reconciliation processes. Such processes also require
the international community to respect the principle of
national ownership of the reconciliation process.
Egypt is convinced that regional and international
organizations have an important role to play in
maintaining international peace and security in
partnership with the United Nations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. In the same vein, Egypt, as Chair
of the African Union, is working to open the African
Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development, based in Cairo. Once operational, the
Centre will support national priorities to tackle the root
causes of conflict and consolidate and sustain peace
across the African continent, based on the concept
of African solutions for African problems. Moreover,
on assuming the chairmanship, Egypt announced the
launch of the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and
Development, which aims to be an African platform
that brings together Africa’s partners to discuss issues
of peace, security and development. The aim will also
be to find practical solutions to the different challenges
in that regard. We are creating this forum based on our
conviction that there is a linkage among peace, security
and development issues and as a confirmation of the
comprehensive approach to addressing the root causes
of problems and challenges faced by Africa, from a
perspective that strengthens the concept of national
ownership of efforts to achieve lasting peace and
development across the African continent.
Egypt has also actively participated in
peacekeeping activities, including by contributing
significant contingents of troops and police forces to
6/29

19/11/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations, primarily on
the African continent. That reflects our commitment
to our African brothers, and, in that connection, we
wish to support efforts to achieve peace, stability and
prosperity for all African peoples. We support the role
of peacekeeping in assisting parties to conflicts with
confidence-building and national reconciliation.
We reiterate the importance of having an overarching
political framework in place alongside peacekeeping
operations. Such a framework is necessary for these
operations to fulfil the role entrusted to them.
In conclusion, we thank you, Madam President, for
having convened today’s important meeting. We wish
the United Kingdom presidency every success this
month in its efforts to guide the Council in carrying
out its main responsibility pursuant to the Charter of
the United Nations, namely, to maintain international
peace and security.
The President: I must remind colleagues that the
time limit for statements is four minutes. Otherwise
we will not be able to get through the list of speakers.
My delegation will pass the speaker a note once they
reach the four-minute stage in case they do not see
the microphone, but then I am afraid that I will have
to interrupt to ensure that we can hear every speaker
on the list this afternoon. I thank all colleagues for
their understanding.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Today’s debate
highlights the fact that it is not sufficient for the
Security Council to simply put an end to conflicts,
but that it should help to break the conflict cycle. In
large part, this is, of course, a task we assigned to the
Peacebuilding Commission when it was created in
2005. I will focus my brief comments today on how to
ensure that reconciliation leads to genuine, sustainable
peace. The process requires, among other things,
eschewing impunity, fostering inclusion and addressing
root causes.
Sustainable peace is only possible when opponents
deal with the past and commit to a shared view of the
future. Reconciliation must never allow for de facto or
de jure impunity for the most serious crimes. Justice for
atrocity crimes removes those most likely to go back on
peace agreements from political life and deters them
and others from committing similar crimes in future.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

When reconciliation does include amnesties that prevent
accountability for atrocities committed by politically
powerful figures, it disregards victims’ calls for justice
and creates the conditions for divisive memory politics
or even a new phase of conflict. We support the United
Nations position that the peace agreements it endorses

Mr. Kakanur (India): Madam President, I thank
you for convening today’s debate on the importance
of reconciliation and the process of peacebuilding. We
appreciate the comprehensive and insightful briefings
on the subject by the Secretary-General and the
other briefers.

“can never promise amnesties for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity or gross violations
of human rights” (S/2004/616, para. 10).

Reconciliation is a crucial step in stopping the
cycle of violence and insecurity in post-conflict
situations and in building sustainable peace. Given the
immense complexities and unique local context of each
post-conflict theatre, there can be no one-size-fits-all
template for such dynamic situations. Reconciliation
is a long and arduous process, and artificially imposed
standards or timelines are unlikely to achieve success.
My delegation is of the view that reconciliation has
to be a truly homegrown process. The inherent limits
on the breadth, depth and duration of any external
peacebuilding mission suggests that the kind of
deep-rooted sustainable change that peacebuilding
seeks to bring about requires the long-term support
and commitment of a critical mass of domestic
actors, including civil society, youth, women and
religious leaders.

That being said, the Council’s recent meeting on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina illustrates
the difficulties involved in ensuring that international
criminal justice leads to long-term accountability,
sustainable peace and meaningful reconciliation (see
S/PV.8658). Achieving accountability often requires
the inclusion of restorative justice, as well as such
transitional-justice mechanisms as truth commissions.
Key to this process is that each and every situation has
an approach to accountability shaped by the needs of
those seeking justice.
For reconciliation to last, it must include people
from all parts of society. Participation in processes
where reconciliation is sought must be gender sensitive
and incorporate the perspectives of young people and of
minority groups within a State. Civil society, religious
leaders and indigenous representatives may also play
significant roles. Inclusive reconciliation builds a
broader constituency for a lasting peace.
Reconciliation must also grapple with factors at the
root of division. There has been a significant growth
in intra-State conflicts, many of which are based on
claims by communities within a State to a greater
measure of governance over their own affairs as an
expression of self-determination, often on the basis of
ethnic, cultural or religious identity. On this basis, we
are currently working on a handbook for mediators,
affected communities and States to bring together
best practices in preventing and resolving these
conflicts, based on five principles: self-governance, the
protection of minority rights, inclusive reconciliation
processes, the acknowledgement of historical context,
and awareness of the role of affected third States. We
hope that this will make a contribution to the successful
reconciliation of conflicts and disputes over issues of
self-determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

Well-meaning reconciliation efforts of the United
Nations or the wider international humanitarian
community may not be in tune with the realities on
the ground. Expecting domestic actors to uncritically
embrace external norms and ideas as inherently superior
to domestic ones is being unrealistic. Conflict corrodes
and destroys human infrastructural and institutional
capacities. Such capacities need to be rebuilt if national
actors are to exercise a meaningful degree of ownership
over events in the post-conflict period. While it
would be a mistake to overlook domestic institutions
and practices as sources of peacebuilding, it would
be erroneous to uncritically romanticize them. It is
therefore necessary that adequate capacity-building
resources are made available for building robust
institutions and State structures.
Peace and justice are the primary links in any
post-conflict scenario. India supports enhanced
international cooperation for the development and
codification of international criminal law and to
strengthen the rule of law as a whole. We also believe
that, for a truly effective and credible international
justice system, we must avoid selectivity, partiality
and double standards in the application of rule of law
at the global level. In this context, our view is that the
United Nations must play a non-prescriptive supporting

19-374337/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

19/11/2019

and facilitating role. The United Nations must ensure
the inclusiveness, ownership and participation of all
stakeholders in the reconciliation process. Equally
important is United Nations support for humanitarian
assistance, the protection and promotion of human
rights, and the facilitation of political reconciliation
processes in accordance with the principles of neutrality
and impartiality.

universal values and principles that must be present
to offer the right conditions for a peaceful settlement
of an issue and a successful reconciliation process.
Accountability is an essential starting point for any
process of reconciliation as the journey down the long
road towards healing and peace begins. Justice must be
served, because without justice there is no peace. Truth
is very important for reconciliation.

We reject an unwarranted reference by the
delegation of Pakistan earlier today to the situation in
an integral part of India (see S/PV.8668). Let me recall
that both sides have solemnly agreed to resolve such
issues through means agreed to by the parties.

You ask in your guiding concept note (S/2019/871,
annex), Madam President, how the Security Council
and the United Nations can most effectively support
nationally owned reconciliation processes. The Security
Council must start by ending conflicts. In many parts
of the world conflicts are managed, not solved. The
Security Council needs to tackle the reasons that people
fight, and not focus only on how to stop the fighting.
Addressing the root causes of conflict can go a long way
in achieving durable peace and genuine reconciliation.
Ending occupation and oppression and guaranteeing
an equitable settlement are only a few examples of the
prerequisites for peace — not only for one generation,
but all future humankind.

In conclusion, if peacebuilding is to move beyond
being an exercise in social engineering, we must
acknowledge that peacebuilding resources exist within
conflict-affected societies themselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month and thank you for
choosing the topic of reconciliation for today’s debate.
Under its Chapter VI, on the pacific settlement of
disputes, the Charter of the United Nations allows for
the Security Council to call upon the parties to any
dispute to settle it by means of, inter alia, negotiation,
mediation and conciliation. These three tools for the
peaceful settlement of disputes are essential to the
preservation of international peace and security by
offering a peaceful alternative to resolving conflicts. But
reconciliation cannot happen in a vacuum and cannot
be an end in itself. It is a process that is indispensable
for the parties themselves to be able to turn the page on
conflict and open a door to understanding, forgiveness
and peace.
The Security Council has more than a dozen
conflicts on its agenda, and there are dozens of disputes
between countries and within societies around the
world today where the cycle of violence makes it seem
impossible to imagine that the people involved in such
disputes could live together in harmony again. But they
can: through a powerful reconciliation process, if it is
done correctly and in the proper conditions.
First, we have to acknowledge that no two disputes
are the same and no two peoples fit the same mould
when it comes to resolving disputes. But there are
8/29

Imposing settlements might work for a short
time, but the seeds of conflict remain and germinate
as soon as new conditions make it possible to resume.
Reconciliation cannot happen when grievances
persist and injustice lingers. Outside assistance for
homegrown reconciliation processes has to respect
cultural sensitivities and people’s beliefs, instead of
imposing ready-made formulas on populations. Local
knowledge is very important. In multi-ethnic and
multicultural societies, one has to make sure that the
result of the reconciliation process is equitable, so that
no party feels aggrieved. In Lebanon, after what was
referred to as the 1958 revolution, the crisis ended with
a formula, “No victor, no vanquished”, which assured
each party to the conflict that it had got what it wanted
and political life could resume.
Concepts like dignity are very important for
reconciliation. Settlements have to help people
preserve their dignity — the dignity of not feeling
humiliated by the conditions of any conflict resolution
or reconciliation. Dignity is also culturally sensitive. Its
meaning and scope are very much culturally defined,
and any reconciliation has to take that into consideration.
Nelson
Mandela,
when
speaking
about
reconciliation — a process he knew well — said that
true reconciliation does not consist in merely forgetting
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the past. He was right. It is not about forgetting the past
and the pain; it is about imagining the future — a future
of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
on the United Kingdom’s accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November
and thanking you for convening and choosing the topic
of this debate. I thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, which confirms his resolute commitment to
consolidating and sustaining peace. I would also like
to thank the other speakers for sharing their views on
this issue.
This debate is dedicated to a topic that is not often
independently addressed at the Security Council,
but nonetheless remains important, even crucial, for
building and sustaining peace. Without successful
reconciliation processes, the risk of relapsing into
conflict significantly increases, which history has taught
us to the detriment of our populations, who continue
to suffer the horrors of conflict, in particular on the
African continent. Morocco welcomes this opportunity
to share its views on the issue by highlighting the
following points.
First, as rightly pointed out in the concept
note (S/2019/871, annex) before us at this debate,
reconciliation has often been associated with
transitional justice. That is extremely important in
order to definitively turn the page on a conflict.
Secondly, the leading role of community and
religious leaders must be highlighted. Especially in
societies that could be described as traditional, those
leaders enjoy a special status and command significant
respect, which they do not hesitate to use for the benefit
of their communities if conflicts arise. Their role is
even more important in the case of a religious conflict.
The simple fact of seeing representatives of different
religions involved in a conflict holding information
meetings and working jointly to raise awareness among
the population about the benefits of living together can
have a decisive impact on populations.
Thirdly, although no conflict or crisis is the same,
it is important to draw on our broad pool of experience
and expertise in reconciliation. However, what ensures
success for any process based on past events is national

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

ownership. That cardinal principle makes it possible
to adapt experiences to the specific situation of any
given country. It also allows for greater involvement of
country leaders and civil-society representatives — an
essential component of the process.
Fourthly, Morocco welcomes the growing role
played by women in reconciliation processes, in line
with the women and peace and security agenda. The
involvement of women, who are unfortunately often
the first victims of conflict, remains fundamental
to the success of reconciliation processes. We fully
support the Secretary-General in his desire to promote
women’s participation in all areas, including in
reconciliation processes.
The United Nations has, and continues to play, a key
role in most past and ongoing reconciliation processes.
Whether through its presence on the ground, the means
at its disposal or by its good offices’ services, the
United Nations is equipped to provide decisive support
to reconciliation processes. In that regard, I would like
to align myself with the delegations that have cited the
Peacebuilding Commission as one of the bodies that is
best placed to address issues related to reconciliation.
The main strength of our Organization is, of course,
its impartiality and neutrality, which are essential
components of any action supporting a reconciliation
process. It also has the ability to compile and use best
practices and, lastly, it can support other organizations
that could benefit from their comparative advantages
over the United Nations.
In conclusion, I wish to stress that any reconciliation
process must operate at both the national and local
levels. Dialogue at the local level must foster dialogue
at the national level, thereby ensuring the inclusivity of
the process and national ownership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Before delivering my
remarks, I would like to state that Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by the observer
of the European Union.
Reconciliation is aimed at rebuilding trust,
strengthening resilience and forging a functioning
relationship between the people and the Government,
known as the social contract. It can be successful only
if the process is representative and inclusive, embraces
universal rights and values, such as freedom and

19-374339/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

human dignity, and if that reconciliation focuses first
and foremost on the people and their safety, security
and welfare.
Recalling the twin resolutions on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture (General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Council resolution 2282 (2016)),
promoting healing and reconciliation and building a
professional, accountable and effective security sector,
including through its reform, are critical components
to consolidating peace and security, promoting poverty
reduction, strengthening the rule of law and good
governance and preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict. Let me focus on three important areas.
First, Slovakia is a keen advocate of the issue of
security sector reform as an important instrument to help
maintain peace and stability, particularly in countries
recovering from conflicts and undergoing the processes
of post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
In April 2018, South Africa and Slovakia, on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
co-hosted a high-level round table on security sector
reform and sustaining peace. The event underlined that
security sector reform plays a key role in the successful
implementation of both the sustaining peace agenda
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Given the vital role that security sector reform plays
in conflict prevention, post-conflict reconstruction and
sustaining peace, an expanded understanding of United
Nations involvement and the contributions of securitysector reform to reconciliation is essential. We need a
better understanding of, and education on, why peace
agreements are often not fulfilled and why we are
witnessing relapses into conflict.
Today it is more than evident that incorporating
greater numbers of marginalized ethnic and religious
groups into the military and police forces, security
structures and rule-of-law institutions and fostering
a cultural shift towards non-discriminatory and
accountable public policy can help to alleviate
grievances around security, especially in the aftermath
of conflict.
Secondly, on partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations for building and sustaining
peace, Slovakia holds this year’s chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Our three priority areas in that context have
been preventing, mediating and resolving conflicts;
building a safer future; and effective multilateralism.
10/29

19/11/2019

As well as supporting peaceful settlements through
inclusive political dialogue and mediation processes,
we have placed a particular focus on easing the daily
lives of the people affected by conflict. Peace processes,
including mediation and reconciliation, must be
inclusive. Everyone’s voice must be heard, particularly
that of the youth. Young people’s perspectives and
their active engagement are crucial to promoting and
strengthening international peace and security.
Another important part of that, of course, is the
context of Sustainable Development Goal 16, on
building sustainable, peaceful and inclusive societies
that are supported by a functioning and accountable
institutional framework. I would like to highlight the
development of the first OSCE guidelines on security
sector governance and reform, which we consider as
practical guidance and an important milestone in that
respect. The third priority of our OSCE chairmanship
has been effective multilateralism and, in that context,
the importance of United Nations-OSCE cooperation
and partnership, including through the important work
of the United Nations Liaison Office in Vienna.
Lastly, Slovakia has presented its candidature to
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has a key role in bringing together
the various actors of the United Nations system,
including the United Nations country teams and civil
society, which are instrumental in reconciliatory
efforts in many settings. We believe that the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission to the Security
Council could and should be better used and further
drawn upon to ensure that appropriate attention is paid
to reconciliation at all stages of the conflict cycle. In
that regard, we look forward to further engagement
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council.
Before concluding my remarks, let me also mention
that, in just a few days, from 5 to 6 December, we will
organize the OSCE Ministerial Council in Bratislava.
Many of these issues are very high on the Ministerial
Council’s agenda. It is a unique opportunity for
the largest regional peace and security cooperation
organization to focus on important issues, including
peacebuilding and reconciliation, and the participating
States will review and assess the organization’s
activities, including on strengthening dialogue on
security issues in all of the OSCE’s three dimensions.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the United
Kingdom’s initiative to explore the role of reconciliation
in peace processes and sustainable peace. The discussion
is particularly timely in the light of the challenges that
peacemakers continue to face. Generations in Europe
have felt and understood the devastating effects of
violent conflict. Today war within the European Union
is unthinkable, because we have worked hard to build
confidence and trust. Yet, without continuous work to
reconcile, there is no future for peace, even in Europe.
The need to advance knowledge on reconciliation on
a global scale is urgent. Today’s conflicts repeat in
cycles. Peace agreements fail more often than they
succeed. We believe that we must arrive at a better
understanding of why that happens.
Reconciliation is key to sustainable peace. It is a
process that enables the restoration of social relations
on the basis of fundamental values, such as human
dignity and human rights, including the right to life
and the right to physical and psychological integrity. It
is a complex process that has to be considered from the
outset in any peace-support efforts and requires a truly
integrated approach.
In all those aspects, the Peacebuilding Commission
has a central role to play by bringing together
the various actors of the United Nations system.
Moreover, the active advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission to the Security Council could be further
drawn upon to ensure that appropriate attention be paid
to reconciliation at all stages of the conflict cycle.
Our policies and practices need to be continuously
upgraded. For example, 75 per cent of Security
Council-mandated missions aim for reconciliation,
but no commonly accepted definitions or guidelines
on what that means and how to achieve it exist. The
concept of reconciliation needs to be sharpened in
order to operationalize it more effectively. We are
ready to contribute to that. We need to learn more about

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

how various elements of reconciliation have worked in
different settings, and with what impact. In doing so,
we need to gain better awareness of how to support
national and local reconciliation strategies in countries
emerging from conflict, whether and how to support
reconciliation processes as part of exit strategies and
how the Council can engage with other parts of the
United Nations system, including the Secretariat, to
support those processes.
We also need to recognize that neither the United
Nations, the EU nor any other multilateral organization
alone can advance reconciliation. Reconciliation
happens at the individual and interpersonal level, the
societal level and the institutional level. We are enablers;
it is the conflicting communities that are the agents. We
can provide a framework, tools and safe spaces, but to
offer support, we need a solid, and preferably common,
understanding of what makes reconciliation effective.
Religions should be factored into reconciliation
approaches and our diplomatic practice. Diplomatic
practices could benefit from improved religious
literacy. The setting up by the European Union of an
international exchange platform on religion and social
exclusion is one example of how we are working on
that; training and exposing our own diplomats to the
many facets of religion in different parts of the world
is another.
Peace agreements can become more sustainable
by involving political and societal actors in peace
negotiations, in addition to the primary conflict parties.
Traditional and religious leaders and their networks are
also seen as having the capacity and public trust to find
solutions for sustainable peace. Women reconcilers
often take the first steps towards mobilizing their
communities and engaging with their enemies; their
efforts need support. Youth movements are growing
rapidly, and their perspectives and efforts must be
learned from. Reconciliation and healing are usually
associated with the post-conflict stage, but are also
overlapping processes that take place during conflict
and can prepare the ground for peace or can prevent
further violence.
To conclude, we reiterate our determination to
continue this important work on how to better support
reconciliation processes both within peacekeeping and
peacebuilding contexts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.

19-3743311/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I am honoured to
speak on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).
The important role of reconciliation processes in
the maintenance of regional and international peace
and security can be gleaned from ASEAN’s experience.
ASEAN plays an important role in post-conflict
situations. The Bali Concord II, signed in 2003,
mandated ASEAN to find innovative ways to increase
its security and establish modalities for the ASEAN
Political-Security Community, including in the area of
post-conflict peacebuilding.
Established in 2011, the ASEAN Institute for
Peace and Reconciliation was envisioned to be
ASEAN’s knowledge hub and centre of excellence in
building capacity on conflict resolution and further
strengthening peace-oriented values towards harmony,
peace, security and stability in the region and beyond.
The ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation has
successfully held a number of activities, namely, its
Regional Youth Conference on Peace and Tolerance in
2018, in Jakarta, and a training series on mainstreaming
peace and reconciliation in ASEAN this year, in
Manila. We welcome the collaboration between the
ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation and the
United Nations in convening a workshop on ASEAN
perspectives in conflict management and conflict
resolution in the region, held in Jakarta, and look
forward to more active initiatives at the Institute in the
future. It also successfully launched its first research
study, entitled Lessons Learned from a Process of
Conflict Resolution between the Philippine Government
and the Moro National Liberation Front, as Mediated
by Indonesia and a seminar on the outcome of the
project in September.
At the tenth ASEAN-United Nations summit,
held in Bangkok three weeks ago, ASEAN and the
United Nations reaffirmed their commitment to
cooperate through the ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation. The United Nations and Viet Nam will
co-host the seventh ASEAN-United Nations workshop
and fifth regional dialogue on political-security
cooperation and focused collaboration in support of
the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation in
December in Hanoi.
We also welcome the establishment of the ASEAN
Women for Peace Registry last year as a groundbreaking
initiative to take stock of ASEAN women experts in the
12/29

19/11/2019

field of peace and reconciliation, who may be called
upon at times when specific expertise is required. This
year, underscoring women’s participation, we also
welcome various initiatives and actions on women’s
roles in peace processes, namely, the convening of the
ASEAN Women Interfaith Dialogue, held in Jakarta on
the theme “Promoting understanding for an inclusive
and peaceful society”; the first regional symposium
on implementing the women and peace and security
agenda in ASEAN, which was held in Phnom Penh; and
a regional training on women and peace and security,
held in Jakarta.
ASEAN stands ready, in partnership with key
stakeholders and in solidarity with the community
of nations, to identify more innovative and inclusive
approaches to promote the United Nations peacebuilding
and sustaining peace agenda, including reconciliation
processes in the region.
I would now like to offer some insights in my
national capacity.
For the Philippines, reconciliation is a long-term
process that seeks innovative ways to address, integrate
and embrace the painful past and the shared future as
a means of dealing with the present. The foundation of
that approach is an environment that builds, nurtures
and embraces a culture of peace. For the Philippine
Government, components of that environment include
catch-up socioeconomic and development programmes
in
conflict-affected
areas,
conflict-sensitivity
programmes and the continuous development of a peace
constituency that is supportive of the peace process.
Another integral component is the “people’s peace
tables” initiatives for the youth, indigenous peoples,
women, sultanates and other stakeholders, which serve
as a platform for conversations on peace and conflict
issues. Finally, the Government’s early recovery and
rehabilitation programmes are implemented using a
peace lens to ensure that the work delivers on physical
reconstruction and rebuilds the torn social fabric of the
community of nations.
To conclude, our experience with the signing of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law for the Autonomous Region
in Muslim Mindanao, in July last year, taught us that
the signing of a peace agreement is just the beginning
of the peace process. The process is completed when
every Filipino owns the peace and the peace dividends
of progress, security and a comfortable life are enjoyed
by all.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): The Holy See
wishes to thank the United Kingdom for convening this
open debate on the role of reconciliation in maintaining
international peace and security. The theme is both
crucial for the peace and stability of present and
future generations and central to the mission of the
Catholic Church, which, throughout its history, has
sought continually to be a sign and instrument of unity
among peoples.
A powerful example of reconciliation came about
after violence erupted in the Central African Republic
and various stakeholders sought to amplify or, indeed,
manipulate the religious nature of the conflict, so as
to further compound artificial divisions among the
population. Three men stood up and said “no”: the
Catholic Archbishop of Bangui, an evangelical pastor
from the city and an imam. They courageously set
up an interreligious platform at the national level,
the experience of which was repeated at the level of
local communities across the country. In spite of the
inevitable problems and difficulties encountered along
the way, the initial and inspired vision of those three
religious leaders remains. Furthermore, the visit of His
Holiness Pope Francis to that divided and impoverished
land, in November 2015, points to such efforts as the
only way forward. It was and remains inconceivable
for people of faith and members of major religions
to make an unjust use of weapons for one group to
dominate others.
Religious leaders must stand together and show to
those in their pastoral care that diversity — whether
that be ethnic or religious — need not be an obstacle to a
nation’s unity and that divisions can be overcome when
we commit to fraternity. The Pope’s invitation to the
Imam of the Central Mosque in Bangui to ride with him
and greet the people together from the Popemobile was
a powerful sign and had an incredibly positive impact.
Reconciliation, of course, involves differences;
it acknowledges divisions and seeks to overcome
difficulties that all too often lead to people being killed
and suffering violence and other violations against
their human dignity, and it requires magnanimity
to see the bigger picture, seek the common good and
invest in a more just, humane and prosperous future.
However, genuine reconciliation in no way minimizes
the suffering; rather, it must deal with it. Genuine

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

reconciliation examines what led to dispute and conflict
in the first place and uses appropriate means to find a
way to a lasting and durable peace, which, of course, is
not possible without justice.
Promoting reconciliation is not simply wiping
the slate clean and can never be seen as an excuse for
impunity. The guilty must be held accountable and those
whose lives have been so sorely affected should receive
some form of reparation. In that regard, societies that
have been fractured should make use of mechanisms,
such as transitional justice, to set the foundations
on which the rule of law might be re-established
and universal human rights be enjoyed by all. A key
element in ensuring that peace may truly flourish is
to guarantee that initiatives are also implemented at,
and rise up from, grass-roots and community levels, in
which church communities and religious leaders have
an indispensable role to play — one that can never
allow for ambivalence or political manipulation. In that
regard, it is also important to engage all relevant actors,
including members of civil society that were formed in,
and who form, in their turn, cultures of peace.
The President: Let me just remind all colleagues
to speak for a maximum of four minutes. That enables
all to participate in the debate, which is the reason that
we impose a time limit. Speakers can take it for granted
that the presidency welcomes their thanks and gratitude
for organizing the debate and their congratulations on
assuming the presidency, which we have achieved by
dint of alphabetical order, and we also welcome their
appreciation of our wisdom in organizing this debate.
As a result, speakers may cut all of that from their
statements. I know that the next speaker will set an
example in that regard.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): When Canadians think
about reconciliation, at the forefront of our minds is, of
course, our own colonial history, our relationship with
indigenous peoples and our own painful and ongoing
process. In 2017, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau
addressed the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.12) and
called the failure of successive Canadian Governments
to respect the rights of indigenous peoples our great
shame. We see our path towards reconciliation as a series
of continuing actions, one of which was endorsing the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples. At the heart of our journey is the opportunity
for victims and survivors themselves to tell their stories

19-3743313/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and be meaningfully listened to and heard across our
country. That was a key component of Canada’s Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and Canada’s national
inquiry into missing and murdered indigenous women
and girls.
From that experience, we know first-hand that
unjust institutions and systemic inequality are not
established overnight and are not dismantled in a day.
We know that it will take time, investment, energy,
humility and sustained political will to overcome those
legacies and to jointly build new ones. We also know
that there is no one-size-fits-all approach. But from our
own experience and the experiences of others, there are
a few common elements that we can all learn from.
First, we know that reconciliation is not an event
or even a single process. Effective efforts towards
reconciliation involve balancing concurrent demands,
including peace and justice, reckoning with the past,
moving forward, accountability for perpetrators and
healing for victims. Secondly, successful reconciliation
processes rely first and foremost on national ownership
and domestic leadership. Thirdly, such processes are
survivor- and victim-centric. They counter legacies
of exclusion with inclusion, while engaging local
communities in both the design of processes and the
implementation of the recommendations that flow
from them.
I would like to recognize Security Council member
South Africa, which showed us that truly reckoning
with the past can help to build an inclusive future.
Theirs is an example of both the links between systemic
inequality and instability and those between genuine
efforts towards equality and stability. In that vein, we
are very encouraged that we are seeing similar action
today in The Gambia and the first inklings of what we
hope to see in the Central African Republic.
(spoke in French)
The establishment of the Truth, Reconciliation
and Reparations Commission in the Gambia marked a
major break from the violations of the former regime.
We commend the Commission’s outreach efforts to
ensure that more victims and witnesses can participate.
Canada is proud to have provided technical
assistance for forensic investigations and financial
support to local organizations to strengthen the
participation of survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence. Canada encourages the Gambia to follow
14/29

19/11/2019

through on the Commission’s recommendations to
ensure accountability of those responsible for violations.
In the Central African Republic, we welcomed
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation. We appreciate that inclusivity,
local-level dialogue and community engagement
continue to be important parts of this process,
particularly in increasing women’s participation.
Combating impunity is vital to sustaining peace
in the Central African Republic. We commend the
work of the Special Criminal Court and encourage
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparation and
reconciliation commission as soon as possible, taking
into account gender-balance policies.
Canada, South Africa, the Gambia and the Central
African Republic are all distinct cases with their own
legacies of oppression and exclusion, but there are
common lessons to be learned.
Sustained political commitment is a prerequisite
for effectiveness.
(spoke in English)
This is where Canada believes that the Security
Council, regional organizations and other external
actors have a crucial role to play. We commend the
work of the African Union in particular for providing
technical support to the Gambia and in brokering the
peace process in the Central African Republic.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) offers a valuable platform for strengthening these
partnerships and for offering sustained attention and
accompaniment. I would like to commend the Gambia,
along with other countries, for regularly coming to the
PBC to offer their frank assessment of challenges and
opportunities for reconciliation.
As a longstanding member and a candidate to serve
as the next Chair of the PBC and an aspiring member
of the Council, Canada will continue to promote
efforts to strengthen United Nations support for
national reconciliation processes. Our willingness to
listen, to learn and to adapt to meeting new challenges
are among the assets that have prepared us for such
potential future roles on both the PBC and, we hope, on
the Security Council.
In closing, I would like to leave the Council with
these words from the final report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission of Canada:
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

“Without truth, justice, and healing, there can be no
genuine reconciliation. Reconciliation is not about
closing a sad chapter of Canada’s past but about
opening new healing pathways of reconciliation
that are forged in truth and justice”.

Timely intervention to reconcile the parties to nascent
hostilities before divisions become entrenched is crucial
to our prevention efforts. Therefore, reconciliation
should play an integral part in the overall conflictprevention strategy of the United Nations.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

Reconciliation is also crucial at the post-conflict
stage in order to prevent the recurrence of conflict
by building more peaceful and resilient societies.
While formal reconciliation processes are critical to
sustainable peace, some of the most powerful forms of
reconciliation, in terms of restoring the social fabric,
are to be found in everyday life. In critical situations,
the starting point must be to ensure that adequate levels
of humanitarian assistance are available. Long- or
medium-term tools for reconciliation, such as education,
health care and demobilization and disarmament, are
often underfunded and can perpetuate social divisions
in post-conflict societies.

Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): Peace is the core
value and purpose of the United Nations, and we agree
that reconciliation is part of our comprehensive approach
to sustaining peace. In the absence of a commonly
accepted definition or guidelines for reconciliation,
we consider it both an objective and a process that
encompasses all three pillars of the United Nations.
First, we need national and regional ownership
to settle disputes. As such, reconciliation processes
must come from within the interested parties. It is
the primary responsibility of national Governments
to identify, drive and direct priorities, strategies and
activities for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. With
that in mind, in order for the reconciliation process to
be effective, the various narratives of the parties need
to be taken into account so as to build confidence and
mutual understanding,
Secondly, post-conflict reconciliation represents
a long-term process that addresses the root causes of
the conflict. That requires an understanding of the
grievances that lead to conflict by taking into account
the voices of women, young people and marginalized
groups. Since every conflict is different, a variety of
approaches are applicable, depending on the countryspecific context. Most importantly, there cannot
be a “one-size-fits-all” solution to promoting postconflict reconciliation.
Thirdly, we need wider and more effective use of
mediation and dialogue facilitation. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s strong commitment to mediation,
and we were pleased to host him and his High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation in Istanbul, in conjunction
with the Sixth Istanbul Mediation Conference at the end
of last month. Panel discussions focused on the role of
international and regional organizations as well as on
that of emerging technologies, with participants from
the field of peace and reconciliation.
There is a need for mediation at all stages of the
conflict cycle, and mediation provides an important
tool for reconciliation at different phases of that cycle.

The needs and concerns of women and youth as well
as the reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons should be brought into humanitarian planning
and post-conflict responses at the strategic level.
Against that background, I would like to end by
emphasizing that actions speak louder than words. It is
time to put an end to the conflict in Syria, for example,
which continues to pain the collective conscience of
humankind. This is a conflict that has already caused
the death of nearly 1 million people, displaced more than
12 million and forced half of them to leave the country.
It is imperative for the international community
to support the peace corridor, which would enable the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of the Syrian people
to their homeland. We will continue to work towards
the transformation of Syria into a democratic, secular
and stable country with secure borders, in full respect
of its territorial integrity and national unity.
Turkey stands ready to share its experience, gained
through active involvement in and support for the
recovery efforts of various post-conflict countries,
from the Balkans and the Middle East to the Horn of
Africa. We are committed to continuing our support for
the enhancement of the efforts of the United Nations in
that direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Reconciliation is
surely a critical issue for the Security Council. As we

19-3743315/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

have said before in this Chamber, peace is a process, not
an event. Silencing the guns is fundamental but does not
of itself bring societies together. Almost always, there
follows a long process of acknowledging past wrongs,
rebuilding trust and preparing for a shared future.
Ireland’s understanding of reconciliation is shaped
most profoundly by our own peace process, founded on
the 1998 Good Friday agreement, which brought to an
end some 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland, and
where the work of protecting the peace and furthering
reconciliation continues today. The Irish and United
Kingdom Governments work in partnership within
the framework of that agreement, which commits all
parties to
“the achievement of reconciliation, tolerance and
mutual trust, and to the protection and vindication
of the human rights of all”.
True reconciliation is surely at the heart of all
successful peace processes.
There can be little doubt that reconciliation in itself
is not an easy process. We in Ireland have also learned
that to be successful, it must be inclusive. One of the key
women involved in building peace in Northern Ireland,
Avila Kilmurray, spoke recently of the importance of
the work of local women’s community groups, groups
such as the Foyle Women’s Information Network and
the Training for Women Network in Northern Ireland.
Their brave efforts in their own communities to build
shared understanding has been key to building trust on
the ongoing road we follow to reconciliation.
It is precisely because we know the value of
local community efforts to build reconciliation that
the Irish Government established the Reconciliation
Fund in 1982. Last year the Fund supported 153
non-governmental organizations, community groups
and voluntary organizations, specifically to promote
reconciliation and to create a better understanding
between the people and traditions on the island of
Ireland, and between Ireland and Britain.
The International Fund for Ireland was established
in 1986 jointly by the United Kingdom and Irish
Governments as an independent body to encourage
contact, dialogue and reconciliation across the island of
Ireland. That organization continues its essential work
as part of our peacebuilding framework to this day. It
has benefited from support from international partners
including the United States, Canada, Australia, New
16/29

19/11/2019

Zealand and, importantly, the European Union. As with
achieving peace agreements, the deeper subsequent
task of reconciliation can be significantly assisted
through the support, perspective and cross-learning of
committed international partners. While progress has
been made on so many fronts in our own peace process
in Ireland, challenges and obstacles remain.
While no two conflict situations are the same, it is
useful to share experiences of reconciliation, from local
processes and dialogue to national truth commissions.
We believe that the United Nations should work to
capture and share those experiences across contexts
and across continents. Ireland supports principled,
locally-sensitive approaches to accountability and
reconciliation, which work to maximize peace and
justice and guarantee victims’ rights and incorporate
what we like to call a critical analysis of the context in
which conflict occurred.
Too often reconciliation is left as the last issue
once the immediate violence has stopped and when the
attention of the international community has already
turned elsewhere. In particular, we see transitions
from United Nations peacekeeping operations as an
important moment to systematically ensure that we
have a focus on supporting continued reconciliation
efforts there and at all levels. We believe that this can
be done through strengthened United Nations country
teams, engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission
and support for the Peacebuilding Fund.
Our view is that the Security Council, too, can and,
frankly, must do more. As the resolutions on sustaining
peace pointed out, investment in peace requires a
cross-pillar approach, for which reconciliation is a
fundamental critical element. Putting resources behind
that work is a necessary and worthwhile investment,
and we urge the Council to play its role. As an aspiring
member of this body, we look forward to having our
opportunity to step up to the plate and play our part in
that endeavour in 2021-2022.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, we congratulate your friendly
country, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and thank you for holding
today’s important meeting.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The scourge of conflict and its high financial
and human costs mean that conflict prevention and
resolution are a moral and human imperative that
requires a comprehensive approach if gains are to be
preserved and the recurrence of conflict prevented.
Such a comprehensive approach includes national
reconciliation, addressing root causes of conflicts and
early warning.
In the context of peacebuilding, sustaining peace
is a task and responsibility shared among all national
stakeholders concerned. In this regard, we refer to the
vital roles that the Secretary-General, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the United Nations in general, as well
as relevant regional and international organizations
and agencies, can play through partnerships and the
building of local capacity and expertise.
If a reconciliation process is to be successful and
lasting, it must be real, credible and inclusive. It must
aim to consolidate lasting peace and address the root
causes of conflicts, with the participation of religious
leaders and civil society as a whole. In addition, we
must strive to increase the participation, representation
and contribution of women in all stages of conflict
resolution and mediation, including reconciliation
efforts, and adopt a gender perspective in reconciliation
talks and conflict prevention.
Qatar also believes that young people can play
an important role. We cannot of course talk about
sustaining peace and the non-recurrence of conflict in
future without the participation of future generations.
In this regard, we would note that the State of Qatar is
planning to host the second International Symposium
on Youth Participation in Peace Processes next year.
In its desire for sustained peace, strengthened
stability, non-recurrence of conflicts and national unity
of States, the State of Qatar recognizes the importance
of national reconciliation to the achievement of those
objectives. We therefore attach great importance to
supporting reconciliation in the context of its ongoing
efforts to consolidate peace, including through mediation
and humanitarian and development assistance, which
bolster opportunities to achieve lasting peace. This is
what has motivated the efforts made by Qatar to restore
stability to Afghanistan, Darfur and other areas.
Key factors for the success, effectiveness and
consistency of reconciliation processes include
justice, accountability and impunity, particularly for
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

gross violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Accountability
is an important deterrent that contributes to the
non-recurrence of or relapse into conflicts. Accordingly,
we support the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. Documenting crimes and
holding their perpetrators accountable are important
factors in reaching the peaceful settlement of conflicts
and in achieving lasting reconciliation.
In conclusion, we must give serious attention
to efforts aimed at supporting peacebuilding and
sustainable peace and at finding lasting solutions to
conflicts. We must look into all factors for success and
benefit from best practices so that future generations
may be saved from the scourge of war and conflict.
The President: I now give the floor representative
of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing today’s open
debate on reconciliation for promoting peacebuilding
and sustaining peace efforts in the larger context of
international peace and security. We also thank the
Secretary-General and other briefers for sharing their
thoughts and valuable insights on the issue.
Reconciliation has proven to be a useful instrument
for sustaining peace and preventing relapse into
conflicts, both in inter-State and intra-State conflict
situations. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has a
wealth of experience in this regard. In its advisory role,
the PBC continues to inform the Security Council, the
General Assembly and Member States about how better
to support reconciliation with the aim of preventing
the recurrence of conflict and promoting durable peace
and security domestically, regionally and globally. We
must work towards further integrating this learning
into a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. Reconciliation involves a host of
issues, from ensuring the rule of law, accountability and
transitional justice to promoting sustainable economic
growth, national ownership, social cohesion and gender
equality and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including religious freedom.

19-3743317/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As one of the major troop- and police-contributing
countries, Bangladesh has been supporting national
and local reconciliation strategies in countries
emerging from conflict. Under the astute leadership
of our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, we have also
had the successful experience of reconciliation in the
Chittagong Hill Tracts, which, in 1997, led to the signing
of the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord, bringing
about sustainable peace with our ethnic minorities in
that region.
Drawing from those experiences, we believe
reconciliation can be a critical enabler for resolving
the Rohingya humanitarian crisis, the brunt of which
we are bearing. We are convinced that the Security
Council can play an important role in promoting
peace in Myanmar’s Rakhine state by ensuring
reconciliation and the reintegration of the Rohingya
community in Myanmar society, which can pave the
way for repatriation. Certainly, it would require a
robust enabling environment underpinned by dialogue
among the Rohingya — and, for that matter, other
ethnic minorities — the rest of Myanmar society,
and the Myanmar authorities, and by a sustainable
political process. We therefore tend to emphasize a
more comprehensive approach, particularly through
preventing violence against unarmed civilians, ending
dehumanization narratives and addressing the root
causes of conflict. There are many successful models
for achieving truth and reconciliation and transitional
justice, as we have seen in a number of countries,
including Rwanda, South Africa and Sierra Leone, and
these models may be followed. Reports of the various
United Nations mechanisms on Myanmar would also
be useful.
In addition, we wish to highlight a few points.
First, Myanmar must adopt clearly defined
strategies for reconciliation so that the returning
Rohingya can harmoniously coexist with others
in Rakhine state. In this regard, the importance of
appropriate confidence-building measures among the
parties concerned cannot be overstated. A whole-ofsociety approach, with opportunities for civil society
and media actors, is key.
Secondly, any reconciliation process in Rakhine
must pass the rigours of transparency, objectivity,
trust and confidence. Accordingly, it is important
that regional or international actors are involved in
the process. Success would largely depend on the
18/29

19/11/2019

impartiality of the actors, their compliance with agreed
norms and respect for diverse opinions and, more
importantly, international law.
Thirdly, the Security Council has to encourage
Myanmar to address core grievances and guarantee
unhindered and safe passage of relevant humanitarian
personnel and supplies to ensure the resettlement of
civilians and the reduction of humanitarian suffering.
Fourthly, we have heard first-hand accounts of how
sexual violence has been used against Rohingya women
fleeing Myanmar. Children and young people have also
borne a heavy brunt. Therefore, promoting meaningful
reconciliation and the reintegration of the Rohingya
community would require the active participation of
women and young people in the process.
Finally, ensuring accountability and justice for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law is of paramount importance. To
that effect, the international community and the United
Nations should make appropriate use of the tools at their
disposal. As the Secretary-General said this morning,
no reconciliation can work without justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I will honour your request,
Mr. President, to skip the first paragraph of my
statement, in which I express my gratitude. Still, I
would like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive
and useful inputs to this debate.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
I will now
national capacity.

make

a

few

remarks

in

my

Since the last time the Council held an open debate
on this topic in 2004 (see S/PV.4903), the international
peace and security context has changed significantly.
Today, the increasingly complex and multifaceted
nature of conflicts requires us to explore equally
complex and innovative ways to conduct reconciliation
processes. Reconciliation must acknowledge the wrongs
of the past, restore victims’ human dignity and hold
perpetrators accountable. It must also be conducted
in such a way that it improves future relationships
between parties, creating a just and inclusive society
that will not relapse into conflict.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

While reconciliation processes are highly context
\-sensitive, with no one-size-fits-all solution, there
are some universally valid recommendations. Let me
mention a few.
First, I highlight the importance of national
ownership. We strongly believe that communities in
conflict must play the primary role in assessing how
to conduct reconciliation processes. Reconciliation
should be nationally owned, since sustainable peace
cannot be imposed from the outside. But, while primary
responsibility lies at the national level, the international
community and the United Nations can provide
assistance. That may be done in the form of lessons
learned and good practices from similar post-conflict
situations, advocating for international norms and
standards, providing capacity development for building
effective democratic institutions, strengthening the rule
of law and ensuring adequate assistance. The promise
of a decent life offered by sustainable economic
development can be one of the strongest incentives for
pursuing reconciliation.
Secondly, inclusivity is key. Just last month, in
October, the Security Council held its annual debate
on women and peace and security (see S/PV.8649). I
reiterate that women should be placed at the heart of
conflict-resolution and peacebuilding efforts. Equally
important, young people play an essential role in
reconciliation because they can challenge stereotypes
and be agents of change in conflict transformation.
Therefore, focusing on the implementation of the
women and peace and security and the youth, peace and
security agendas is essential.
Thirdly, partnerships play a critical role. The
knowledge and expertise that regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, the European
Union or the Economic Community of West African
States can offer are of paramount importance. We also
believe that strengthening partnerships inside the United
Nations is necessary. In that regard, during Romania’s
chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in 2018, one of our priorities was to increase synergies
between the PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Security Council. The PBC has a unique position in
sustaining reconciliation efforts, given its convening
role in bringing together Member States, the United
Nations system, international financial institutions,
regional organizations and civil society.

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

Reconciliation is both a process and a goal, and
while existing institutional and legal frameworks
are absolutely indispensable, reconciliation requires
a whole-of-society approach. The role of informal
reconciliation, carried out at the individual and
community levels, can be as important as formal
processes in rebuilding trust and the fabric of society.
One of the most prominent figures of successful
reconciliation, Nelson Mandela, made that point
extremely clear when he said:
“In the end, reconciliation is a spiritual process,
which requires more than just a legal framework.
It has to happen in the hearts and minds of people.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me join my colleagues
in expressing our gratitude to the United Kingdom
presidency for convening today’s debate, taking up
the issue of reconciliation and placing it high on the
Council’s agenda. We congratulate the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the presidency.
Reconciliation is vital to achieving sustainable
peace and, in today’s continuous cycle of wars, violent
conflicts and failed peace agreements, advancing the
process of reconciliation becomes urgent.
Georgia is committed to the policy of peaceful
conflict resolution, and pursues a reconciliation and
engagement policy towards its occupied Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia. Even as it confronts
Russian occupation and creeping annexation along
the occupation line in those two regions, the Georgian
Government spares no effort to build trust and
confidence between artificially divided communities
and to enhance people-to-people contacts, including
through the engagement of women in peace projects
and confidence-building measures.
In 2018, in close cooperation with all relevant
national and international stakeholders, the Georgian
Government adopted a new package of peace initiatives
entitled A Step to a Better Future. The initiative has
sparked the interest of the local population in both
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, and even
with the artificial obstacles installed along the dividing
lines, people-to-people contacts and interest in travel
throughout Georgia have increased. The main novelty
of the initiative is that, together with other tangible
benefits and opportunities, for the first time the

19-3743319/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

19/11/2019

initiative provides possibilities for economic activity
and trade across the dividing lines. The peace initiative
covers three main dimensions.

residing in the occupied regions free of charge. It is
important to mention that the number of beneficiaries
increases each year.

The first is facilitating trade across the dividing
lines. The goal is to encourage joint business initiatives
and to simplify and expand trade through the creation of
new opportunities by enabling the products originating
from or produced in Abkhazia and Tskhinvali to access
the internal market of Georgia, as well as foreign
markets, through the export opportunities available to
Georgia. It also allows the supply of goods produced
on Georgian-controlled territories, or imported into
Georgia, to the occupied regions.

However, as we speak, the programme is under
serious threat in the Tskhinvali region. Just a few
weeks ago, we informed the Council on the recent
cases of the borderization and closure of the so-called
crossing points in the Tskhinvali region, particularly
in Akhalgori district. As a result, we had yet another
fatal accident when 70-year-old Margo Martiashvili,
requiring urgent medical assistance, died because of the
refusal by the occupying regime to open the so-called
crossing point in order to access the nearest hospital.

The second dimension is enhancing educational
opportunities for the residents of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali by easing access to all stages of education
throughout the area and expanding opportunities to
participate in international educational programmes
by simplifying access to international universities in a
status-neutral way. Importantly, in partnership with the
international community, the initiative seeks to protect
the Abkhaz language so as to ensure education in the
native language in Abkhazia.

Recently, on 9 November, Dr. Vazha Gaprindashvili
from Tbilisi, while paying a visit to a patient in
need of urgent care, was illegally detained by the
occupation forces, sentenced to two months of pretrial
detention, and remains in custody as we speak, on
the allegation of so-called illegal border crossing
and other concocted accusations. Dr. Gaprindashvili
should be released at once. We call on the international
community to take a firm and principled stance on that
issue. This represents a clear attempt on the part of the
occupying Power and the authorities in control to further
destabilize the already grave security, humanitarian
and human rights situation on the ground. It is even
more alarming that illegal detentions, kidnappings,
torture, killings and loss of life have become regular
and no one is held accountable for those crimes.

The third dimension is easing access to State
services by simplifying technical procedures for
obtaining Georgian passports and life-cycle documents
by the residents of occupied regions. Documents issued
in Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, while being illegal, will be
used for the purpose of identification and determination
of facts of birth, death, marriage, divorce and residence
in these regions, and necessary civil documents will be
issued subsequently.
In order to support the implementation of the peace
initiative A Step to a Better Future, on 12 August the
Georgian Government established a peace fund. The
fund issues grants for socioeconomic projects across
the dividing lines, thereby facilitating dialogue,
cooperation, reconciliation and confidence-building
between divided communities, as well as the
empowerment of conflict-affected populations living
on both sides of the dividing lines and the improvement
of their socioeconomic conditions.
Free health-care services are a key direction of the
Georgian Government’s peace and engagement policy,
whereby the residents of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions are able to access various State healthcare programmes. In particular, the State referral
programme covers the medical treatment of persons
20/29

The occupying Power is the sole party responsible
for the situation on the ground. Therefore, the
engagement of our partners and the United Nations, first
and foremost to support our reconciliation efforts, will
significantly contribute to achieving sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): Viet Nam aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of the Philippines on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
Despite many efforts, prolonged and relapsed
conflicts exist in many places in the world. One of
the most important reasons for that reality is the lack
of awareness or underestimation of the importance
of reconciliation and the lack of investment in
reconciliation. While we fully agree that reconciliation
fundamentally is about building or rebuilding
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

relationships, we are of the view that reconciliation
processes should be conducted with a great sense of
tolerance, in a comprehensive manner and at all levels.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, reconciliation must be nationally driven and
owned. The parties concerned, who know best the
root causes of conflicts, should be the main initiators
and actors of reconciliation. Furthermore, the success
of reconciliation hinges on trust and long-term goals,
which can be achieved only though a comprehensive
approach to addressing, among others, political, social,
economic, cultural and justice issues.
Secondly, regional organizations, the best actors in
reinforcing the strategic trust and mutual confidence
among countries of a region, can be good parties
to reconciliation processes. For example, the high
contracting parties to the 1976 Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia agreed to constitute
a High Council to provide the parties to disputes
with recommendations on the appropriate means of
settling such disputes, including reconciliation. Upon
agreement of the parties to dispute, the High Council
can also constitute a conciliation committee.
Thirdly, the United Nations should play a
supportive role in reconciliation by advocating for
normative change and promoting awareness. It must
also enhance coordination and synergies within
the United Nations system, as well as partnerships
between the United Nations and other players, with due
attention to encouraging the broader participation of all
stakeholders. The United Nations can and should assist
regional organizations and countries in strengthening
their capacity for reconciliation and help share best
practices among regions and countries.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our strong commitment
to persistently pursuing the peaceful resolution of
disputes and conflicts, with a view to achieving
sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): While peace agreements
may treat the symptoms of conflicts, their causes
cannot be fully addressed without the restoration, at
the grass-roots level, of the fractured relationship that
starts or fuels the conflict cycle. As the human pillar
of conflict resolution, complementing its political
and justice pillars, reconciliation is perhaps the only

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

process that can help a post-conflict society come to
terms with brutal and irreversible historical facts. We
would propose the following three elements as key for
reconciliation to be credible as a project in the service
of a peaceful future, through an organic process of
overcoming a violent past.
First, reconciliation cannot be a substitute for
justice or a disguise for impunity, both as a matter of
principle and because the resentment created by the
lack of accountability defeats the objective of achieving
viable peace. Rather, reconciliation should act as a
complementary accountability mechanism that compels
perpetrators to take responsibility for their actions.
Historically, individual and collective amnesties have
been included in political agreements in order to end
the conflict. However, no amnesties granted by peace
agreements or as part of reconciliation processes can
extend to the commission of supreme international
crimes, such as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. In that regard, the United Nations has both
a moral and material responsibility, in particular with
respect to peace agreements concluded under its watch.
Secondly, however difficult it is for a society
to tackle uncomfortable historical truths, identity
questions, prejudices and inequalities, a reconciliation
process, if it is to be credible, must never be a vehicle
for sanitizing or revising history.
Thirdly, with regard to timing, it is hard to envisage
a reconciliation process before reaching a political
settlement, given the difficulty of the desired outcome,
which is nothing less than social transformation by
enabling the peaceful coexistence of rivals, leaving
no room for different historical narratives or for
questioning the truth and creating unified social and
political structures.
Lastly, our biggest challenge when it comes to
reconciliation is broadening its scope, from a national
process to one that can address grievances resulting
from inter-State conflict, without prejudice, of course,
to the administration of international criminal justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Reconciliation in the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
most relevant theme because, together with mediation
and diplomacy, it becomes an integral component
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes. The

19-3743321/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

modern security architecture, which is based on the
collective responsibility of all States Members of the
United Nations, is undergoing a critical test. The lack
of trust among great Powers, stark economic and social
inequalities and underdevelopment have prevented
progress in many parts of the world.
Kazakhstan has always been at the forefront
of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention,
reconciliation and confidence-building measures, as
they are the core principles of maintaining international
peace and security. The best example of its practical
implementation has been the creation, on Kazakhstan’s
initiative, of the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, which has been
a successful instrument for preventively addressing the
key challenges in our region for more than 10 years.
The prioritization of conflict prevention in
the mandates of the United Nations and regional
organizations is an essential tool for achieving
reconciliation and maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, we note my country’s successful
experience convening the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which has
been functioning for more than a quarter of a century
now and uniting 28 countries.
Being aware that faith and religious leaders can
play a significant role in reconciliation, Kazakhstan
has been proud to convene the Congress of Leaders
of World and Traditional Religions since 2003. The
added value of the Congress is that the forum brings
together religious leaders, politicians, representatives
of international organizations, as well as experts,
non-governmental organizations and civil society on a
common platform.
Believing that war can never be a lasting solution
to any problem, Kazakhstan worked towards a viable,
inclusive and Syrian-led political process and provided
the platform for the Astana process on Syria. We are
sure that the 13 rounds of Astana talks contributed
to United Nations efforts to launch the Syrian
Constitutional Committee, which, according to Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen, “can be a door-opener to a wider
political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people” (S/PV.8628, p. 2).
We make the following observations based on
our experience.
22/29

19/11/2019

First, reconciliation is a process and an outcome
where confidence-building measures (CBMs) play an
important role since they provide the incentive for parties
to engage in constructive dialogue. Reconciliation
cannot be successful without CBMs facilitating
people-to-people contacts, promoting tolerance and
enhancing minority rights and participation.
Secondly, reconciliation must take place with
diverse interventions at all levels, from national
leadership to grassroots, while taking into account a
country’s unique historical and cultural context. It is
also clear that conflicts should be rectified through
diplomacy and investments in development.
Thirdly, reconciliation cannot be imposed
from outside. It must be worked out by all relevant
stakeholders, including women and youth.
Finally, next year the United Nations family will
mark its seventy-fifth anniversary. That important
milestone represents a unique opportunity to take
a critical look at the problems and challenges that
confront us. My country has been and will always
be at the forefront of diplomacy, mediation and
reconciliation, using them as the strongest armaments
for peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mrs. Samarasinghe (Sri Lanka): It is important to
recognize that social, economic and political conditions
at the community and national levels could have
profound and widely divergent effects on the world
stage, impacting international peace and security.
The recent attacks in Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday
demonstrate how effectively the global can be localized
and the local, globalized. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-inspired domestic terrorists responsible
for those attacks — some of them foreign-educated
and hailing from affluent, politically influential
families — were radicalized abroad and through
social media. For Sri Lanka, with its multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multi-religious composition, and
following a decade of peace during which we have
forged ahead towards reconciliation, transitional justice
and economic development, the Easter Sunday attacks
were particularly devastating.
In today’s intensely globalized world, extremism is
digitized and those who have lost territory elsewhere
are seeking new pressure points to ignite. Conflict
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and violence in one nation may tear apart societies in
other nations and create schisms in the rich mosaic of
our collective civilizations. It is therefore vital that the
international community join forces in renewing our
efforts in that regard and help to establish restorative
frameworks at the community and national levels,
leading to genuine reconciliation and sustained peace.
In doing so, it must be recognized that reconciliation
mechanisms and transitional justice initiatives cannot
be imposed on nations by external forces.
National reconciliation efforts must also be
based on meaningful public participation, including
that of Government, national legal professionals,
women, minorities, affected groups and civil society.
Without public awareness, consultations and education
campaigns, national reform efforts will remain
vulnerable and weak. In that regard, the United
Nations could play an important role in facilitating
these processes and assisting with capacity-building
and non-conditional funding through its peacebuilding
architecture in order to build community resilience at
the grass-roots level.
Having experienced for nearly 30 years a brutal
onslaught of terrorism, Sri Lanka is conscious of the
value of a nation built on the principles of democracy
and the rule of law. To that end, Sri Lanka has already
taken several steps to rebuild its democratic institutions
and create a framework for reconciliation, under which
the Office on Missing Persons and the Office for
Reparations have already been operationalized and the
Right to Information Act passed into law, as part of
those efforts to strengthen institutions and frameworks.
Furthermore, given Sri Lanka’s multi-religious culture,
the country has sought to encourage interfaith dialogue
and harness religious leaders to act as early warning
systems so that the Government may be alerted to
radical behavioural patterns in a timely manner.
Above all, national ownership and leadership are
needed if the parties to a conflict and society as a whole
are to work towards reconciliation and sustained peace.
Finally, it is important to acknowledge the United
Nations field missions, which work closely with national
stakeholders and local communities, in accordance
with mission mandates. Their importance to the overall
United Nations peace and security architecture cannot
be overstated, especially at a time when the United
Nations and multilateralism in general are facing
multiple threats and challenges that are testing our

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

collective ability to respond. It is therefore important
that field missions enhance cooperation with host
Governments in order to cement national ownership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to participate in today’s open debate on the
topic of reconciliation — a topic that, despite having
been rarely addressed in this format by the Council, is
a concept and practice inherent to the maintenance of
peace and understood to be an objective and a process
of building a common vision of society, ensuring that
the needs of all sectors of the population are taken into
account, as defined in Council resolutions.
“Since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in
the minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed”, states the UNESCO Constitution and
the preamble of the Declaration on a Culture of Peace.
Some 20 years after the adoption of the Declaration,
that maxim remains as valid as ever before. In myriad
cases and national contexts, history has shown us that
peace is not automatically achieved in the absence of
conflicts, and that reconciliation is not a mere shift
from conflict towards non-violent coexistence. Both
peace and reconciliation must be nurtured, promoted
and facilitated constantly and in a lasting manner.
Reconciliation is a process; it is not a state of being.
There is no magic formula or unique recipe for peace,
inasmuch as it is people who are called upon to build
their own history.
Seventy years ago in Costa Rica, following a
conflict that, despite its brief duration, had profound
impacts on the unity of the Costa Rican people and the
fracturing of its social fabric, the Founding Junta of
the Second Republic took one of the most momentous
decisions to abolish the army as a permanent institution,
on 1 December 1948. That was not a decision born solely
in the mind of a single person or those of a few, but was
already part of a political culture in which the bayonet
seldom shone brighter than words in defending ideas.
Above all, that decision was rooted in a deep
conviction, best expressed by the Costa Rican educator
Joaquín García Monge:
“The only way to prevail and bring men together is
the love that is born from a mutual understanding
of the qualities of understanding and of the heart.”

19-3743323/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

19/11/2019

Years later, when José Figueres Ferrer, who had
abolished the army in 1948, was asked about the reasons
for doing so, he replied simply:

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes so
that everyone has the opportunity to speak today.

“After a short but gruelling fraternal war, I found
myself before two armies — one victor and another
defeated. But both were comprised of young Costa
Ricans who had only one desire: to return to their
homes. I understood then that it was time to dissolve
both armies.”

I now give the floor to the representative
of Azerbaijan.

But it was not the decree abolishing the armed
forces that healed the wounds of a fractured nation, but
the process by which the State placed people, their wellbeing and their dignity at the centre of its action, by
means of creating effective, inclusive and transparent
institutions with a mission and vision of their raison
d’être that went beyond the political pendulum. The
stability of our democracy and political system was
not born of that decree or of the holding of regular
elections, transparent though they may have been. It
was born of a sustained and progressive investment in
universal health care, public and free education and an
environment that is healthy and ecologically balanced.
Reconciliation, like peace, is not a political project
but the conviction and capacity of men and women to
resort to dialogue and understanding as the tools for
resolving any dispute. For that reason, the responsibility
of all States in promoting and sustaining a culture
of peace is not only in the prevention of conflicts or
threats to peace, but in the fulfilment of human rights
for all, without distinction of any kind, in compliance
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goal
16; in the creation of robust and inclusive institutions
that respond and adapt to the needs and demands of
people; and through national and global narratives that
build collective meaning and inclusion.
We are living in times of mistrust and division
among peoples, communities and institutions. The
peoples of the world are expressing with greater
vehemence the lack of response to their demands, the
inequality of their societies and the wealth of the elite.
In that context, reconciliation ceases to be a process
anchored in societies torn apart by war and violent
conflict, becoming instead the legitimate demand of
peoples that they be recognized as equal, and the State
is no longer a Leviathan but a channel for inclusion,
education, justice and dignity. If we want peace, we
should prepare not for war but for peace.
24/29

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): The consistent position of
Azerbaijan with regard to the topic under consideration
has been stated on numerous occasions, including in
the Security Council. This position stems from the
experience of facing continued armed aggression and
ethnic cleansing and, above all, from my country’s
keen interest in contributing to the achievement of
sustainable peace in our region and worldwide.
The unlawful use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of States, the
increased brutality of armed conflicts, growing terrorist
and separatist threats, the highest level of forced
displacement, racism, intolerance and discrimination
on ethnic and religious grounds continue to represent
the most serious challenges to peace, security and
sustainable development.
In their twin resolutions on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, adopted in
2016 (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security
Council 2282 (2016)), the General Assembly and the
Security Council have emphasized the importance of
reconciliation and stressed the need for the joint work of
Member States to sustain peace at all stages of conflict
and in all its dimensions.
In a number of situations, dedicated efforts have
helped move peace and reconciliation processes forward.
At the same time, more concerted actions and synergy,
along with closer strategic and operational partnerships
between the United Nations and Governments, are
required to end the conflicts of today and direct greater
attention to preventing the conflicts of tomorrow.
First and foremost, it is critical to ensure that
peace efforts, including reconciliation processes, and
conflict settlement frameworks are not used as a tool
to consolidate the situations achieved by the unlawful
use of force and other egregious violations of general
international law. Justice is a fundamental building
block of sustainable peace. It is essential to address
conflict-related violations by all available means.
Such efforts must be free of selectivity and politically
motivated objectives.
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Unfortunately, in some situations of armed conflict,
including those of a protracted nature, accountability has
not received proper attention and perpetrators not only
continue to enjoy impunity for the most serious crimes
but are ostentatiously glorified at the State and society
levels. Accountability for such crimes is essential not
only for the purpose of bringing those responsible to
justice but also for ensuring the sustainability of conflict
resolution, truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests
of victims and the well-being of society at large.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue at the
national and international levels is one of the important
avenues within the broader objectives of peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and reconciliation. Azerbaijan is
keen to continue its efforts towards promoting mutual
understanding and respect for diversity, including
through the Baku process and the World Forum on
Intercultural Dialogue, which have received wide
global recognition since their inception. The continued
support of the United Nations for successful initiatives
of this kind on the culture of peace and multiculturalism
is essential in the context of building relationships,
overcoming stereotypes and misconceptions and
implementing development frameworks and policies.
In conclusion, it should be emphasized that the
United Nations plays a central role in ensuring the
uniform application of the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Support
for that role of the Organization and for safeguarding
its collective security, political and humanitarian
mechanisms is crucial to addressing conflicts and to
achieving the goals of peace, inclusive sustainable
development and human rights for all. The President:
I now give the floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this meeting. In such a volatile
international context, it is essential to emphasize
the importance of national reconciliation in the
peaceful settlement of conflicts in order to maintain
international peace and security. We would also like
to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing
this morning.
This month we celebrate the International Day for
Tolerance, given its importance in the lives of peoples
as a key means of achieving peace, prosperity and
survival for all humankind. Tolerance is a civilized
behaviour that is embodied in peaceful coexistence

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

among the different religions and cultures through the
consolidation of constitutional principles and national
legislation, which must condemn all forms of violence,
hatred, extremism and discrimination against any
group because it is different.
Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
states that
“any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security, shall, first of all, seek a solution by
negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements, or other peaceful means of their
own choice”.
That is why the Kingdom of Bahrain believes that no
effort to achieve peace will be successful if States
continue to fuel conflicts as a way of imposing their
hegemony over other States. It is therefore crucial to
implement the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Organization.
Such resolutions reiterate that interference in the
internal affairs of States must be avoided and that
mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and the peaceful
settlement of disputes must be supported.
We must also cooperate in the fight against
extremism and terrorism, in particular cross-border
terrorism, which prevails in various parts of the world.
We must also strengthen collective efforts to provide
the necessary humanitarian assistance to peoples and
countries and to combat the agendas of those who seek
to destabilize national and international stability.
I also wish to refer to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the prevention of armed conflict
(S/2001/574), in which he stresses that the achievement
of peace requires the coherent political participation of
women and young people in reconciliation efforts. In
that regard, we note the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, the various Special Envoys and Special
Representatives, and other senior advisors.
Another report of the Secretary-General
(E/2019/68), on progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), sheds light on the
importance of SGD 16, dedicated to the promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, the provision of access to justice for all,
and building effective, accountable institutions at all
levels.. However, progress in these areas continues

19-3743325/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

19/11/2019

to face many challenges. Leaving no one behind is
another international initiative to protect and promote
human rights. That is why it is imperative to follow a
certain number of policies that are conducive to the
achievement of just and lasting growth.

legitimize institutions and serves as a reminder that
justice will ultimately prevail. Furthermore, it gives
communities solace in knowing that past atrocities will
not be forgotten and that history will not be manipulated
or rewritten.

Lastly, the international community must support
effective reconciliation efforts, the rule of law and
respect for the dignity of individuals and disseminate
concepts promoting a culture of peace among peoples
in order to prevent the scourge of war. The Kingdom of
Bahrain reiterates that it will work with international
partners and the United Nations to achieve these
noble goals.

The international community has a fundamental
role to play in helping conflicting States and societies
find common ground on which to build a stable and
peaceful future. We fully appreciate the fact that that is
by no means an easy feat, especially when taking into
account the level of distrust that years of fragmentation
and conflict bring with them. Nevertheless, history has
shown us that, through reconciliation, humankind has
the ability to take the ashes of conflict and transform
them into the seeds of peace and cooperation, often
against all odds.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): Malta fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union.
We would like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.
Time and time again, we have seen countries
descend into chaos, owing to a peace process that did
not give reconciliation the attention it deserved. A peace
agreement must primarily unite all sides to the conflict,
as well as the victims, and instil in them the willingness
and conviction to invest in a common future. Imposing
solutions, especially from the outside, will most likely
lead to resentment and deepen divisions. On the other
hand, understanding and addressing the grievances
of all sectors of society greatly increases the odds of
achieving lasting peace.
Reconciliation is an integral part of maintaining
and, more important, of building peace. While we all
know that there is no magic formula for that, we also
know that there are elements that apply in all cases.
Giving women a central role in the peace process is a
case in point, and no country or community can hope
to achieve just and comprehensive peace if half of its
population is excluded. Youth also has a crucial role to
play. Apart from being the future, every generation has
its own unique perspective. Those elements, too, should
be adequately reflected.
Accountability is an integral part of reconciliation.
The consequences of atrocities committed during
conflict leave indelible scars on victims and societies.
Unfortunately, accountability does not turn back time
and erase such actions. It does, however, strengthen and
26/29

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for its choice of theme
for today’s open debate. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for highlighting the efforts of the United
Nations to promote reconciliation among and within
States and war-torn societies, and we took careful note
of the remarks offered earlier by today’s briefers.
In reflecting on the role and functions of the United
Nations aimed at promoting reconciliation, we need to
carefully address the challenges associated with and
conditions generating gross violations of human rights
in certain parts of the world. While we all recognize that
reconciliation is vital to sustaining peace and security,
it is obvious that crimes of exceptional scope and
magnitude, such as genocide, require a framework of
reconciliation, which entails the right to truth, justice,
accountability and guarantees of non-recurrence.
The irresponsibility of inciting hate speech,
racial and ethnic profiling and the glorification of
hate crimes, especially at the instigation of political
leaders, cultivate fertile ground for discrimination and
marginalization, which if not addressed properly, can
lead to mass atrocities. Attempts to deny, or to justify,
the crime of genocide are not only reprehensible,
but risk undermining the fight against impunity,
reconciliation and efforts to prevent atrocity crimes in
the future. Such challenges require the strong collective
efforts of Member States, international organizations,
religious leaders and civil society to overcome the cycle
of violence and sustain peace on the basis of human
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

dignity, respect and human rights, including the right
to life.
We agree that reconciliation should be
incorporated into peace efforts throughout all stages
of conflict. Preparing peoples for the return to peace
and the restoration of their violated human rights and
fundamental freedoms is crucial to promote confidence,
trust and reconciliation and pave the way for the
settlement of conflicts. Reconciliation is a process that
must occur at the individual, societal and State levels.
We would like to stress the indispensable role of
women and youth in promoting reconciliation. The
meaningful and inclusive participation of women
affected by conflict in peace processes is instrumental,
as it has proven to increase the chances of achieving
durable and lasting settlements and reconciliation.
Genuine reconciliation should be anchored in drawing
lessons from the dark pages of history. Dealing with
the past can be meaningful if it proceeds from the
unequivocal condemnation of previous crimes, thereby
enabling the realization of the right to the truth.
Religious leaders play an important role in
promoting tolerance, dialogue and peaceful coexistence
and in opposing attempts to commit violence perversely
in the name of religion. Therefore, the attacks on
religious leaders, such as the recent killing by terrorists
of two priests of the Armenian Catholic community of
Qamishli in north-eastern Syria, should be resolutely
condemned and the perpetrators brought to justice.
As a nation that has witnessed the horrors of
genocide in its own historic homeland and continues
to face the challenges of the denial and justification of
past crimes, Armenia bears a special duty to promote
the prevention of the crime of genocide. Derogatory
statements, aimed at justifying genocide by means of
denigrating and insulting the dignity of the victims
and qualifying it as “the most reasonable act”, deepen
misunderstanding and distrust and make genuine
reconciliation and dialogue even harder.
Indeed, the recognition and condemnation of
the Armenian genocide is essential to serving truth,
historical justice and reconciliation. It is essential for
the entire international community, and particularly
the potential victims of identity-based crimes — people
who are vilified simply because of their ethnic and
religious origin.

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

Armenia also remains committed to advancing the
prevention agenda through education and awarenessraising of gross violations of human rights and identitybased discrimination against all groups and peoples
that, if not addressed, can lead to mass atrocities
and genocide.
It is by acknowledging the truth and the
commemoration of and tribute to the dignity of the
victims of past crimes that we can pave the way for
genuine reconciliation and sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): In the 1990s, Sierra
Leone was embroiled in a brutal civil war, which left
tens of thousands of people dead and hundreds of
thousands displaced. At the end of the war, the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission for Sierra Leone was
set up to not only expose perpetrators and identify
victims, but also to serve as a mirror through which
all Sierra Leoneans examined their own roles in the
conflict. The dialogue helped the victims to face their
perpetrators, as well as to reconcile and move on with
their lives.
The findings of the Commission encouraged
Sierra Leoneans to believe that the past must never
be forgotten. The Commission’s recommendations
touched on every aspect of the lives of Sierra Leoneans.
Its final report served as a road map for building a new
society in which all Sierra Leoneans can walk unafraid
with pride and dignity. Together with the Commission,
the Special Court for Sierra Leone was established,
through the partnership and assistance of the United
Nations, to bring to justice those who bore the greatest
responsibility for the serious crimes committed during
the war. It achieved that objective and completed its
operations in Sierra Leone in 2013.
The Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone
was established 2013 to oversee the continuing legal
obligations of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. We
are indeed grateful to United Nations Member States
for their continued support in terms of the subvention
to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone under
the item “Proposed programme budget for the year
2020” on the agenda of the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.
The Special Court represents an acknowledgement
of the intrinsic link connecting reconciliation, justice,

19-3743327/29

S/PV.8668 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the need to fight impunity, the promotion of the rule of
law and the preservation of peace and stability in Sierra
Leone. Sierra Leone is therefore proud to be a pioneer
that puts into practice two transitional mechanisms. We
took that unfamiliar path because of our genuine desire
to consolidate peace and seek justice for victims. The
two mechanisms have unquestionably been a positive
force in terms of sustaining peace for our country.
It is critically important that we understand and
address the ways in which mutual mistrust, suspicion,
anger and animosity spill over into the priorities of
national development, such as fighting corruption
and attracting foreign investment. In that regard, my
Government has identified strengthening national
cohesion as a top priority for promoting unity within
the country. With that in mind, in May we launched a
presidential initiative that was heralded by a national
conference on peacebuilding, diversity management
and rebuilding national cohesion. That will soon be
followed by the creation of an independent commission
for peace and national cohesion, to be established by
an act of Parliament later this year or early next year.
The support of the United Nations in that regard will be
highly appreciated.
In building peace and national reconciliation and
avoiding polarization, it is critical that all stakeholders,
citizens, Governments, politicians, civil society, the
private sector, women and young people are all engaged
in the national development process. Finally, as the old
cliché goes, there can be no peace without development
and no development without peace. Together we are
stronger, and it is much easier to sustain peace with
all stakeholders on board than when some are excluded
and marginalized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November and thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely debate
on the role of reconciliation in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, which
showcased his leadership in this area.
Experience has shown us that reconciliation is
not only important for the maintenance of peace, it is
the only way to ensure lasting and sustainable peace
28/29

19/11/2019

in post-conflict societies and therefore throughout the
world. We have also learned that every case brings its
own challenges. However, I would like to share some
reflections that my delegation believes apply to all
cases. Reconciliation is much more than a matter of
a simple agreement or a fixed point that parties can
reach. It is a broad process that if it is to be meaningful
must be frank, participatory and comprehensive. It is
neither a point of departure nor one of stasis, but a
gradual process that waxes or wanes based on three
aspects — first, the background and causes of the
conflict in question, secondly, reparation efforts and
thirdly, the inclusiveness of the process.
If we want reconciliation to play a crucial role for
peace, we must ensure that women, young people and
people with disabilities participate in all processes. I
spoke about women’s participation in peace processes
during the Security Council’s open debate in October
(see S/PV.8649), and I reiterate Ecuador’s commitment
in that regard today. The participation of young
people deserves another open debate, but I would at
least like to underscore the importance of harnessing
their resilience and understanding of diversity in
reconciliation processes. That is also why education
and the promotion of tolerance in all societies are vital.
We must foster trust and a culture of peace. At the same
time, we must avoid impunity, for which international
courts and tribunals have a crucial role, including
the International Criminal Court, of course. Ecuador
supports every element of transitional justice. We must
also continue to support special political missions.
The 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture
will offer us a new opportunity to equip the United
Nations with the tools it needs. However, preventive
diplomacy is the best tool we have for peace. As the
international community, we must strengthen earlywarning mechanisms and work to prevent and stop
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights at all times, because any such violence during a
conflict makes any future reconciliation process harder.
For example, sexual violence in armed conflict, or the
involvement of minors, undermines the chances of
early reconciliation even when the violence has ceased.
My country, Ecuador, is a country of peace. That
is why we promote multilateralism as a central element
of sustainable peace and advocate for dialogue and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts, and why Ecuador
responds to violence with peace and to attacks with
dialogue. We defend dialogue as the foundation of any
19-37433

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

peaceful society. That is also why — although I am
deviating from the subject of the debate — I should point
out that in October, during violent demonstrations that
sought to destabilize Ecuador and undermine peace,
our national Government prioritized an inclusive and
generous dialogue that put the common good and peace
above every other consideration. Ecuador will continue
to defend peace, development and human rights at
both the national and international levels as a matter
of priority.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My colleagues informed me that in my absence
Mr. Heusgen, our colleague from Germany, asked me
some questions. I do not see him in the Chamber, but I
hope that my responses will be conveyed to him. I will
be very brief. By the way, Mr. President, this may be
the result of the interaction that you have promoted here
in the Chamber, but in my understanding, interactivity
still implies making it clear that I should be asked
questions when I am in the Chamber, not when I am
at another event with the Secretary-General. That is,
unless it is just from a desire to put one’s interlocutor
in an uncomfortable position. I have definitely been
put in a somewhat uncomfortable position, considering
that on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of our
Organization it now falls to the representative of Russia
to explain to the representative of Germany what the
Nuremberg trials were and why they were a good thing.
However, I will try to do it as briefly as possible.
I want to affirm that we consider the Nuremberg
trials to be a model of international justice in punishing
war criminals who had unleashed an aggressive,
predatory war, especially on the territory of the Soviet
Union. To be honest, it is true that I did not think that
the purpose of our meeting was making an excursion
into recent history. However, if we are talking about the

S/PV. 8668 (Resumption 1)

present day, then everything that has happened in the
past few years post-Nuremberg seems more by way of
reprisals against various regimes or political opponents
that someone does not care for. For example, the
conclusion of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) was an attempt to alter reality based
on previously established verdicts. Suffice it to point
out how the ICTY prosecuted the Kosovo-Albanians’
case. We promise to explain the whole thing to the
Permanent Representative of Germany, Mr. Heusgen,
at December’s upcoming briefing on the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. At the
same time we can go into detail about the project
for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office sponsored by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which for a ninth year
has been unable to begin investigating the facts of the
large-scale removal of vital organs and other crimes
committed by Kosovo militants.
As for the International Criminal Court, one
shameful decision about the refusal to investigate the
coalition’s crimes in Afghanistan, ostensibly in the
interests of justice, is sufficient to show that it has
forever parted company with its reputation.
I am sure that our German colleagues are perfectly
familiar with all of these facts. Frankly, therefore, their
almost masochistic desire to hear them again and again
is astounding. And it definitely does not strengthen the
approaches they advocate.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I would like to thank our
conference officers for their tireless work today,
particularly rounding up Member States when they
were perhaps not in their places when they should have
been. As ever, I would like to thank our colleagues from
the Security Council Affairs Division and, of course,
our fantastic interpreters.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

19-3743329/29
