VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Comnúttee

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 80
Recalling its resolution 3432 (XXX) of 8 December
1975,
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland31 and Guatemala, 32
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of Belize,33
Reaffirming the principies established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960, in particular that all
peoples have the right to self-determination, by virtue
of which right they freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and
cultural development,
Noting that negotiations have taken place between
the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, acting in close consultation with the
Government of Belize, and the Government of Guatemala, pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5
of resolution 3432 (XXX),
Regretting that these negotiations have not resulted
in the removal of such obstacles as have hitherto prevented the people of Belize from exercising freely and
without fear their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms that the inviolability and territorial integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Calls upan all States to respect the right of the
people of Belize to self-determination, independence
and territorial integrity, to facilitate the attainment of
their goal of a secure and early independence and to
refrain from any action that would threaten the territorial integrity of Belize;
4. Calls a/so upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland as the
administering Power, acting in close consultati~n with
the Government of Belize, and the Government of Guatemala to pursue vigorously their negotiations in accordance with the principies of General Assembly resolution
3432 (XXX), in order to reach an early conclusion;
5. Requests the two Governments concerned to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on such agreements as may have been reached
in the negotiations referred to above;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue its examination of the question.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
SQ /bid.,
31 Ibid.,

chap. XXVI.
Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 15th meeting, paras. 43-49.
32 lbid., 19th II?-~ting, paras. 12-~8, and 26th meeting,
paras. 12-22; and 1b1d., Fourth Commzttee, Sessional Fascicle
corrigendum.
'
33 /bid., 15th meeting, paras. 51-57.

31/51.

123

Question of the New Hebrides

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the New Hebrides,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to thc Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Indcpendence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory, including General Assembly
resolutions 3290 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974 and
3433 (XXX) of 8 Dccember 1975,
Aware that France, as an administering Power, has
not participated in the discussions of the Special Committee relating to the Territory,
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of France 35 and of thc United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 36 as the administering Powers, relating to developments in the New Hebrides,
Noting the joint communiqué issued by the Governments of France and the United Kingdom on 7 October
1976, 37 in which the administering Powers state that
it is their joint policy to promote the democratic evolution of the New Hebrides in accordance with the principie of self-determination,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implemcntation of the Declaration with respect
to the N ew Hebrides,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such a mission to the New Hebrides is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information
in regard to the conditions prevailing in the Territory
and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the people
therein with respect to their future status,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the New
Hcbrides, and stressing the necessity of diversifying its
economy as a matter of priority,

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the New Hebrides; 38
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
34 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XVI.
. 35 lbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 27th meeting, paras. 2-6.
36 /bid., 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
37 A/3 l /286, annex.
38 O/jicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Surplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XVI.

124

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

sbould in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides;
4. Notes with satisfaction the establishment of the
Representative Assembly of the New Hebrides and the
declared intention of the administering Powers to increase progressively the responsibilities enjoyed by that
Assembly, in accordance with the wishes of the people
of the Territory;
5. Reiterates its request that the two administering
Powers should continue to take measures to expedite
the process of decolonization in the New Hebrides;
6. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate steps to strengthen the economy of the
New Hebrides and to work out concrete programmes
of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the Territory;
8. Requests the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to co-operate with the Special Committee and to consider permitting access by a United Nations visiting
mission to the New Hebrides, and to report on this
aspect to the Special Committee when it next considers
the question of the New Hebrides;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the administering Powers, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sccond session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/52.

Question of Bermuda, Cayman lslands,
Montserrat aml Turks and Caicos lslands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, Cayman
lslands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, 39
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nat~ons relating to the Territorics listed above, in particular General Assembly resolutions 3425 (XXX)
and 3427 (XXX) of 8 Deccmber 1975,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listcd abovc, 4 º
so /bid., chaps. III, XXVII and XXIX.
Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee Sessional Fas4 0 [bid.,

cicle, corrigendum.

'

N oting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic política! institutions in those Territories,
Cons~ious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a _co_nsequence of the 1975 United Nations Visiting
Mission to Montserrat41 and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such missions to colonial Terri!ories is essential for securing adequate and first-hand
mf~rmation in regard to the political, economic and
social conditions in those Territories and to the views
wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
'
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achi_evei:ient by their peoples of the objectives embod1ed m the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration,
. Aware _of the special circumstances of the geograph1cal locat10n and economic conditions of the Territ?ri~s concerned, and stressing the necessity of divers1fymg and strcngthening further their economies as
a n:~tter of priority in order to promote economic
stab1hty_ and _to_ ~educe their dependence on fluctuating
cconom1c achv1ties,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Com!11ittec on the Situation with rcgard to thc
Implementat10n of the Declaration on the Granting of
~ndepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relatmg to Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands; 42
2. Rea{fi,rff!S thc inalienable right of the peoples of
those _Terntones to self-determination and independcnce m accordance with the Declaration·
'
~- ]!eafjirms its conviction that questions of territorial s1ze, geographical isolation and limited rcsources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the
administcring Pow~r, in consultation with the freely
elected representahves of thc peoples, to continue to
take all thc necessary steps to ensure the full and
s_peedy_ attainmcnt of the goals set forth in the Declarat10n wlth respect to the Territories;

5. Calls upon the administering Power to expand its
programme o_f budgetal")'. and devclopment aid and to
takc a~l- poss1blc steps, m consultation with the local
authontJes as appr~priatc, to divcrsify and strengthen
further the econom1es of the Territories listed above
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance
and cconomic dcvclopmcnt for thosc Tcrritorics·

'

6. . Urges the administcring Power, with the coopcrat1011 of the Governments of the Tcrritories conccrned, to saf~gu~rd the inalienable right of the pcoples
of those Terntones to thc enjoyment of their natural
41
lbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.l ), chap. XXVIII, annex.
42 lbid., Thirty-first Sessiun, Supplcment No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev. l), chaps. XXVII :rnd XXIX.
