S/PRST/2008/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5890th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 May 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security: role of the Security Council in supporting security
sector reform”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the statement by its President of
21 February 2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) and emphasizes that security sector reform
is an essential element of any stabilization and reconstruction process in
post-conflict environments. The Security Council recognizes that the
establishment of an effective, professional and accountable security sector is
one of the necessary elements for laying the foundations for peace and
sustainable development.
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts on
security sector reform and takes note of his report entitled ‘Securing Peace and
Development: the role of the United Nations in supporting security sector
reform’ of 23 January 2008 (S/2008/39).
“The Security Council commends Slovakia and South Africa for their
joint initiative in holding the International Workshop on Enhancing United
Nations Support for Security Sector Reform in Africa on 7-8 November 2007
and takes note of the letter dated 20 November 2007 from the Permanent
Representatives of Slovakia and South Africa (S/2007/687). The Security
Council encourages further similar activities.
“The Security Council recognizes that security sector reform is a longterm process and reiterates that it is the sovereign right and primary
responsibility of the country concerned to determine its national approach and
priorities for security sector reform. It should be a nationally owned process
that is rooted in the particular needs and conditions of the country in question.
The Security Council underlines that the strong support of the United Nations
and international community is also critical in strengthening national
capacities thereby reinforcing national ownership, which is crucial for the
sustainability of the process.
“The Security Council recognizes the important role that the United
Nations has played in supporting national security sector reform efforts and
underlines the need for its continued engagement. In this regard, the Security

08-33703 (E) 120508

*0833703*

S/PRST/2008/14

Council emphasizes the need to develop an holistic and coherent United
Nations approach to security sector reform as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral, in close consultation with Member States.
“The Security Council underlines that United Nations support to security
sector reform must take place within a broad framework of the rule of law and
should contribute to the overall strengthening of the United Nations rule of law
activities as well as wider reconstruction and development efforts. This will
require coordination with all relevant United Nations actors, in particular the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, to ensure coherence of
approach.
“The Security Council emphasizes the important role that the
Peacebuilding Commission, through its integrated peacebuilding strategies,
can play in ensuring continuous international support to countries emerging
from conflict. The Security Council also recognizes the importance of
continued close cooperation and partnerships with non-United Nations actors,
in particular regional, subregional and other intergovernmental organizations,
including international financial institutions and bilateral donors, as well as
non-governmental organizations.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include, wherever appropriate, recommendations related to security sector
reform in his periodic reports on United Nations operations mandated by the
Security Council.”

2

08-33703
