162

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

vention on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;113
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision
1978/24 of 5 May 1978, by which the Council authorized a working group open to all members of the. Commission on Human Rights to meet for one week immediately before its thirty-fifth session with the task of
preparing concrete drafting proposals _for a draft convention on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, on the basis of the
relevant documents of the thirty-fourth session of the
Commission and any comments received from Governments;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-fifth session, to give high priority to the question of drafting a convention on torture;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 114 called for under General Assembly resolution
32/63, containing replies to the questionnaire;
5. Calls upon Member States which have not yet
done so to reply to the questionnaire, as called for
under resolution 32/63;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session further
information provided in response to the questionnaire,
and to submit all the information available which he
has received to the Commission on Human Rights and
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities;
7. Takes note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 115 called for under General Assembly resolution 32/64, containing unilateral declarations;
8. Invites Member States which have not yet done
so to deposit the unilateral declarations with the Secretary-General, as called for under resolution 32/64;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
inform the General Assembly, in annual reports, of
such further unilateral declarations which may be deposited by Member States;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment" for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved under this item.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/179.

Draft Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, in which it requested the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control to elaborate a code of
conduct for law enforcement officials,
Further recalling its decision 32/ 419 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the Secretary-General
to transmit to all Governments the draft Code of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 116 for their
examination and comments,
113 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. VIII.
114 A/33/196 and Add.1-3.
115 A/33/197.
116See A/32/138, annex.

Commending the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control on the work done by it at its fourth session with a view to the elaboration of the code of
conduct for law enforcement officials, 117
Convinced of the importance of providing the citizenry served by law enforcement officials with protection of all their rights and interests,
Having taken into account the report of the Secretary-General on the draft Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials, 118
l. Notes with appreciation the results of the openended informal working group which met during the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly as set out
in the annex to the present resolution and requests the
Secretary-General to transmit them to Member States
for their consideration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
annex to the present resolution to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session under the item entitled
"Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment";
3. Recommends that a working group should be
established at the beginning of the thirty-fourth session
of the General Assembly to continue elaboration of the
draft Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials
and requests the Secretary-General to allocate sufficient staff and resources to enable it to complete its
task;
4. Expresses the hope that the draft Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials will be adopted
by the General Assembly during its thirty-fourth session.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
ANNEX
Draft Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials
The General Assembly,
Considering that the purposes proclaimed in the Charter of
the United Nations include the achievement of international
co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling, in particular, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rightsll9 and the International Covenants on Human Rights, 1 20
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by
the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9
December 1975,
Mindful that the nature of the functions of Jaw enforcement
in the defence of public order and the manner in which these
functions are exercised have a direct impact on the quality of
life of individuals as well as of society as a whole,
Conscious of the important task which law enforcement
officials are performing diligently and with dignity, in compliance with the principles of human rights,
Aware, nevertheless, of the potential for abuse which the
exercise of such duties entails,
Recognizing that the establishment of a code of conduct for
law enforcement officials is only one of several important
117 See E/CN.5/536, chap. V.
11s A/33/215 and Add.l and Add.1/Corr.l.
110 Resolution 217 A (III).
120 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

measures for providing the citizenry served by law enforcement
officials with protection of all their rights and interests,
A ware that there are additional important principles and
prerequisites for the humane performance of law enforcement
functions, namely:
(a) That, like all agencies of the criminal justice system,
every law enforcement agency should be representative of and
responsive and accountable to the community as a whole,

(b) That the effective maintenance of ethical standards
among law enforcement officials depends on the existence of
a well-conceived, popularly accepted and humane system of
laws,
(c) That every law enforcement official is part of the
criminal justice system, the aim of which is to prevent and
control crime, and that the conduct of every functionary within
the system has an impact on the entire system,
(d) That every law enforcement agency, in fulfilment of
the first premise of every profession, should be held to the
duty of disciplining itself in complete conformity with the
principles and standards herein provided and that the actions
of law enforcement officials should be responsive to public
scrutiny, whether exercised by a review board, a ministry, a
procuracy, the judiciary, an ombudsman, a citizens' committee
or any combination thereof, or any other reviewing agency,
(e) That standards as such Jack practical value unless
their content and meaning, through education and training and
through monitoring, become part of the creed of every law
enforcement official,
Adopts the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials
set forth below and decides to transmit it to Governments with
the recommendation that favourable consideration should be
given to its use within the framework of national legislation
or practice as a body of principles for observance by Jaw enforcement officials.

Article I
Law enforcement officials must at all times fulfil the duty
imposed upon them by law, by serving the community and by
protecting all persons against illegal acts, consistent with the
high degree of responsibility required by their profession.
Commentary:121
(a) The term "law enforcement officials" includes all officers of the law, whether appointed or elected, who exercise
police powers, especially the powers of arrest or detention.
( b) In countries where police powers are exercised by
military authorities, whether uniformed or not, or by state
security forces, the definition of law enforcement officials
shall be regarded as including officers of such services.
(c) Service to the community is intended to include
particularly the rendition of services of assistance to those
members of the community who by reason of personal,
economic, social or other emergencies are in need of immediate aid.
( d) This prov1S1on is intended to cover not only all
violent, predatory and harmful acts, but extends to the full
range of prohibitions under penal statutes. It extends to
conduct by persons not capable of incurring criminal liability.

Article 2
In the performance of their duty, law enforcement officials
should respect and protect human dignity and maintain and
uphold the human rights of all persons.
Commentary:
The human rights in question are identified and
protected by national and international law. Among the
(a)

1 21 The commentary provides information to facilitate the
use of the Code within the framework of national legislation
or practice. In addition, national or regional commentaries
could identify specific features of the legal systems and practices
of different States or regional intergovernmental organizations
which would promote the application of the Code.

163

relevant international instruments are the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the
United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
and the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
( b) National commentaries to this provision should
indicate regional or national provisions identifying and
protecting these rights.

Article 3
Law enforcement officials may use force only when strictly
necessary and to the extent required for the performance of
their duty.
Commentary:
(a) This provision emphasizes that the use of force by
law enforcement officials should be exceptional; while it
implies that ,Jaw enforcement officials may be authoriz.ed to
use force as is reasonably necessary under the circumstances
for the prevention of crime or in effecting or assisting in the
lawful arrest of offenders or suspected offenders, no force
going beyond that may be used.
[(b) It is implicit in this provision that firearms may
be used only in exceptional circumstances; in every instance
where a firearm is used, a report should be made promptly
to the competent authority.]

[(b) The use of firearms is considered an extreme
measure and in general firearms should not be used except
when other means are not sufficient to restrain an offender
who offers armed resistance or to apprehend a criminal who
threatens the lives of others. Every effort should be made to
exclude the use of firearms against women and children. In
every instance where a fir,earm is used, a report should be
made promptly to the competent authorities.]
(c) National law ordinarily restricts the use of force by
law enforcement officials in accordance with a principle of
proportionality. It is to be understood that such national
principles of proportionality are to be respected in the interpretation of this provision. In no case should this provision
be interpreted to authorize the use of force which is disproportionate to the legitimate objective to be achieved.

Article 4
Matters of a confidential nature in the possession of law
enforcement officials should be kept confidential, unless the
performance of duty or the needs of justice strictly require
otherwise.
Commentary:
By the nature of their duties, law enforcement officials
obtain information which may relate to private lives or be
potentially harmful to the interests, and especially the reputation, of others. Great care should be exercised in safeguarding and using such information, which should be disclosed only in the performance of duty or to serve the needs
of justice. Any disclosure of such information for other purposes is wholly improper.
Article 5
No law enforcement official may inflict, instigate or tolerate
any act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, nor may any law enforcement official
invoke superior orders or exceptional circumstances such as a
state of war or a threat of war, a threat to national security,
internal political instability or any other public emergency a'1
a justification of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

164
Commentary:

(a) This prohibition derives from the Declaration on
the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly, according
to which:
"[Such act] is an offence to human dignity and shall be
condemned as a denial of the purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations and as a violation of the human rights
and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights [and other international
human rights instruments]."
( b)

The Declaration defines torture as follows:

" ... torture means any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted
by or at the instigation of a public official on a person
for such purpos-es as obtaining from him or a third
person information or confession, punishing him for an
act he has committed or is suspected of having committed,
or intimidating him or other persons. It does not include
pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions to the extent consistent with the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners."122
(c) The term "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment" has not been defined by the General Assembly, but should be interpreted so as to extend the widest possible protection against abuses, whether physical or mental.

[Articles 6 to 10 could not be debated by the informal
open-ended Working Group during the thirty-third session of
the General Assembly owing to lack of time.]

33/184.

Importance of the improvement of the
status and role of women in education
and in the economic and social fields
for the achievement of the equality of
women with men

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 134 of 16 December 1976 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1978/30 and 1978/32 of 5 May 1978,
Recognizing the importance of the improvement of
the status and role of women in education and in the
economic and social fields for the achievement of the
equality of women with men,
Recognizing further the importance of the exchange
of experience in these matters among States,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status and role of women in education, 123
l. Urges States to take the necessary measures to
promote full equality of women with men in education and in the economic and social fields;
2. Recommends that States envisage in their policies all appropriate measures to create necessary conditions which will enable women to participate in work
on an equal footing with men;
122 First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders: report by the Secretariat
(United Nations publication, Sales No. 56.IV.4 ), annex I.A.
12a A/33/214.

3. Invites Member States to give in their reports,
which are to be submitted in accordance with Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1325 (XLIV) of
31 May 1968 and 1677 (LII) of 2 June 1972 and
General Assembly resolution 3520 (XXX), the fullest
possible information on their experience in the improvement of the status and role of women in education and in the economic and social fields and its impact on the achievement of the equality of women
with men;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and regional
commissions as well as other interested intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations having
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to submit their observations concerning ways and
means for the improvement of the status and role of
women in education and in the economic and social
fields, on the basis of existing studies and field experience in projects, as well as the conclusions of seminars and symposiums held on such subjects;
5. Requests the specialized agencies, regional commissions and other interested organizations of the
United Nations system to organize seminars and meetings and to make studies on ways and means for the
improvement of the status of women in education and
in the economic and social fields;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an
analytical report on the status and role of women in
education and in the economic and social fields, based
on the material received under paragraphs 3 and 4
above as well as on various existing studies and research, for consideration by the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to bear in mind
the content of the present resolution in preparing
documentation for the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, to be held in 1980.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/185.

Preparations for the World Conference
of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, including the adoption of the
subtheme "Employment, Health and
Education"

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it decided to convene a world conference in 1980, and 33/189 of 29 January 1979, in
which it, inter alia, emphasized the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education" for the Programme of
Action for the second half of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
and requested the Secretary-General to invite the regional commissions to convene preparatory meetings
and seminars,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/32 of 5 May 1978, in which the Council
recommended the subtheme "Employment, Health and
Education" for the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, and invited Member States to submit reports
