S/PRST/2005/67

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5342nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 December 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the commencement in Abuja, Nigeria,
of the seventh round of the African Union (AU)-led inter-Sudanese peace talks
on Darfur, and expresses its appreciation to the African Union, the
international community and the other donors.
“The Security Council is encouraged by the active participation of
representatives from all invited groups of the Sudan Liberation Movement/
Army (SLM/A) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), as well as
members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, as part of the
Government of National Unity, and urge their continued cooperation with the
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) and with the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS).
“The Security Council calls on all parties to the conflict to fulfil their
commitments to conclude a just and full peace accord without further delay.
The Security Council demands that all parties refrain from violence and put an
end to atrocities on the ground, especially those committed against civilians,
including women and children, humanitarian workers and international
peacekeepers.
“The Security Council recalls the demands on the Government of the
Sudan and the rebel forces, as well as other armed groups, to respect fully their
commitments referred to in its recent resolutions. The Council demands, in
particular, that the SLM/A, the JEM and the Government of the Sudan
immediately cease violence, comply with the N’djamena Ceasefire Agreement,
end impediments to the peace process and cooperate fully with the African
Union Mission, and that the Government of the Sudan disarm and control
militias. It further demands that those responsible for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law be brought to justice without delay.
“The Security Council recalls its concern that the persisting violence in
Darfur might further negatively affect the region, in particular the security of
Chad. It firmly condemns in this context recent attacks perpetrated by armed
elements within Chad and in particular the attack on 19 December 2005 on

05-65866 (E) 211205

*0565866*

S/PRST/2005/67

positions of the Chadian national army in the town of Adré, and supports
efforts to reduce tensions on the border.
“The Council reaffirms its determination to make full use of existing
measures under the relevant Security Council resolutions on the Sudan,
including holding accountable those responsible for violence and violations of
the arms embargo, and those who impede the peace process.
“The Security Council expresses its gratitude to the African Union and
its Mission in Sudan (AMIS) for the positive role its forces have played in
reducing violence and promoting the restoration of order in Darfur.
“The Security Council also appeals to donors to continue both supporting
the crucial work of AMIS in stemming the violence in this suffering region
and providing critical humanitarian assistance to millions of war-afflicted
civilians in Darfur and across the border in Chad.
“In the broader Sudan context, the Security Council welcomes further
progress achieved in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, in particular the signing of the Constitution for Southern Sudan
and the formation of the Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS).”

2
