S/2013/295

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 May 2013
English
Original: French

Letter dated 15 May 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I should like to draw your attention to Security Council resolution 899 (1994)
concerning the matter of the Iraqi private citizens and their assets which remained
on Kuwaiti territory following the demarcation of the international boundary
between Iraq and Kuwait. The Security Council decided therein that the
compensation payments to be made pursuant to the arrangements described in the
Secretary-General’s letter of 22 February 1994 (S/1994/240) may be remitted to the
private citizens concerned in Iraq, notwithstanding the provisions of resolution 661
(1990).
The Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat has been
responsible for dealing with the issue of compensation. In accordance with the
course of action outlined in the above-mentioned letter from the Secretary-General,
Kuwait contributed to the trust fund created for the purpose of compensation, the
Trust Fund for Iraq-Kuwait border issues. A notice to the Iraqi farmers concerned
was prepared; a representative of the Department visited the border area between
Iraq and Kuwait with a view to informing the Iraqi individuals concerned of the
compensation and what needed to be done to claim it. The text of the notice was
published in Kuwaiti newspapers. While most of the farmers were personally
informed of the compensation amounts, none felt in a position to apply for the
compensation at the time.
The Department continued to pursue the matter, but did not receive from the
Iraqi authorities at the time the cooperation necessary to effect the payment. A visit
to Iraq by a representative of the Department in order to proceed with the handover
of compensation payments to the beneficiaries was postponed in early June 1995 at
the request of the Government of Iraq, which did not suggest an alternative date.
Attempts by the Department to make practical arrangements for disbursement of the
compensation were not successful until after the fall of the Government of Saddam
Hussein.
On 30 June 2005, the Department informed the Permanent Representative of
Iraq to the United Nations that the Organization intended to proceed with the
disbursement of compensation. Detailed modalities for the identification of and
payment to the individual beneficiaries were forwarded to the Permanent Mission of
Iraq. On 2 February 2007, the Government of Iraq was requested to inform the
United Nations as to how it intended to proceed with regard to these arrangements.

13-34024 (E) 200513 200513

*1334024*

S/2013/295

On 28 March 2007, the Permanent Mission of Iraq informed the Secretariat
that the Council of Ministers of Iraq had decided to establish a team from the
relevant ministries, headed by a representative of the Council of Ministers, to
distribute the compensation determined by the United Nations Compensation Fund
to the Iraqi farmers concerned. In notes verbales dated 4 February and 26 March
2008, the Permanent Mission of Iraq requested, on behalf of the Committee on the
distribution of compensation to Iraqi farmers, that the total amount of compensation
and the interest should be deposited in the account of the Development Fund for
Iraq at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. There were subsequent exchanges
between the Department and the Permanent Mission of Iraq on the modalities of
such a transfer.
On 30 April 2008, the Department informed the Government of Kuwait of the
Iraqi request outlined above. After an exchange of correspondence with the
Department, the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations noted, in its
letter dated 18 February 2009, that Kuwait had fulfilled all of its commitments
relating to the issue of compensation of the Iraqi farmers and that the subject “now
remains between the United Nations and Iraq”. The letter outlined no conditions or
specific demands.
On 29 November 2012, the Permanent Mission of Iraq informed the
Department that the Government of Iraq would update the final list of beneficiaries.
On 2 May 2013, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq wrote to me (see annex) to
request the transfer of the funds to the Ministry’s account number 2 in United States
dollars at the Rasheed Bank.
Given the Iraqi requests to transfer funds and the fact that no objections were
raised by the State of Kuwait, and taking into account the provisions of paragraph
10 of Security Council resolution 1483 (2003), I intend to conclude an agreement
with the Government of Iraq whereby the United Nations will transfer the funds
contained in the Trust Fund, less applicable administrative costs, to the Government
of Iraq, which will assume full responsibility for identifying the beneficiaries,
determining the amount of compensation to be paid to each beneficiary and
disbursing the corresponding amounts. The agreement will also provide for the
Government of Iraq to inform me on a regular basis of the progress achieved in
identifying and making payment to the beneficiaries and on completion of the
process.
As at 31 March 2013, the balance of the Trust Fund was $1,438,718. Should
the Council agree with the course of action outlined above, my responsibilities
under Security Council resolution 899 (1994) will have been discharged upon
transfer of the funds to the Government of Iraq. The Governments of Iraq and
Kuwait have been consulted on and agree with the course of action outlined above.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

13-34024

S/2013/295

Annex
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to express my appreciation for your efforts to settle the issues
pending between the Republic of Iraq and the State of Kuwait. We are now
finalizing the lists of Iraqi farmers whose land was affected by the demarcation of
the borders between the two countries entitled to compensation. I should therefore
be grateful if you could instruct that the amount designated for that purpose should
be transferred to the Ministry’s account at Rasheed Bank, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs Branch, missions account No. 2 (United States dollars).
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
(Signed) Hoshyar Zebari
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq

13-34024

3
