S/2019/776

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 September 2019
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General
I.

Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 46 of Security Council
resolution 2463 (2019) and covers major developments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo from 29 June to 25 September 2019. The report describes progress in
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since my report of
17 July 2019 (S/2019/575); provides an overview of political developments; outlines
progress in adjustments to the Mission’s priorities, posture and presence, as well as
the pursuit of its comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians; and provides
information on the performance of MONUSCO uniformed personnel.

II. Political developments
2.
The political situation during the reporting period was dominated by the
inauguration of a coalition government under the Prime Minister, Sylvestre Ilunga
Ilunkamba, in September. The President, Félix Tshisekedi, also continued to play an
active role in regional initiatives to strengthen bilateral relations and increase
cooperation on security and economic issues.
3.
On 26 August, Prime Minister Ilunga announced the composition of his
government, following the endorsement by President Tshisekedi. It comprises 67
members, including the Prime Minister, 5 vice-prime ministers, 10 State ministers,
31 ministers, 3 ministres délégués and 17 vice-ministers. Three out of four of the
ministers have never served in a government. The representation of women increased
from 10 per cent to 17 per cent. The distribution of ministries between the two
platforms of the coalition is broadly in line with a prior agreement, reached on 29 July,
which provided that 42 portfolios would go to the Front commun pour le Congo and
23 to the Cap pour le changement. The same agreement also contained a commitment
by the two platforms to implement a common programme through a coalition
government.
4.
An extraordinary session of the National Assembly was convened between
19 August and 7 September to debate and approve the programme of the new
Government and inaugurate its members. On 3 September, Prime Minister Ilunga

19-16130 (E)

031019

*1916130*

S/2019/776

presented the programme, which focuses on the political, defence and security,
economic and finance, reconstruction and social and cultural sectors. The document,
which was presented without detailed budgetary commitments, aligns with the
priorities of President Tshisekedi and reflects the positions for which Cap pour le
changement and the Front commun pour le Congo campaigned during the 2018
election. On 6 September, following a process of parliamentary debate and scrutiny,
the National Assembly approved the government programme and proce eded to the
inauguration of the new ministers. The Lamuka coalition boycotted the inauguration
in protest at allegedly deliberate violations of parliamentary rules, which in their view
disadvantaged the opposition. Several influential civil society organiz ations also
expressed their concern over the size of the new Government and its cost implications.
5.
The installation of the legislative institutions continued to generate political
contestation. Internal disputes surfaced visibly during the election of the Senate
Bureau on 27 July, following the endorsement by the Front commun pour le Congo
of Alexis Thambwe Mwamba as its sole candidate for the Senate presidency. This led
to disagreements with the second largest political grouping of the platform, the
Alliance des forces démocratiques du Congo et alliés, whose leader, Modeste Bahati
Lukwebo, also expressed interest in the position and maintained his candidacy even
after being confronted with exclusion from the Front commun pour le Congo. In a
secret ballot, Alexis Thambwe Mwamba was eventually confirmed as President of the
Senate with 65 votes against 43 for Modeste Bahati, indicating that the Front commun
pour le Congo could not leverage its full numerical strength despite its majority. The
Cap pour le changement-aligned former Prime Minister Samy Badibanga was elected
First Vice-President of the Senate against the candidacy of a prominent member of
Front commun pour le Congo, Évariste Boshab.
6.
Following his relatively strong showing in the Senate, Mode ste Bahati
announced that the Alliance des forces démocratiques du Congo et alliés would
henceforth act as a third member of the government majority, separate from the Front
commun pour le Congo. However, the actual loyalties of individual members of the
grouping remained contested. On 2 September, the faction led by Modeste Bahati
eventually expelled a number of senior officials and five constituent parties from the
Alliance des forces démocratiques du Congo et alliés, citing their continued
allegiance to the Front commun pour le Congo.
7.
The last two remaining gubernatorial elections took place in June and July. The
vote was conducted in Sud-Ubangi on 10 July and won by a Front commun pour le
Congo affiliate. The Sankuru election, initially postponed due to logistical and
security constraints, took place on 20 July. Despite the fact that the Front commun
pour le Congo held a majority in the provincial assembly, an independent candidate,
who later announced his loyalty to President Tshisekedi, was elected a gainst former
Government Spokesperson Lambert Mende.
8.
The composition of the National Assembly was subject to legal processes until
a revised ruling of the Constitutional Court on 3 and 4 July reinstated some of the
previously disqualified members of the Assembly, but also confirmed the invalidation
of 31 initially elected National Assembly members, many of them from the
opposition. According to the final list of elected officials published by the Court, the
Front commun pour le Congo has over 300 seats, Cap pour le changement has 48
seats, and the opposition Lamuka platform holds 99 seats. The remaining seats are
held by members of the Alliance des forces démocratiques du Congo et alliés. In a
letter dated 29 July, the Comité laïc de coordination called on all judges of the
Constitutional Court to resign, given what they viewed as a violation of the
Constitution in the handling of electoral disputes. The 31 invalidated parliamentarians
also continued to protest against their exclusion from the National As sembly and
formed an alliance for that purpose. In the Senate, the Front commun pour le Congo
2/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

and aligned independent senators hold 79 seats, Alliance des forces démocratiques du
Congo et alliés hold 12, Lamuka 11, and Cap pour le changement hold 4, with t he
remaining positions held by independents without declared affiliations.
9.
The opposition Lamuka coalition continued its activities, including by holding
rallies throughout the country and calling for peaceful marches to denounce the
rulings of the Constitutional Court that had invalidated the election of some of its
National Assembly members. The leadership of Lamuka met on 30 July and
reaffirmed its commitment to work for the reform of national institutions, including
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante. The meeting also designated JeanPierre Bemba as the rotating coordinator of Lamuka for the next three months, taking
over from Moïse Katumbi. Other initiatives by Lamuka leaders included rallies held
by Moïse Katumbi with supporters in all four provinces of the Grand Katanga area in
July and August and a rally held by Martin Fayulu in Kinshasa on 4 August. On
10 July, a leader of Lamuka, Freddy Matungulu, announced that he would cease his
activities in the coalition, following his appointment at the African Development
Bank upon the recommendation of President Tshisekedi.
10. Civil society and faith-based organizations continued to be actively engaged in
political matters. The Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Église du Christ au Congo continued to call for local elections to be held
before the end of the year, and on 9 August submitted a petition with 1.5 million
signatures to that effect. Other organizations, including the National Council for
Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process also called for the local elections
to be organized. The Council continued its mediation role between political
formations, including calming tensions between supporters of Cap pour le
changement and Front commun pour le Congo over the composition of the new
government, and dispatched a good offices delegation to Sankuru Province to prevent
potential violence surrounding the gubernatorial elections.
11. Pursuing his anti-corruption agenda, President Tshisekedi, on 8 August,
established an office for behavioural change, the Coordination pour le changement de
mentalité. Further, during a speech on 11 July marking the first African
Anti-corruption Day, he reiterated his determination to reform the justice system and
called for the ratification of the African Union Convention on Preventing and
Combating Corruption. He also advocated a greater role for women in politics and
spoke in favour of a 30 per cent female representation rate in the coalition
government, and for Parliament to adopt a quota system in elective assemblies and
public administration.
12. President Tshisekedi also continued to pursue an active regional diplomatic
agenda. Notably, on 12 July, he met with the President of Angola, João Lourenço in
Luanda as part of a quadripartite meeting with the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame,
and the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni. In the joint communiqué of the
meeting, they called for cooperation on peace and security, with a focus on armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
regional economic integration. The summit also supported dialogue between Rwanda
and Uganda to resolve their existing differences, which the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Angola were asked to facilitate. In a follow-up quadripartite summit,
on 21 August, in Luanda, Rwanda and Uganda signed a memorandum of
understanding to improve political and economic relations.
13. From 4 to 8 July, President Tshisekedi participated in the twelfth extraordinar y
summit of the African Union in Niamey, on the margins of which he met with the
Chair of the African Union, the President of Egypt, Abdel Fattah al -Sisi, and the
President of South Africa, Cyril Ramaphosa, to discuss bilateral cooperation and
regional issues.
19-16130

3/17

S/2019/776

14. On 17 and 18 August, the President attended the thirty-ninth summit of the
Heads of State and Government of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) in Dar es Salaam, during which he called for a regional coalition to eradicate
armed groups in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
this context, the final communiqué of the Summit referred to the acts of extremism
and terrorism in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, specifically in the Beni area,
and agreed to collaborate with the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and consolidate efforts towards security stabilization in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. The communiqué also commended
the President of Namibia, Hage Geingob, as outgoing Chairperson, and the President
of Zambia, Edgar Chagwa Lungu, as outgoing Chairperson of the SADC Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, for their role in contributing to the peaceful elections
and transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
15. On the economic front, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
concluded Article IV consultations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
26 August, marking an important step in their cooperation. The Executi ve Board
further stated that growth was projected to decrease from 5.8 per cent in 2018 to 4.3
per cent in the current year, as copper and cobalt prices continue to fall.
16. In pursuit of her good offices, my Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Leila Zerrougui, continued to meet with key national and
provincial authorities, including President Tshisekedi, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the Chief of Staff of the President, Vital Kamerhe, the incoming Minister
of the Interior, Security and Customary Affairs, as well as the Governors of Ituri,
Sankuru, Kasai Central and South Kivu. She used these occasions to discuss
opportunities for supporting institutional reforms and strengthening democratic
governance, as well as the ongoing Ebola response.
17. During my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 30 August to
1 September, I had the opportunity to hold meetings with representatives of the major
political forces, civil society and institutions of the country, incl uding President
Tshisekedi, the Speaker of the National Assembly, Jeanine Mabunda, and Prime
Minister Ilunga. The need for MONUSCO and national security forces to work
together more effectively to address the threat posed by armed groups was an
important conclusion of my meetings. I also interacted with authorities and civil
society organizations in North Kivu, notably Goma, Beni and Mangina, where I
expressed the solidarity of the United Nations with the victims of armed group
violence, as well as Ebola and other public health challenges.

III. Security situation
18. Intercommunal violence and armed group activity continued to claim the lives
of numerous civilians, with an upsurge in incidents in some areas in the east of the
country. Despite political commitments to address the causes of insecurity in Ituri
Province, Djugu and Mahagi territories saw an increase in violence. Attacks on
civilians also increased in the Grand Nord area of North Kivu Province, due to a
resurgence of attacks by presumed members of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF).
Also in North Kivu, Masisi territory continued to be negatively affected by extensive
armed group clashes, causing dozens of civilian deaths. Insecurity also persisted in
Maniema, South Kivu and Tanganyika Provinces, but did not increase significantly.
While politically sensitive elections in Sankuru Province took place in a relatively
calm atmosphere, the risk of communal violence remains.

4/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

North Kivu Province
19. The security situation in the Grand Nord deteriorated during the reporting
period, with a notable increase in attacks on civilians in Beni territory. Alleged ADF
members killed at least 36 civilians and abducted dozens more in 26 attacks. By
contrast, there was a decrease in ADF attacks against the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC). Civil society organizations in the
region organized a series of demonstrations urging local and national authorities, as
well as MONUSCO and the international community, to address insecurity in Beni
territory. Several civilians were injured, and the police arrest ed dozens in the context
of these demonstrations. Mai-Mai groups also continued to attack civilians, Ebola
response centres and FARDC, in particular in the Butembo and Lubero areas, with 25
attacks recorded during the reporting period, of which 12 were aga inst civilians, 7
against the FARDC and 6 against Ebola virus disease centres.
20. In Masisi territory, the Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové (NDC-R) armed group
continued to pose a significant threat to the safety and security of civilians. The group
is known to have carried out summary executions of civilians, rape, unlawful
imprisonment and the imposition and collection of illegal taxes. The strategy of
NDC-R to extend its area of control beyond Masisi and Walikale territories, in
particular into Rutshuru territory, led to violent confrontations with other local armed
groups. The clashes resulted in the killing of at least 60 civilians and caused large scale displacement. Up to 25 schools remain closed in Masisi territory owing to
insecurity, leaving approximately 3,000 students without access to education.
South Kivu and Maniema Provinces
21. The overall security situation in South Kivu remained tense and unpredictable,
with eight out of the nine territories of the Province affected by local and foreig n
armed groups. In Kalehe and Shabunda territories, the Mai -Mai Raia Mutomboki and
other members of local armed group reactivated their support networks, reportedly
with the tacit support of some local politicians, following the movement of the
Conseil national pour le renouveau démocratique and the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) into the area. This also triggered the intensification of
confrontations between FARDC and local armed groups in Bunyakiri, as well as
renewed rivalries with FARDC for the control of mining areas in Shabunda territory.
22. In Uvira and Fizi territories, insecurity and recurrent armed confrontations
continued to adversely affect the population. Intercommunal conflict between
Banyamulenge groups, supported by the Gumino and Twigwaneho militias, and the
Babembe, Bafuliru and Banyindu communities, supported by various Mai -Mai
groups, resulted in serious human rights violations in the Minembwe area of Fizi
territory. The continued presence of Burundian and Rwandan ar med groups in the
Province made the situation even more volatile. Approximately 200,000 people
remained displaced owing to continued insecurity.
23. In southern Maniema Province, Kabambare territory witnessed renewed armed
group hostilities against the Namoya mine site. FARDC redeployed troops to secure
the privately run concession; however, on 26 July, four mine workers, including a
South African national, were taken hostage by members of Mai -Mai Malaika and
eventually released. While sexual violence reportedly committed by security forces
in Salamabila decreased, incidents of rape reportedly committed by members of
Mai-Mai increased in number. FARDC continued operations against Mai -Mai
Malaika in Kasongo and Kabambare territories. Kabambare territory cont inued to
experience insecurity due to clashes between Twa militia, Apa na Pale and members
of Mai-Mai Yakutumba from South Kivu and Tanganyika Provinces.

19-16130

5/17

S/2019/776

Ituri Province
24. On 23 August, ADF carried out its first multi-day incursion outside of North
Kivu, into the Boga area of Irumu territory, Ituri Province. The primary purpose
appeared to be resupply with cash, basic goods, cattle and medication. No fatalities
were reported, but some 114 civilians, including women and minors, were abducted
for forced labour and ransom payments.
25. The demobilization process of the Force de résistance patriotique de l ’Ituri
(FRPI) has advanced considerably since my previous report. On 12 August, the
Governor of Ituri Province launched the pre-cantonment of FRPI combatants. This
followed a visit by President Tshisekedi in July, which facilitated negotiations with
the FRPI on a final agreement for their demobilization. To date, over 800 combatants
have registered in the pre-cantonment site in Geti. The signature of a peace agreement
between the Government and FRPI is expected to take place later in the year.
26. In his public address in Bunia on 30 June, President Tshisekedi committed to
restoring peace in Ituri and holding perpetrators of human rights violations
accountable. Following the visit, police and FARDC deployments were increased to
enable military operations against the armed assailants. Although to a lesser extent
than in previous months, these acts of violence persisted in Djugu territory, causing
tens of thousands of civilians to flee.
27. In Mahagi territory, Ituri Province, the reporting period was marked by killings,
lootings and the destruction of villages. During attacks on several villages in Djugu
and Mahagi territories on 10 and 11 June, at least 117 members of the Alur and Hema
communities were killed. There was little military presence during the attacks, which
appear to have been coordinated. Despite calls for restraint by community leaders and
local authorities, inter-community relations remained strained. Tensions also rose in
the Alur community after the killing of at least seven Alur individuals by unidentified
armed men in a village near Bunia town on 16 July.
Tanganyika Province
28. The security situation in Kalemie town gradually improved during the reporting
period. In Kambu, MONUSCO provided its good offices to facilitate a dialogue
between Twa combatants, former Bantu militia leaders and customary chiefs, which
had a positive impact on the security on the Kalemie-Moba road axis. As a result,
normal traffic between Lubumbashi and Kalemie resumed.
29. Security incidents were also reported in north-eastern Nyunzu territory and
northern Kalemie territory. In these areas FARDC and various Mai-Mai groups fought
for control of mining sites, leading to the displacement of the population. In the
Bendera area, both FARDC and armed groups reinforced their respective positions.
Kasai, Kasai-Central, Kwilu, Mai-Ndombe and Sankuru Provinces
30. In Sankuru Province, tensions remained high following delayed gubernatorial
elections, and the killing of several politically aligned militia leaders. Community
violence continued in Lodja, centred in the areas of Kondo -Tshumbe and NambeluLuhembe, where there is little security presence. T he risk of violence related to local
power struggles persists, particularly in the Kondo-Tshumbe sector of Lodja territory.
31. Following the self-demobilization of the Kamuina Nsapu militia across Kasai
and Kasai Central Provinces in the aftermath of the elections, an overall reduction in
security incidents was observed. Some cases of intercommunal violence nevertheless
occurred, as members of the Pende, Tetela and Chokwe communities clashed with
members of Kamuina Nsapu-affiliated Luba groups. Returns of Congolese refugees

6/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

from Angola continued, in particular into the Kamako area in Kasai Province and are
expected to increase further.

IV. Humanitarian situation
32. During the reporting period, the humanitarian situation significantly
deteriorated in several areas of the country, mostly owing to intercommunal conflict,
armed group violence and ongoing epidemics. Humanitarian actors continued to be
confronted with several challenges in aid delivery, such as accessibility in conflict
areas and lack of funding. As at 29 August 2019, the humanitarian response plan,
which requires $1.65 billion, was 29 per cent funded.
33. Currently, 13.1 million people, or 10 per cent of the population, are estimated
to be food-insecure. As a particular concern, 4.5 million children are affected by
severe and moderate acute malnutrition, and 11 per cent of the health zones in the
country were above nutritional emergency thresholds during the first trimester of
2019. In the Kivu Provinces, more than 60 per cent of the population is food-insecure,
with more than 20 per cent at emergency level. Further increases in food insecurity
may occur, given poor climatic conditions, which will have an impact on crops, in
particular in the east of the country.
34. In Masisi territory, North Kivu Province, over 67,000 people were newly
displaced in June and July. Meanwhile violence in Djugu territory in Ituri Province
displaced tens of thousands, with total numbers reaching 400,000 displaced persons
in Djugu, Irumu and Mahagi territories. In the high plateaus of South Kivu Province,
approximately 180,000 people were displaced during May and June.
35. Epidemics continued to be among the most urgent humanitarian concerns. Since
the beginning of 2019, over 16,000 suspected cases of cholera and 300 deaths were
reported. There were also over 150,000 suspected cases of measles, including some
3,000 deaths.
36. Despite the ongoing response effort, the number of Ebola cases in North Kivu,
Ituri and South Kivu Provinces continued to increase and reached over 3,000 cases
and more than 2,000 deaths by the end of August. On 15 July, the first case of Ebola
was confirmed in Goma. Two days later, the World Health Organization declared the
outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. On 16 August, the first
two Ebola cases were confirmed in South Kivu Province. Both cases were contained,
and no further spreading of the disease occurred.
37. The United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator and the World
Health Organization continued to support the national Ebola response, with a focus
on security, political engagement and support for affected communities. The
Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator met with President Tshisekedi, the Prime
Minister, the Health Minister, local authorities, donors, civil society actors and
international non-governmental organizations for coordination and advocacy. In
August, the Ebola response was placed under the direction of President Tshisekedi,
supported by a multisectoral committee of experts. Ebola response efforts continued
to be hampered by insecurity and communal distrust, as attacks on responders and
facilities persisted.

19-16130

7/17

S/2019/776

V. Comprehensive approach to protection of civilians
A.

Mission-wide strategies
38. In collaboration with the Government, MONUSCO continued to rely on targeted
strategies to reduce armed group violence and implement mechanisms for the
protection of civilians. This is consistent with the Action for Peacekeeping
commitment to pursue tailored, context-specific peacekeeping approaches to
protecting civilians. The most significant progress was achieved in Ituri Province,
where the commitment of national and provincial authorities, as well as MONUSCO
support, allowed for the pre-cantonment of over 800 members of FRPI, while
negotiations have continued towards the full demobilization of the group.
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team have accompanied and supported
the process since late 2017. A new community reintegration programme is being
finalized through the Mission’s stabilization support structures and will support the
local reintegration of FRPI combatants.
39. In North Kivu, MONUSCO began a detailed review of its targeted strategy
against ADF, including setting up intelligence architecture and reviewing the
effectiveness of existing early warning systems. The broader protection plan is also
being reviewed and will enable the Mission to more effectively address the security
dynamics created by Mai-Mai actions in the Beni, Butembo and Lubero areas. In
Maniema, South Kivu and Tanganyika Provinces, MONUSCO reviewed its protection
strategy. The need to effectively tackle Mai-Mai Yakutumba was identified as a
priority. Next steps will include workshops with United Nations partners and national
authorities in Kalemie and Kindu, in preparation for the eventual withdrawal of
MONUSCO from those areas.
40. MONUSCO continued to implement its protection through projection approach
and undertook 19 standing combat deployments and 7,422 long -range patrols during
the reporting period. Early warning systems and local protection committees, which
consist of at least 30 per cent women, in hard-to-reach communities were expanded,
leading to improvements in the Mission’s ability to reach civilian populations. The
Community Alert Network system received a monthly average of 861 early-warning
alerts during the reporting period (compared with 1,257 alerts in the previous period);
80 per cent of which resulted in responses from the Government or MONUSCO.
Alerts that could not be responded to mainly emanated from remote areas with limited
presence of national security forces.
41. Regarding security governance, MONUSCO pursued close cooperation with
FARDC. To this end, the Mission held weekly conferences with high-ranking officers
on relevant topics, including international humanitarian and international human
rights law. The Mission also helped FARDC institutionalize peacekeeping modules in
their training curriculum. MONUSCO continued to work actively to coordinate the
support for security sector reform provided by international and bilateral partners.
MONUSCO also provided air transport to 114 FARDC personnel via United Nations
flights. Four joint air reconnaissance flights and 14 medical evacuations were
conducted on behalf of FARDC.
42. MONUSCO continued to mitigate the threat posed to civilians by explosive
hazards and the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons. To this
end, the Mission destroyed 122 items of unexploded ordnance. It also installed 13
weapon safes to help secure 130 State-held firearms in police stations in North Kivu
Province and trained 35 members of national security services in the handling of
weapons and ammunition.

8/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

B.

Field-level response
43. In Masisi territory in North Kivu Province, MONUSCO established a standing
combat deployment in Pinga, which supported the signing of an intercommunal
agreement between residents of the Hunde and Nyange communities on 25 July.
MONUSCO also deployed four joint military and civilian teams to address protection
of civilians concerns. These deployments led to the surrender of 13 Congolese and 18
foreign combatants, as well as the separation of 16 children from armed groups. In
response to increased insecurity and abuse against civilians in Beni territory, the
Intervention Brigade intensified conduct of long-range and area domination patrols,
in coordination with the FARDC, in the Beni and Kamango areas.
44. In South Kivu Province, in addition to establishing a standing combat
deployment in Bibatama, MONUSCO strengthened early warning systems in the
Kalehe area, successfully preventing the entrenchment of foreign armed groups. In
Shabunda territory, the Mission continued to engage with community leaders to
strengthen mechanisms for the prevention of sexual violence. The deployment of
integrated military and civilian teams through a standing combat deployment in the
Minembwe area enhanced early warning capacities and increased humanitarian access
to the area. Also in Minembwe, MONUSCO facilitated dialogue between community
leaders, resulting in a code of conduct on local transhumance practices. MONUSCO
also deployed a joint civilian and military team in the artisanal gold exploitation areas
of Lubichako, Misisi and Lulimba, helping to prevent an escalation of violence and
denying armed groups access to residential areas.
45. In Maniema Province, MONUSCO established a standing combat deployment
at Salamabila from 15 August to 11 September, which focused on the protection of
civilians and liaison with FARDC on the conduct of operations against Mai-Mai
Malaika. The deployment facilitated a technical mission to enhance the capacity of
security forces in Salamabila, reinforce local protection mechanisms and encourage
a return to peaceful negotiations. In Kasongo, a joint response mission delivered
training for FARDC, the Congolese National Police and local security council and
local protection committee members.
46. In Ituri Province, MONUSCO maintained four standing combat deployments in
the Djugu area and intensified patrolling in response to continued violence against
civilians. This helped protect the local population and internally displaced people,
while facilitating humanitarian access. In addition, fact-finding missions were
conducted to assess protection needs and to investigate alleged human rights
violations by militias and State security forces. The Mission worked with the
provincial authorities to establish a commission of inquiry into the violence in Djugu.
MONUSCO also established a standing combat deployment close to the FRPI
pre-cantonment area as a contingency.
47. In Tanganyika Province, MONUSCO helped create an environment conducive
to talks between provincial authorities and Mai-Mai leadership on the root causes of
the conflict. Several joint missions were conducted with authorities and influential
customary leaders to areas such as Nyemba, where a preliminary dialogue was
conducted with leaders of the Mai-Mai Apa na Pale. Standing combat deployments
were also established in Lambo Katenga (Bendera/Kalemie territory), Kabeya Mayi
(Nyunzu territory), Nyemba (West Kalemie territory) and Lyoni (Moba territory) in
preparation for new community violence reduction projects to provide a community based approach to the reintegration of ex-combatants.
48. In the Kasai area, following the initial postponement of the gubernatorial
election in Sankuru, MONUSCO sent a standing combat deployment to Lodja and
Lusambo. The situation in Lusambo calmed down enough to allow for its withdrawal.

19-16130

9/17

S/2019/776

In Lodja however, the deployment required further strengthening, as well as multiple
mediation and advocacy missions to address tensions. MONUSCO support facilitated
the resolution of a security crisis following the escape of 169 prisoners from Kananga
prison during the first quarter of the year. The support included technical advice and
assistance on the effective management of high-risk prisoners, in particular members
of the Kamuina Nsapu militia, and capacity-building for the security personnel.
49. In support of the Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator and the national Ebola
response, MONUSCO engaged with national and local authorities to promote a more
conducive environment for humanitarian actors. MONUSCO supported provincial
representatives and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in the
coordination of the response, with a specific emphasis on the sensitization of the local
population on preventive measures. The Mission also scaled up its efforts to provide
area security and improve access for responders and the affected population. Daily
patrols were conducted between Beni and Butembo. The MONUSCO military
component also provided static security to strategic locations such as the Ebola
Operations Centre in Butembo and conducted day and night patrols to ens ure the
safety of all United Nations personnel. The Mission’s police component
complemented these efforts through community policing activities. In the meantime,
radio Okapi continually broadcast information about Ebola preventive measures and
activities.

VI. Extension of State authority
A.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
50. MONUSCO processed 165 individuals from local and foreign armed groups
who volunteered for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and facilitated
the release of 34 children associated with armed groups before handing them over to
national child protection counterparts. Of the 165 ex-combatants, MONUSCO
repatriated 32 to Rwanda and 14 to Burundi, while 21 Rwandan civilians were
transferred to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and 29 Congolese
combatants were handed over to national entities. The Mission continued the gender sensitive screening of entrants to prevent women and children abducted by armed
groups from being placed with them as dependants in camps.
51. MONUSCO intensified its engagement with national authorities on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and advocated a strategic shift from
static demobilization structures to more flexible and tailored approaches. In addition
to supporting the FRPI process, and as an interim solution towards longer -term
national disarmament, MONUSCO and the United Nations country team continued to
work jointly with provincial and local authorities to prepare initiatives for former
combatants and communities for demobilization and community violence reduction.
To date this year, nearly half of all beneficiaries of community violence reduction
projects have been women, compared with 30 per cent in 2018.

B.

Stabilization
52. The National Stabilization and Reconstruction Programme for conflict zones in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO launched a call for proposals
through the Stabilization Coherence Fund to implement a democratic dialogue
programme for inter-community conflicts in Djugu territory. The programme is a first
step in expanding International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy

10/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

programming in Ituri Province following the now concluded Mambasa programme
and ongoing South Irumu programme.
53. On 3 July, the National Steering Committee of the Stabilization Coherence
Fund, co-chaired by the acting Minister of Planning and the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, allocated funding for expanding the
stabilization programme in the North Kivu Kitchanga priority zone. Expected to start
in the second quarter of 2020, the programme will build on previous projects carried
out over the past three years and will focus on the socioeconomic and social
reintegration of at-risk youth and registered ex-combatants, ensuring higher
participation of women in stabilization programming, as well as supporting local
political processes aimed at reducing armed group activities.

VII. Human rights situation, justice and corrections
54. The number of human rights violations during the second quarter of 2019
dropped by 5 per cent compared with the first quarter, with MONUSCO documenting
1,479 cases. State agents, mainly FARDC soldiers and the Congolese National Police,
were responsible for nearly 56 per cent of the violations. The remaining 44 per cent
were committed by armed groups. The human rights situation remained most
worrying in conflict-affected provinces, where over 85 per cent of all violations took
place, particularly North Kivu, South Kivu, the Kasais and Tanganyika. At least 286
civilians, including 66 women, were victims of extrajudicial or summary killings.
55. The number of violations of civil and political rights and fundamental freedoms
decreased further in the second quarter of 2019, to nearly half the number documented
during the first quarter. Where violations occurred, they were predominantly
committed by State agents, mainly the Congolese National Police. Obstacles to
freedom of the press and attacks and threats against human rights defenders and other
civil society actors continued to be observed. In some cases, armed groups targeted
journalists and civil society members who had reported human rights abuses or
supported the work of Ebola response teams. While several peaceful demonst rations
were held without incident, others were suppressed by the authorities, including
through lethal force.
56. In the second quarter of 2019, at least 32 people died in detention, mainly due
to lack of access to appropriate medical care or malnutritio n. At least 146 people
escaped from detention centres across the country, with Kwango, Maniema and North
Kivu Provinces being the most affected. Both figures represent a decrease from those
recorded in the previous quarter.
57. MONUSCO continued to support the efforts of the Congolese authorities, which
have been essential to national reconciliation and building trust between state and
populations, to combat impunity and address cases of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other serious human rights violations. Throughout the country, at least
18 militia members, 15 FARDC soldiers and six Congolese National Police officers
were convicted of various serious crimes in the second quarter of 2019. Guidon
Shimiray Mwissa, the leader of the NDC-R armed group, against whom the North
Kivu military prosecutor issued an arrest warrant on 7 June on charges of crimes
against humanity for rape and war crimes for recruitment of child soldiers, is still at
large.
58. On 9 July, the team of international experts on the situation in Kasai engaged in
an interactive dialogue on the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the forty-first session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva. It noted
that its recommendations to investigate and prosecute the violence of 2016 and 2017

19-16130

11/17

S/2019/776

as crimes against humanity and war crimes have not resulted in any verdicts. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities requested that the team of international
experts continue to support transitional justice efforts in Ka sai, including technical
assistance to judicial authorities to investigate the violence of December 2018 in
Yumbi, Mai-Ndombe Province. On 10 July, the Human Rights Council renewed the
mandate of the team of international experts for another 15 months and requested the
United Nations to provide technical assistance to the Government to support judicial
investigations across the country.

VIII. Sexual violence
59. During the second quarter, over 300 women, 70 girls and one man were victims
of various forms of conflict-related sexual violence, including rape, gang rape and
forced marriage. Over half the incidents were perpetrated by armed groups in North
Kivu, which was the province most affected by sexual violence, followed by
Tanganyika and South Kivu.
60. Overall, armed groups were responsible for 72 per cent of the documented cases
of sexual violence, while State agents, mainly FARDC soldiers, accounted for the
remaining 28 per cent. Among armed groups, members of FDLR and NDC -R were
the main perpetrators in North Kivu, followed by Mai-Mai Fimbo na Fimbo
combatants in Tanganyika Province.
61. During the reporting period, MONUSCO carried out two protection missions in
Ituri Province, with technical support from women protection advisers in preparation
for a joint investigation mission. Other missions for verification and protection of
conflict-related sexual violence cases were carried out in South Kivu, Kasai Central
and Tshopo Provinces. These missions interacted with 416 victims and witnesses,
including 173 victims of conflict-related sexual violence, and ensured referrals for
medical and psychosocial assistance where needed.
62. The reporting period also saw the investigation and prosecution of emblematic
cases of crimes against humanity, including conflict-related sexual violence. On
8 July, the International Criminal Court found Bosco Ntaganda guilty, beyond
reasonable doubt, of 18 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
in 2002 and 2003. On 18 September, the military leader of FDLR , Sylvestre
Mudacumura, who was wanted by the International Criminal Court, was killed in
North Kivu Province. The Sheka trial in North Kivu and the preparation of the
Kokodikoko hearings in South Kivu involved approximately 175 victims of conflict related sexual violence, as well as other human rights violations perpetrated in
Mwenga and Shabunda territories.

IX. Child protection
63. During July and August, MONUSCO documented 242 grave violations against
children. These included two cases of rape, one killing, two cases of maiming, one
abduction, the looting of a primary school and a health post and the documentation
of 234 children (31 girls, 203 boys) who had escaped or been separated from armed
groups. Children were mainly separated from Kamuina Nsapu (71) in the Kasais, Twa
militia (36) in Tanganyika Province, Mai-Mai Malaika (21) in Maniema Province and
Mai-Mai armed groups (29) in South Kivu.
64. During the reporting period, five armed-group commanders signed unilateral
declarations or road maps to end child recruitment and other grave child rights
violations. Since July 2018, 25 commanders have signed such road maps with
12/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

approximately 1,200 children subsequently released. Over 120 FARDC and
Congolese National Police officers were trained on the child protection mandate, the
prevention of sexual violence and age verification to avoid recruitment of minors.
Further, over 280 MONUSCO troops were trained on the protection of children in
armed conflict. The Mission reached out to 1,820 communit y members through
awareness-raising activities to stop and prevent child recruitment and other grave
child rights violations. In addition, 78 non-State armed group focal points received
training on child protection and the implementation of declarations an d road maps
signed by factions of armed groups against the recruitment of children.

X. Gender considerations in mandate implementation
65. During the reporting period, MONUSCO conducted workshops on genderresponsive budgeting and legislation for the newly elected provincial assembly
delegates and other administrative authorities. The Mission further supported civil
society efforts to promote women’s political inclusion, resulting in the appointment
of two female customary chiefs to the South Kivu and Kongo Central provincial
assemblies. Finally, the Mission shared good practices for gender-responsiveness by
State institutions with the President’s adviser on youth, gender and prevention of
conflict-related violence. During the reporting period, over 300 women mediators
received training from MONUSCO. The Mission also trained over 436 journalists
(over 40 per cent of whom were women) on gender-sensitive and non-discriminatory
communication in the media.
66. MONUSCO continued to integrate gender into its security considerations. In
Beni, Bukavu, Bunia, Goma and Kananga, the Mission mapped areas of heightened
security needs for women, leading to reinforced patrols and surveillance in 18
locations. MONUSCO also helped ensure that specific measures for the pro tection of
women and girls were incorporated into local security plans. To improve the living
conditions of female inmates in high-risk prisons, the Mission advocated more female
corrections officers, which increased to 25 per cent, and increased provision of
specialized services and medical support. In addition, legal clinics on gender -based
violence were set up in North Kivu, South Kivu and Kasai Central Provinces, helping
to improve access to justice.
67. Internal efforts by MONUSCO towards gender parity during the reporting
period included applying special measures from the system-wide strategy on gender
parity to the comparative review phase of the personnel downsizing process, which
resulted in improved retention of female staff. As at 31 July, about 32 per cent of
international civilian staff were women.

XI. Deployment and assessment of performance of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
A.

Progress in adjusting the Mission’s priorities, posture and presence
68. In line with the strategic objectives outlined in Security Council resolution 2463
(2019), the operational focus of MONUSCO centred around the protection of
civilians, reducing the threat posed by armed groups and assessing the human rights
situation and supporting efforts to promote accountability and fight impunity,
stabilize and strengthen State institutions and facilitate humanitarian access,
including in areas affected by the Ebola virus disease. The deployment of troops
remained unchanged during the reporting period.

19-16130

13/17

S/2019/776

69. With a view to focusing resources on areas where the presence of armed groups
poses a persistent threat to the civilian population, MONUSC O adjusted its presence
by closing its antenna offices in Bandundu, Matadi, Mbandaka and Mbuji -Mayi, as
well as its field offices in Dungu, Kisangani and Lubumbashi. The United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office adopted measures to ensure its continued pres ence in
Kisangani and Lubumbashi, in collaboration with the United Nations country team.
MONUSCO also took measures to ensure that Radio Okapi would continue
broadcasting in areas where MONUSCO offices were closed.
70. The MONUSCO police component readjusted its field presence alongside the
Mission’s office closures. Police personnel from closed locations were redeployed to
other locations, including Bukavu, Bunia, Butembo, Goma and Uvira in order to
reinforce and consolidate police presence there and support the Mission’s efforts in
the protection of civilians and the Ebola response effort. The Mission also redeployed
a formed police unit from Lubumbashi to Bukavu. Two platoons, temporarily
deployed to Butembo, provide security support for the Ebola respons e.

B.

Assessment of performance of the Mission’s uniformed personnel
in protecting civilians
71. A total of 18 units were evaluated on their support for: mandate implementation;
aspects related to command and control; training; discipline; and the sustainability of
logistical capacities and medical support. This reflects the Mission ’s determination to
ensure the highest level of peacekeeping performance, as stipulated in the Action For
Peacekeeping initiative, including in paragraph 13 of the Declar ation of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. With three reviews
pending finalization, 5 units were assessed as excellent and 10 as satisfactory. To
improve operational standards, MONUSCO instituted training, as well as operational
and logistical measures to enhance the capability of contingents to implement their
mandate. In line with the emphasis on the planning and execution of joint offensive
operations, the Force leadership visited sector headquarters to advise on joint
operational planning, focusing specifically on the joint fight against ADF. A
headquarters-based team carried out casualty evacuation stress testing, which
confirmed that MONUSCO medical evacuation and casualty evacuation procedures
were fit for purpose.
72. MONUSCO also evaluated six formed police units against several criteria,
including: their support for mandate implementation; aspects related to command and
control, training and discipline; and the sustainability of logistical capacity and
medical support. All units were assessed as excellent. An evaluation of individual
police officers was also implemented. As a result, the skill set for protection of
civilians in urban areas was further defined, which will enable the selection of police
officers with relevant experience for future deployments.

C.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
73. MONUSCO continued to maintain robust measures to ensure a zero -tolerance
policy for all personnel on sexual exploitation and abuse. During the rep orting period,
15 misconduct allegations were brought forward, of which 10 were categorized as
serious. Preventive measures included training, risk assessments and patrols to
enforce curfews and out-of-bounds areas. The Mission also conducted outreach
activities in local communities and supported 43 community-based complaint
mechanisms in localities where MONUSCO has a strong presence. These activities

14/17

19-16130

S/2019/776

reflect the Action for Peacekeeping commitment to strengthen the conduct of
peacekeeping operations and personnel.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
74. During the period under review, 57 incidents with impact on the safety and
security of United Nations personnel were recorded. These included 19 hazard, 20
crime and 16 civil unrest incidents. No incidents were due to armed conflict.

XIII. Observations
75. The transfer of power following the December 2018 elections represents a
historic opportunity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A sense of hope has
spread across parts of the country with the advent of the new political dispensation
under President Tshisekedi. I witnessed some of the positive changes taking place
during my recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 31 August to
2 September.
76. Continued political stability and security, as well as increased State presence, in
areas of conflict are critical for the consolidation of the current political transition
and the advent of sustainable peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I welcome the inauguration of the new coalition government and encourage
its members to continue to place the needs of the Congolese people above the pursuit
of partisan interests. I urge all political actors to pursue the consensual approach that
characterized the government formation process. It is incumbent on both the
Government and opposition to play their part in fostering national unity and building
strong institutions through sustained and inclusive political dialogue among all
stakeholders.
77. I take note of the scope of the programme of the new Government, which places
an emphasis on sustainable development, social justice and the delivery of basic
services, and I am encouraged by the Government’s anti-corruption and justice sector
reforms agenda. I welcome in particular the Government’s stated commitment to
reform and increase the professionalism of the Congolese armed forces and other
security institutions. These are essential elements of the broader strategy for
addressing the current state of insecurity in some parts of the country and fighting
impunity. To implement these reforms, the Government will require more resources
than those currently at its disposal. In this regard, I encourage the Government to take
active steps to sustainably expand the revenue base of the State and intensify its fight
against corruption at all levels. I also call on bilateral and multilateral partners to
increase their support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in these critical areas.
78. Regional cooperation remains key to sustainably addressing the threat posed by
foreign armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and stemming the
illicit flow of weapons across the Great Lakes region. I am heartened that President
Tshisekedi views this as a priority. I encourage the signatories of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region to honour their respective commitments under the Framework and build on
the present momentum to address the root causes of conflict and work together to
promote lasting peace and sustainable development in the region.
79. I am deeply concerned by the deteriorating security situation in North Kivu and
continued insecurity in South Kivu and Ituri Provinces. Negative forces continue to
prey on civilians and undermine regional stability. Addressing the threat posed by
these armed groups remains an urgent priority for the Government of the Democratic
19-16130

15/17

S/2019/776

Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, including through credible accountab ility
processes. During my visit, President Tshisekedi and I agreed that MONUSCO and
FARDC should work together more effectively to tackle foreign armed groups.
Resolute action is needed against ADF, which continues to pose a serious threat to
civilians. I remain convinced that MONUSCO still has a critical role to play in
tackling the security and humanitarian challenges facing the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I welcome the opportunity to revitalize the Mission’s cooperation with the
Government in pursuit of this goal.
80. A sustained focus on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed groups operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is key to the
country’s stability. After the spontaneous demobilization of several armed groups this
year, seizing the opportunities offered by a more conducive political environment,
and the momentum for change brought by new national and provincial leaders, is
clearly the way forward. Past experience suggests that the sustainable reintegration
of former combatants would be best achieved through a flexible, community -based
approach centred on supporting the crucial role played by women. I call upon the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to create a
conducive environment for fostering the voluntary surrender of combatants and their
sustainable disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into their home
communities. MONUSCO and the United Nations country team stand ready to work
closely with the Government and provide it with the necessary support.
81. I remain concerned by the ongoing Ebola epidemic in Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which has the potential to spread to neighbouring countries. I call upon
all stakeholders, including national and local authorities, civil society, women’s
organizations and the international community, to spare no effort in putting an end to
the epidemic. I commend the leadership of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the work of the World Health Organization, MONUSCO,
the United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator and all other partners.
I pay homage to the brave men and women on the front lines of the Ebola response,
whose remarkable work I was able to witness first hand during my recent visit to
Mangina in North Kivu. The United Nations remains fully committed to playing its
part in bringing the Ebola outbreak to an end. Beyond Ebola, we must not forget that
preventable diseases such as measles, cholera and malaria continue to claim lives and
must be addressed with equal urgency. I renew my call upon donors and partners to
provide the necessary resources to close the humanitarian funding gap, including at
the international conference on public health that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo intends to host in Goma this November.
82. Lastly, I wish to thank my Special Representative for her steadfast leadership
and dedication, and all MONUSCO personnel, the United Nations country team and
the troop- and police-contributing countries for their commitment to the stabilization
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also commend the efforts of the regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and non-governmental organizations
for their continued support for the Democratic Republi c of the Congo.

16/17

19-16130

19-16130

S/2019/776

17/17
