66

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

treaties contained in the report of the International
Law Commission covering the work of its fourteenth
session, 1
Desiring to give further consideration to this question,
1. Requests the International L,w Commission to
study further the question of extended participation
in general multilateral treaties concluded under the
auspices of the League of Nations, giving due consideration to the views expressed during the discussions
at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly,
and to include the results of the study in the report
of the Commission covering the work of its fifteenth
session;
2. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
eighteenth session an item entitled "Question of extended participation in general multilateral treaties
concluded under the auspices of the League of Nations".
1171st plenary meeting,
20 November 1962.
1813 (XVII). International conference of
plenipotentiaries on consular relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 1685 (XVI) of
18 December 1961 it decided to convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries at Vienna at the
beginning of March 1963 to consider the question of
consular relations, and referred to that conference
chapter II of the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its thirteenth session,2
together with the records of the relevant debates in
the General Assembly, as the basis for its consideration
of the question,
Having considered the item entitled "Consular relations" at its seventeenth session,
Having heard the further expressions of opinion and
exchanges of views on the draft articles on consular
relations prepared by the International Law Commission, 3
Considering that the work of the conference would
be facilitated if States which intended to participate
were to submit in advance of the conference amendments which they might wish to propose to the draft
articles prepared by the International Law Commission,
and that their action in so doing would be without
prejudice to their right to propose amendments in the
course of the conference,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the international conference of plenipotentiaries on consular relations the summary records and documentation
relating to the consideration of this item at the seventeenth session ;
2. Invites States which intend to participate in the
conference to submit to the Secretary-General as soon
as possible, and in any event not later than 10 February 1963, for circulation to Governments, any amendments which they may wish to propose in advance of
the conference to the draft articles prepared by the
International Law Commission.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
Si.-rteenth Session, Su.pplemcnt No. 9 (A/4843).
s Ibid., para. 37.
2 Ibid.,

1814 (XVII). Question of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1451 (XIV) of 7 December
1959 by which it decided that a United Nations juridical yearbook which would include documentary materials of a legal character relating to the United
Nations should be published,
Ha-i•ing re-examined the question at its seventeenth
session,
1. Decides that the United Nations Juridical Yearbook shall contain the documentary materials, concerning the United Nations and the inter-governmental
organizations in relationship with it, which are listed
in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the
publication of the Yearbook in the three working
languages of the General Assembly, and to publish
early in 1964 the first volume, which should include
materials relating to the year 1963 and should not
exceed 256 pages in length.
1196th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
ANNEX
OUTLINE OF THE UNITED NATIONS JURIDICAL YEARBOOK

Part I. Legal activities of the United Nations and the specialized agencies:'
(a) Documents concerning the status of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies ;
(b) Comprehensive index to, and where necessary the text
of, decisions, recommendations, discussions or reports of a
legal character by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies (judgements and advisory opinions of the International
Court of Justice and reports of the International Law Commission will only be indexed) ;
(c) Text of treaties concerning international law concluded
in the United Nations, the specialized agencies and international
conferences convened under the auspices of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies;
(d) Index with brief description of decisions of administrative tribunals of the United Xations and the specialized
agencies;
(e) Text of selected legal opinions of the Secretariat of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies.
Part II. Index with brief description of decisions of international a.nd national tribunals on questions relating to the
United Nations and the specialized agencies.
Part III. Bibliography of works and articles of a legal character relating to the United Nations and the speciali::ed
agencies.

1815 (XVII). Consideration of principles of inter•
national law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter records the determination
of the peoples of the United Nations to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as
good neighbours,
Convinced of the paramount importance of the
Charter in the progressive development of international law and in the promotion of the rule of law
among nations,
