A /73/PV.4

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

4th plenary meeting

Monday, 24 September 2018, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
High-level plenary meeting, to be known as the
Nelson Mandela Peace Summit
Agenda item 66
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/73/L.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): This highlevel plenary meeting is held in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 72/243 of 22 December
2017, and takes place under agenda item 66, entitled
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace”.
I warmly welcome everyone to this high-level
meeting, which will focus on global peace in honour of
the centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/73/L.1, entitled
“Political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela
Peace Summit”. Before proceeding further, I would
like to inform Members that action on the draft
political declaration will be taken at the end of this
opening meeting.
I would now like to make a statement.
It is an honour for me to be here today to celebrate
the centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela, one of the
greatest leaders of our time. He was a leader who taught
us that it is possible to forgive and for reconciliation
and peace to prevail over hate and vengeance. I would
like to acknowledge the presence at today’s meeting

of Dr. Helena Ndume of Namibia, who was one of the
first-ever laureates of the Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela
Prize, along with the former President of Portugal Jorge
Sampaio, who, regrettably, could not be here with us
today. Their efforts to provide inclusive access to health
and education are an inspiration and honour Nelson
Mandela’s legacy in today’s world.
Today the extraordinary legacy of Nelson Mandela
is stronger than ever, five years after his death. Mandela
was always guided by the founding principles of the
United Nations. He exemplified the values of peace,
solidarity, cooperation and respect for all human beings,
regardless of their colour, political views or religious
beliefs. Mandela himself once said,
“For to be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains,
but to live in a way that respects and enhances the
freedom of others”.
I had the privilege of meeting President Mandela in
Johannesburg in 2002 during the Rio+10 United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development. Madiba’s love
for South Africa shone in his eyes. His profound respect
for human dignity permeated his interaction with those
around him. Mandela refused to accept the injustices
of his time, and it is for that reason that his legacy
represents a beacon of hope for a world still ravaged by
conflict and suffering.
The threat of the proliferation of chemical and
biological weapons still looms large. Tensions between
nuclear-weapon States, territorial disputes, ethnic
divisions and the oppression of minorities persist. This
bleak outlook poses a serious threat to peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-29593 (E)

*1829593*

A/73/PV.4

24/09/2018

that we must tackle and resolve together. We are at a
point where certain principles and values enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations have been called into
question. The very principle of multilateralism is being
challenged. There are fears about our ability to take
collective action to address the world’s most pressing
issues, such as poverty and hunger, climate change,
conflict and war. A move away from multilateralism
would jeopardize the future of humankind and of our
planet. The world needs a social contract based on
shared responsibility, and the only forum we have for
achieving that global compact is the United Nations.
That is why this year I am calling for us to recommit
to its founding principles and to multilateralism. And
the General Assembly is the most representative and
legitimate forum we have for dialogue and reconciliation
aimed at building collective peace and security.

expression — the United Nations Organization — that
it will be possible to achieve the peace and security
to which we aspire in order to achieve development
and prosperity.

The draft political declaration (A/73/L.1) we
will adopt today, thanks to the commitment of States
and the wise leadership of South Africa and Ireland,
is a demonstration of the central role played by the
Assembly in achieving global agreements on peace and
security around the world.

I warmly
level meeting.

The Nelson Mandela peace declaration represents a
relaunching of our commitment to peace and a renewal
of States’ willingness to build a peaceful, prosperous,
inclusive and fair world. It calls on us to reflect on the
thousands of victims of conflicts in the world who need
immediate help from us, the States. The declaration
reaffirms our commitment to the sovereignty and
sovereign equality, territorial integrity and political
independence of States.
Respect for the sovereignty and self-determination
of peoples represents a starting point for maintaining
peace and harmony among nations. It is clear that we
can uphold and respect the self-determination and
sovereignty of our countries while also committing
to collective and coordinated action to build more
peaceful, sustainable and resilient societies. As Madiba
knew, there can be no peace if there are still millions
of people without access to quality education, health
care or decent work, and if there is still hunger and
suffering. But that requires strong global leadership,
which is so well represented in this Hall this morning.
It is an honour for me to preside over the General
Assembly as we adopt a declaration that will undoubtedly
give hope to the world and that further reaffirms that
it is only through multilateralism and its clearest
2/10

There are many challenges we face in achieving
peace, and we must ask ourselves how we are going to
address them. Whether we do it together, or alone and
divided, the answer is entirely up to us. Personally, I
believe that we should always choose to walk together
on the path of peace. There is no other option. In
Mandela’s words, “It always seems impossible until it
is done.” As a Latin American poet said, “Some people
transcend death.” Madiba’s gentle, profound gaze and
serene strength, which transformed violence into peace
and aggression into forgiveness, are more alive today
than ever.
welcome

everyone

to

this

high-

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: Nelson Mandela was one
of humankind’s great leaders. He embodied the highest
values of the United Nations. He devoted his life to
serving his community — as a lawyer, a prisoner of
conscience, a peacemaker, a president and a respected
elder. He cherished the ideal of a democratic and free
society in which all people live together in equality and
harmony. That was a bedrock cause for which he was
prepared to fight and die. He faced his oppressors in
court, knowing they had the power of life and death,
and he refused to back down. As a political prisoner,
he steadfastly refused to allow his dignity to be
undermined, and he became a rallying point for a global
movement that led to the dismantling of the apartheid
regime. The role played by the United Nations is a
milestone in our proud history.
As President of South Africa, Madiba championed
women’s rights and South Africa’s landmark 1996
Constitution, which remains a beacon for human rights
and equal opportunity. Under his leadership, South
Africa expanded access to health care, education,
housing, water, sanitation and electricity. Beyond South
Africa’s borders, Madiba was a profound influence for
peace and democracy. In Burundi, for example, he
played a key role in brokering the Arusha Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation, and everywhere he was a
champion for peace, forgiveness, humility, compassion,
dignity and human rights.
18-29593

24/09/2018

This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Almost
exactly 20 years ago, Nelson Mandela spoke about
that landmark document in this Hall (see A/53/PV.7).
He urged all leaders to have the courage to ensure that
eventually we can build a human world consistent with
the provisions of that historic Declaration. Those were
the words of Nelson Mandela. Today, with human rights
under growing pressure around the world, we would
be well served by reflecting on the example of this
outstanding man. We must face the forces that threaten
us with the wisdom, courage and fortitude that Nelson
Mandela embodied. That is the only way to build
the just, peaceful and prosperous world envisioned
in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Madiba was a global citizen whose legacy must
continue to guide us. To honour that legacy, the
Government of South Africa has generously donated
a statue of Madiba that I was honoured to unveil this
morning. In 2015, the United Nations also decided to
award the Nelson Mandela Prize every five years to two
individuals who have made significant contributions
to the service of humankind. The first recipients were
Namibian philanthropic eye surgeon Helena Ndume
and my good friend Jorge Sampaio, former President
of Portugal. Each year, we also observe Nelson
Mandela International Day by promoting and engaging
in community service. Today we remember a man of
great wisdom, quiet dignity and towering achievement
who worked tirelessly for peace and human dignity for
people everywhere. That is our Organization’s purpose
and, as leaders, it is our responsibility. Let us commit to
building on Nelson Mandela’s legacy so that all people
everywhere can enjoy peace, prosperity and inclusive
and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
72/243, I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.
Mr. Mahamat (African Union) (spoke in French):
The life, struggle, work and symbolic significance of
Nelson Mandela go beyond our imaginings. His life
was one of unparalleled riches and will remain the
embodiment of fulfilled abundance. Words will never

A/73/PV.4

be adequate to describe him. As we all know, he shone
his light in this Hall and in every corner of our planet
where the thirst for peace, freedom and equality drained
people’s spirits and haunted humankind.
In January 2014, in remembrance of all that and
many other things, the Summit of Heads of State of the
African Union decided to declare 2014-2024 the Nelson
Mandela Decade in Africa. In that regard, in January 2018
the thirtieth Summit of Heads of State and Government
agreed to commemorate the centenary of the birth of
Nelson Mandela this year. Subsequently, the July 2018
Summit supported holding the Nelson Mandela Peace
Summit on the margins of the current session of the
General Assembly. In the same spirit, on 22 December
2017, the General Assembly decided to convene a highlevel plenary meeting on peace to commemorate the
centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela.
The United Nations and the African Union have once
again come together with enthusiasm to commemorate
and honour the centenary of the birth of a giant of the
modern history of Africa and the world, who matured
through suffering, hardship and adversity and who
dedicated his wisdom, his courage, his intelligence, his
thought, his ethics, his humanism and all his faith to the
freedom and dignity of humankind in all their nobility
and morality, not only for the black man but for man
and his place in relation to history and for history in
relation to man.
Today we are commemorating the centenary of his
birth. While we mourn his physical loss, we are also
proud to have had him as a supreme symbol of the
African man and an inexhaustible source of inspiration
for all generations. The true hallmarks of Madiba are
not only his tenacity, courage and determination, or his
ability to transcend human fragilities as he described
them — egotism, vengefulness and the inability to
forgive — but above all his dedication and commitment
to humanism and the universal. He has gone down
in history, he made history and he has made African
history everlasting. At a time when multilateralism is
suffering attacks from all sides, through selfishness,
intolerance, withdrawal and rejection of those different
from us, the commemoration of Madiba’s centenary
resounds in our lives as an intense call for freedom,
solidarity and peace among humankind.
What would he have said today in the light of all
the challenges and anxieties we are facing? He would
certainly have told us not to yield to fatalism or to

18-295933/10

A/73/PV.4

abandon our struggle for life. He would certainly not
have told us to resolve our conflicts with fire and the
sword, nor with hatred, exclusion, repression or the
oppression of others. On the contrary, he would have
urged us to redouble our efforts to dare to fight and
to win.
At this emotionally charged moment in this highlevel meeting of the world’s decision-makers, I would
like to voice the full commitment of the African
Union and Africa to the universal values that Madiba
embodied, which are his legacy and for which he
gave the best of himself for eternity. Our tribute to an
immortal icon also sends a vivid message of our esteem
and respect for all the fighters for freedom everywhere
in the world. In that regard, we are pleased to see that
the heirs of that great man in the rainbow nation that
he brought forth, South Africa — and beyond it, in
the rest of Africa and throughout the world — remain
passionately committed to his universal message and
more determined than ever to carry on his legacy. May
the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit represent a decisive
step in establishing genuine peace in the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish) I thank
Mr. Mahamat for his statement.
In accordance with decision 72/564 B, of
13 September 2018, I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, President
of the Republic of South Africa.
President Ramaphosa: On behalf of the Mandela
family and the people of South Africa, allow me
to express our humble appreciation to the United
Nations for convening this special Summit in honour
of the founding President of our democracy, Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela.
In 1994, during his inaugural address to the General
Assembly, President Mandela said,
“The great challenge of our age to the United
Nations is to answer the question ‘Given the
interdependence of the nations of the world, what is
it that we can and must do to ensure that democracy,
peace and prosperity prevail everywhere?’” (A/49/
PV.14, pp.8-9)
The signing of the Charter of the United Nations
took place more than 70 years ago, in a world different
from ours today. It was a world still reeling from the
clash of great Powers in the Second World War that cost
the lives of close to 5 per cent of the world’s population
4/10

24/09/2018

at the time. It was from that collective trauma that the
United Nations was born. Countries sought to reimagine
a world where nations would cooperate rather than
clash, and where friendly relations would lead to social
progress, peace and development and a better life for
all. For those noble ideas to be realized, however, they
needed to find expression in the actions of those taking
up the mantle of leadership at the most trying of times.
One such leader was born in the small village of
Mvezo, in the eastern part of South Africa, in 1918.
He would come to represent the hopes of millions of
South Africans who dreamed of a life unshackled from
a system that limited their potential and stifled their
possibilities based merely on the colour of their skin.
The story of South Africa’s transition from apartheid
to democracy, and the role played in it by Nelson
Mandela, is well known. It is a story of humankind’s
great capacity for goodness, peace and hope. It was
also that capacity that led to the establishment of the
United Nations, which served as an important platform
for the anti-apartheid movement and which continues
to be a platform for other struggles against oppression,
war and global injustice. Since the formation of the
United Nations, the world has faced many crises that
have tested the limits of diplomacy and the multilateral
system. Throughout those crises, the United Nations
has endured as a force for stability, cooperation and the
peaceful resolution of conflict.
While much has been done to ensure that the
world will never go to war against itself again, the
Organization has nonetheless continued to face more
intricate and complex challenges. Over the past seven
decades, millions of people worldwide have been
killed, some maimed and others displaced, and many
have starved as a result of war and conflicts. Women
and children continue to bear a disproportionate
burden of those troubles. While we have managed to
avoid another world war, we have continued to grapple
with the haunting spectre of modern atrocities such
as the genocides in Rwanda and Srebrenica. We are
confronting intra-State armed conflicts in Syria, South
Sudan and Yemen, protracted turmoil in a number of
parts of Africa and struggles for self-determination
in Western Sahara and Palestine. They show that the
current threats to international peace and security
are more the result of conflicts within States and the
effects that they have across nations that have become
increasingly interdependent, rather than of traditional
conflicts between States.
18-29593

24/09/2018

Terrorism, transnational organized crime, illicit
flows of finance and growing numbers of refugees pose
significant threats to global order and peace. No longer
can we ignore the troubles of those in distant parts of the
world, or fail to address the root causes of conflicts that
we often imagine are foreign to us. To respond to those
threats, we need a United Nations that is responsive,
adaptable and also able to deal with challenges that its
founders could not have imagined. It should not rely
merely on the political interests of a few, as an impasse
between the major Powers often impedes the entire
Organization’s ability to act. Instead, we should draw
on the strength of the collective in resolving complex
challenges. The United Nations can succeed only to
the degree that we, as global leaders, provide visionary
leadership that transcends our ideological differences
and narrow national interests.
Through this Peace Summit, the current generation
of global leadership has been given a wonderful
opportunity not only to reflect on peace in the world,
but also to take the measures necessary to end the
wars that continue to take millions of innocent lives.
We are called on to act decisively to end the exposure
of women and children to untold suffering, including
displacement, torture, rape, mutilation and murder.
We are called on to ensure that women are afforded a
special role in peace negotiations, political transitions
and in ensuring durable security for all. We must
be unanimous in our support for the work of the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UNWomen in ensuring that women take centre stage on
issues of peace and security and provide leadership in
peace operations. We welcome efforts to achieve the
equal representation of women in leadership positions
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
In our search for peace, we dare not ignore the
continued existence of weapons of mass destruction,
whose capacity for human devastation is too dreadful
to contemplate. Twenty years ago almost to the day,
President Mandela addressed the General Assembly for
the last time. He said,
“We must ask the question, which might sound
naive to those who have elaborated sophisticated
arguments to justify their refusal to eliminate
these terrible and terrifying weapons of mass
destruction — why do they need them, anyway?”
(A/53/PV.7, p.14)

A/73/PV.4

To this day, his question has been met with no satisfactory
answer. The truth is that there can be no justification
for the existence of weapons that carry with them the
potential to extinguish life on this planet. We therefore
applaud the adoption by the General Assembly last
year of the groundbreaking Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons. South Africa will soon deposit its
instrument of ratification of that historic Treaty. We
call on all peace-loving States to ratify the Treaty so
that it comes into force without any delay.
As we strive for peace, we cannot escape the reality
that conflict and hostility have their roots in poverty,
exclusion and marginalization. Unless we confront
the conditions under which the poor of the world live,
we will not succeed in building a peaceful and stable
world. It is for that reason that the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is also very much an agenda
for peace. The Sustainable Development Goals entail a
set of interdependent objectives whose fulfilment would
be the ultimate act of conflict prevention. We must
ensure that the United Nations — in its form, operation
and orientation — is able to maintain international
peace and security, protect human rights and achieve
sustainable development for all.
Today we are gathered as world leaders, representing
the hopes of billions for a peaceful, prosperous world.
It was the desire for such a world that prompted this
Peace Summit, with a view to taking stock of how the
United Nations has performed in the pursuit of peace.
It provides a moment for us as Heads of State and
Government to recommit to achieving the social and
economic development necessary for the prevention of
conflict. It is an opportunity to pledge to one another
and to our peoples our determination to seek peaceful
solutions to our political differences and to build peace
in those countries emerging from the destruction of
war, violence and the perpetuation of hate. It is our
deepest hope that this Summit, in the name of one of
our greatest exemplars of humankind, Nelson Mandela,
can serve as a new dawn for the United Nations.
We hope the Summit will give expression to the
Secretary-General’s call for a surge in diplomacy. We
hope we will rediscover the strength of will to save
successive generations from war and to overcome the
hatred of our past and the narrow interests that blind us
to the vision of a common future that is peaceful and
prosperous. We hope we will prove ourselves worthy as
the bearers of the legacy of Nelson Mandela.

18-295935/10

A/73/PV.4

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
President of South Africa for his statement.
In accordance with decision 72/564 B, I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Leo Varadkar, Taoiseach
and Minister of Defence of Ireland.
Mr. Varadkar (Ireland): It is my great honour
to join the General Assembly today as we adopt the
draft Nelson Mandela political declaration (A/73/L.1).
It reminds us that Mandela’s is a living legacy,
entrusted to us so we can be torchbearers for peace and
reconciliation for this and future generations.
Side by side with our great friends from South
Africa, Ireland was privileged to co-facilitate the work
that has led to today’s Political Declaration. Together
with everyone here today, I reaffirm that Ireland will
continue to uphold the ideals and values of the United
Nations and work with the international community to
achieve the aims that Mandela himself worked for so
tirelessly during his lifetime. In Mandela’s story we
recognize the struggles and triumphs of one individual
and the challenges and hope for humankind. His fight
for freedom and dignity for all — irrespective of race,
gender, sexual orientation, colour or creed — spoke
to our vision of a common humanity and proved
that the seemingly impossible can indeed become
a reality. It was reflected in South Africa’s first
democratic Constitution, which is a template for new
democracies today.
This year in Ireland we mark 20 years of the
Good Friday Agreement, which after decades of bitter
violence brought peace to Britain and Ireland, closer
cooperation between north and south and powersharing in Northern Ireland — at least most of the time.
The Northern Ireland peace process was advanced with
the wisdom and assistance of friends from around the
world, including President Ramaphosa, and for that we
will always be grateful. We have witnessed firsthand
the profound truths that Nelson Mandela showed
through his wisdom and through his actions: that violent
conflict is not inevitable and can be ended; that peace is
made not with one’s friends but with one’s enemies; that
reconciliation is achieved by moving beyond the hurt
and pain of the past towards truth and forgiveness and,
perhaps most profoundly of all, that through justice and
forgiveness we can free the prisoner and free the jailer
as well.
Twenty-eight years ago, just months after he was
released from prison, on an occasion etched in my
6/10

24/09/2018

memory as a young boy who watched it on television,
Nelson Mandela was accorded the special honour of
being invited to speak to the Irish Parliament. There
he inspired us all with his words as he attacked the
arrogance of racism and honoured those who dared to
cry freedom. In our native Irish language, we say of
truly remarkable individuals: Ni bheidh a leithéid ann
arís, which means “We will never see his like again”. I
can think of no better way to describe the uniqueness of
Mandela. I believe that his legacy is truly international
and points to a deeper truth. A voice may be silenced
by death, but its message can never be suppressed. It
is heard for all time and rings through the ages, and it
finds a home in the hearts, minds and values of those
who follow after.
Inspired by the message of Nelson Mandela again,
we in this Hall should provide a voice for the oppressed
around the world and find shared solutions guided by
shared values, such as our belief in and commitment to
multilateralism, to the freedom of the individual, free
enterprise, human rights, democracy and the protection
of our planet. We should look to this declaration as
we face the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Recognizing all that is being done in the area of gender
discrimination, we must renew our efforts to further
advance gender equality around the world, and we must
give young people a greater say in the decisions that
will affect them and the future of our planet.
War and hatred come in many guises, but peace has
the same face the world over. It is the image of those
who open their hearts and minds to make the impossible
possible and build a future worth living for.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Varadkar for his statement.
In accordance with resolution 72/243, I now give the
floor to Ms. Graça Machel, co-founder of The Elders.
Ms. Machel (The Elders): It is my singular honour
to address this collective home of the human family.
I would like to thank President Espinosa Garcés and
Secretary-General Guterres for calling this special
meeting to celebrate Nelson Mandela’s life and his
legacy of peacemaking. I thank the General Assembly
for this privilege. I stand here not as a diplomat, but as
a human rights advocate and concerned citizen of the
world, so forgive me in advance for the unrestrained
manner in which I will share my frank thoughts with
the Assembly today.
18-29593

24/09/2018

Today’s celebration of the legacy of Nelson
Mandela, or Madiba, as he was affectionately known,
provides an appropriate opportunity to reflect on the
very raison d’être of the United Nations. In October
1945, the founding members of the United Nations
made this pledge, first and foremost, in the Preamble to
the Charter of the United Nations:
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind, and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small”.
It strikes me with gratifying humility that, at this
moment of reflection, we associate Nelson Mandela
as a reference point to help guide us in fulfilling that
supreme mandate. Indeed, Madiba’s legacy as a freedom
fighter, peacemaker and statesman speaks to the core
of our greatest aspirations for the United Nations
and for humankind. The purpose of this celebration
of Madiba’s life and his contributions to the world
is twofold — to take inspiration from the values he
embodies and to emulate his unwavering commitment
to freedom, equality, justice and dignity for all.
Let me pause here and bring to mind the legacy
of Kofi Annan, my dear brother and fellow Elder,
who also embodied the values that the United Nations
holds dear. His moral fortitude and commitment to
justice should also serve as an inspiration to shape the
international community into a more stable, peaceful
and equitable one.
The United Nations finds itself at a moment when it
would be well served by revisiting and reconnecting to
the vision of its founders, as well as by taking direction
from Madiba’s servant leadership and courage. His
example of servant leadership reminds us that no
sacrifice is too great to ensure the respect and protection
of one’s people. He deeply believed that there is nothing
more sacred than safeguarding the rights of all human
beings — not the preservation of ego, not partisan
politics and not geopolitical considerations.
An expert in brinkmanship and a keen strategist,
Madiba spent nearly three decades of his life as a
political prisoner, and many years thereafter negotiating
the complexities of peacemaking and nation-building.
We seek inspiration from his successful approach.
While staying true to his ultimate goal of freedom and

A/73/PV.4

social justice, he took the interests of his adversaries
into consideration. He silenced his ego and took risks.
He gave value to the principle of give-and-take and
negotiated in good faith.
The United Nations was shaped by our collective
desire to prevent conflict and ensure that never again
would war engulf nations the world over. Yet more than
70 years later, today’s newsreels are full of conflictridden headlines, signalling significant discord within
our international community. Global security has
deteriorated markedly over recent decades. The number
of armed conflicts has increased, and the protracted
conflicts that have been ravaging our global family
for decades are particularly worrisome to me. Our
collective consciousness must reject the lethargy that
has accustomed us to death and violence as if wars were
legitimate and somehow impossible to terminate. There
is no justification for the loss of life and suffering in
places such as Syria, Yemen, Palestine, Somalia, South
Sudan, the Central African Republic and Myanmar, to
mention just a few. That has been going on far too long.
Thousands of our children, just like our own
sons and daughters, have been robbed of the joys of
childhood. Thousands of women, no different from our
own sisters and mothers, have been brutalized by rape as
a weapon of war. Thousands of our brothers and sisters
have been needlessly maimed or killed. Thousands of
families similar to our own have been ripped apart and
left destitute. It is time to say “enough is enough”.
I appeal to the members of the General Assembly
not to let this be just another summit of statements.
Bold, unprecedented action must follow. As for me,
the meaning of celebrating Madiba is to work to end
this senseless violence as a matter of priority and
urgency. I encourage the Assembly to interrogate and
dismantle what is fuelling these conflicts — egodriven decision-makers, rigid political dogmas, greedy
acquisition of resources and the massive arms industry,
to name just a few. It is time for every leader here to
take responsibility — those who are directly involved in
the atrocities plaguing our world, those who take sides
and those who sit in silence. As the leaders of our time,
they have a moral imperative, and the ability, to bring
to an end the death and destruction we witness on a
daily basis. Colombia has proved it can be done. Others
can follow that example. History will judge those here
should they stagnate too long in inaction. Humankind
will hold them accountable should they allow suffering
to continue on our watch.

18-295937/10

A/73/PV.4

I am speaking as a woman who has experienced
first-hand the pain and misery of war. In 1996, on behalf
of then-Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, I
published a report (see A/51/306) on the devastating
impact of armed conflict on children. My colleagues
and I embarked on two years of research that took us
to conflict settings in every corner of the globe. I was
just a mother then, horrified by stories of frightened
children and grief-stricken mothers in refugee and
displaced-person camps. Today I am a grandmother,
still haunted by their eyes and still sitting with a heavy
heart, knowing that the fate of children in conflict
settings has gotten worse. The voice of a Palestinian
child still whispers to me, asking “When is this is going
to end?” And I know that that boy, now a young person,
is still in a Palestinian refugee camp.
We cannot rest until we right these wrongs. And
to do so we must work more collaboratively with
those beyond this Hall. We therefore actively support
Secretary-General António Guterres in putting peace at
the top of his agenda. Peacemaking requires more than
a political response; it also requires the muscle of the
private sector, civil-society organizations and citizens
at the grass roots as well. For example, 25 years ago,
the African institution ACCORD was established to
contribute to resolving Africa’s conflicts so as to create
the conditions necessary for human security, economic
prosperity and social cohesion. Today, after working on
almost all of Africa’s protracted conflicts, we know that
working for peace alone will not deliver those goals.
Peace, together with governance and development, is
the only approach that can ensure stability. In July of
this year, therefore, President Cyril Ramaphosa of South
Africa and ACCORD launched a new initiative, Global
Peace, to take ACCORD’s experience from Africa and
the global South and extend our solidarity across the
world. Global Peace will make a modest contribution
to transforming how nations drive development and
stability. It will promote an ecosystem of innovators,
influencers, investors and the implementers to generate
innovative solutions to the challenges of our time.
This civil-society initiative will complement the
efforts of Governments and multilateral agencies and
strengthen multilateralism.
When Madiba founded The Elders in 2007, he gave
us a specific mandate:
“To support courage where there is fear; to force
agreement where there is conflict; and to inspire
hope where there is despair”.
8/10

24/09/2018

We Elders spent the past year leading up to Madiba’s
hundredth birthday identifying and showcasing 100
inspirational civil-society organizations of all sizes
and from every part of the world. Each of those 100
organizations represents one of 100 ideas for a freer,
fairer world. They work with a commitment to finding
what unites their communities, and through collective
efforts they are achieving peace, justice, health and
equality in their communities. On behalf of The Elders,
I have the honour to present to the General Assembly
an inspiring publication featuring these “Sparks of
Hope”, which I will hand to President Espinosa Garcés
and Secretary-General Guterres when I conclude
my remarks. This compendium highlights the moral
courage and leadership of change agents across the
world, and I hope members will take inspiration from
their work to accelerate social transformation.
In conclusion, I challenge the Assembly with
Madiba’s words: “It is in your hands to make a better
world for all who live in it”. It is therefore incumbent
on us to live up to the cherished Charter of the United
Nations, which asks us to
“save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war and untold sorrow to mankind and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights and the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small”.
And I quote Madiba again: “It is in your hands”.
The President: I thank Ms. Machel for her
statement and for the 100 “Sparks of Hope”.
(spoke in Spanish)
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
72/243, I now give the floor to Mr. Kumi Naidoo,
Secretary General of Amnesty International.
Mr. Naidoo (Amnesty International): We welcome
the broad sentiments in the draft political declaration
that Governments have agreed on for the Mandela
Peace Summit. But the truth is that we have heard
them before. These are the words that get repeated
time and time again without the political will, urgency,
determination or courage needed to make them a reality
and to make them really count. But we must make them
count — not tomorrow, but right now, because we are
facing multiple crises around the world with people
suffering on an unimaginable scale. Without action,
without strong and principal leadership, I fear for them
and for all of us.
18-29593

24/09/2018

Let us remember that Madiba spent the vast
majority of his life as a civil-society activist. Yet
as we gather here to honour him today, thousands of
activists and human rights defenders around the world
are imprisoned or have been tortured or killed. They
include trade unionists, people from non-governmental
organizations, social movements and religious
communities, journalists and those from the field of the
arts and culture. In far too many countries, the civic
space has been shut down and people deprived of their
right to participate actively and freely in public life.
The Preamble to the founding Charter of the United
Nations opens with the words “We the peoples”, not “we
Member States”. That is why we, the people, should
never allow ourselves to accept injustice. As Martin
Luther King once said,
“I never intend to adjust myself to racial segregation
and discrimination. I never intend to adjust myself
to religious bigotry. I never intend to adjust myself
to economic conditions that will take necessities
from the many to give luxuries to the few when
millions of God’s children are smothering in an
airtight cage of poverty in affluent societies.”
I appeal to the General Assembly today, with the
spirit of Madiba surrounding us all, not to adjust to
the inhumane way that we have been treating millions
of refugees around the world, not to adjust to the
Rohingya population living in an open-air prison under
a system of apartheid, not to adjust to the Palestinians
in Gaza living under a relentless military blockade that
keeps them in poverty and misery, not to adjust to the
centuries-old subjugation of indigenous peoples, not to
adjust to leaders who espouse xenophobic and fascist
narratives or demean or undermine women.
Neither should we adjust to the bloodbaths we
have seen in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Afghanistan, South
Sudan and elsewhere, especially when most of the
people shedding the blood are civilians and a large
proportion of them are women and children. We
should not adjust to the systematic exclusion of people
living with disabilities or to the continuing struggle
and marginalization of children and young people
everywhere, for humankind must not judge itself by
the progress of the most powerful but by the welfare
of the most vulnerable. Indeed, we must take care not
only of the present generation but those of the future as
well. We should not adjust to the dismal failure of the
powerful to protect civilians in conflicts. In particular,

A/73/PV.4

we must not adjust to the deadlock that continues to
haunt the Security Council, whose five permanent
members too often use their powers not to prevent
and stop suffering, but to shield themselves and others
committing the worst crimes.
We should not adjust to the disgraceful levels
of impunity we see, and we should insist on full
accountability for gross violations of human rights
and crimes against humanity. On this, the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute, which gave birth to the International Criminal
Court, we urge a renewed respect for the painstakingly
developed conventions and norms of the United Nations.
We call on nations that have not yet done so to join
the International Criminal Court, particularly three
permanent members of the Security Council — the
United States, China and Russia.
We should not adjust to the continued inaction on
averting catastrophic climate change while thousands
are regularly devastated by extreme weather events from
the Philippines to Puerto Rico, where we saw more than
3,000 lives lost, making it the biggest natural disaster
in United States history. Neither, for that matter, should
we adjust to the imminent reality facing small island
States, whose very existence is under threat. To the one
leader who still denies climate change, we insist that he
start putting himself on the right side of history.
To my brothers and sisters I say, the time for bold
and courageous action is now. I know what my fellow
activists and advocates are facing, but I implore them
not to give up. Let the words of Madiba inspire and
guide us: “The brave man is not he who does not feel
afraid, but he who conquers that fear”. And to all our
political leaders, I want to say that we honour Madiba
by picking up the mantle, honestly and with integrity,
of all the struggles he waged. The draft political
declaration (A/73/L.1) to be adopted here today is an
opportunity for renewed commitment in these troubled
times. I say, let us think of the most powerless people in
the world, those who will live or die as a consequence
of our choices — and let us not disappoint them.
The President: I thank Mr. Naidoo for his statement.
(spoke in Spanish)
We have heard the last speaker for the opening
meeting of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit.

18-295939/10

A/73/PV.4

The Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/73/L.1, entitled “Political declaration adopted at the
Nelson Mandela Peace Summit”. In the light of the
time constraints and in order to ensure the expeditious
conduct of proceedings, delegations wishing to make
explanations of position are kindly encouraged to do
so in their statements to be delivered in the debate and/
or to submit them for circulation as official documents.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.1, entitled “Political declaration
adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit”. May
I take it that the assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/73/L.1?

10/10

24/09/2018

Draft resolution A/73/L.1 was adopted (resolution
73/1).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to His Excellency Mr. Jerry
Matjila, Permanent Representative of South Africa to
the United Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Geraldine
Byrne Nason, Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations, who ably and patiently conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations in the
informal consultations on the resolution 73/1. I am sure
the members of the Assembly join me in expressing our
sincere appreciation to them.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

18-29593
