A /73/PV.26

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

26

th plenary meeting
Friday, 26 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Bahr Aluloom
(Iraq), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 30
Space as a driver of sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/73/L.6)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.6.
Ms. Ramírez de Arellano y Haro (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): It is an honour for me to address the General
Assembly on behalf of my country, Mexico, which this
year has the honour of chairing the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS).
This year, as part of the Committee’s sixty-first
session, we celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the
first United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, known as
UNISPACE+50. Its high-level segment, open to all
Member States, was attended by 93 States, a number
of United Nations entities and specialized agencies
and a wide range of international intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations in the space field.
As evidenced by its successful anniversary in June,
UNISPACE+50 promoted discussions on developing
new directions for the global governance of outer-space
activities and strengthening the capacities of all States,
the Committee itself and the United Nations Office

for Outer Space Affairs to respond to new realities,
challenges and opportunities in the area of space.
Space-based tools are fundamental to meeting
the targets and indicators of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. The space community must
work collectively towards them for the benefit of all,
particularly developing countries. I should not fail to
mention that in addition to those Goals, we also have
before us the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
to mention various landmarks related to space activities
and their impact on all of us who inhabit the Earth and
the solar system.
The States that took part in the high-level
segment adopted the draft resolution, entitled “Fiftieth
anniversary of the first United Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space: space as a driver of sustainable development”
(A/73/L.6), and recommended it for consideration by
the Assembly, under item 30 of its agenda. The work
ahead is to establish a Space2030 agenda, which will be
crucial to the achievement of the goals outlined in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Through the pillars of space economics, space
society, space accessibility and space diplomacy, we
embark today on a COPUOS process as a single platform
to discuss issues related to all space activities and to
integrate a global agenda for greater space awareness
with a view to meeting the challenges facing humankind
and society’s growth. I thank those countries that have

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-34313 (E)

*1834313*

A/73/PV.26

joined in sponsoring the draft resolution, and the
General Assembly for its support.
Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the great honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Paraguay,
which welcomes the progress made in presenting a
comprehensive, inclusive and strategically oriented
vision on strengthening international cooperation in
the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, as well as Mexico’s initiative in submitting
draft resolution A/73/L.6, on which we will vote today.
Paraguay subscribes to the principle of exploring
and using outer space for peaceful purposes for the
benefit of all humankind, especially for attaining
sustainable development, while leaving no one behind,
and so as to achieve disaster risk reduction and address
the consequences of climate change. We refrain from
the use or threat of use of force in our international
relations, strive to prevent an arms race in outer space
and stress the need to ensure international liability
for damage caused by space activities and to continue
working on the design of an appropriate legal regime
in that regard. In that belief, Paraguay has applied for
membership in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space (COPUOS).
For space to be a driver and a decisive element in
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
as discussed at the 2018 session of COPUOS and in its
Scientific and Technical and Legal Subcommittees, it is
essential to strengthen coordination and support at all
international levels, including through improved access
to space data, applications and infrastructure. We
urge all Member State delegations to work together to
seize and strengthen the opportunities of international
cooperation offered by the exploration of outer space,
as well as the development and application of space
science and technology.
All countries, regardless of their level of economic
or scientific development, should participate in,
contribute to and benefit from the exploration and use
of outer space for peaceful purposes. In this regard, we
stress the importance of taking special account of the
needs of developing countries, particularly in building
their capabilities to explore and use outer space for
peaceful purposes without discrimination, on an equal
footing and in accordance with international law. We
emphasize the importance of fostering international
cooperation to that end.
2/8

26/10/2018

In that spirit, the Government of Paraguay, which
recently ratified the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, thereby contributing to its universalization,
has also created a space agency, made up of public and
private institutions, with the objective of promoting
and implementing policies for developing national
space activities and taking advantage of outer space
through its peaceful use. The space agency, which has
been operating since 2017, is currently developing its
space policy and national space-activities programme
and has promoted initiatives to cooperate with similar
institutions in other States, most recently Mexico and
Argentina.
Finally, in our firm belief in the importance of
the work of the United Nations Office for Outer Space
Affairs in the creation of national capacities and its
relevance as a platform for cooperation among States,
the delegation of Paraguay supports providing it with
appropriate and sufficient resources for assisting States
with capacity-building activities in space science
and technology and their applications and in the
development of space legislation and policy.
Ms. AlZaabi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I want to welcome the
Assembly’s adoption today of draft resolution
A/73/L.6, entitled “Fiftieth anniversary of the first
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: Space as a driver of
sustainable development”. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the organization of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE+50), which was an important opportunity
to review more than 50 years of exploring and using
outer space, in addition to defining the future role of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(COPUOS) in terms of the global governance of
outer space.
The United Arab Emirates played an active role
in making the UNISPACE+50 Conference successful,
based on our belief in the importance of achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. We recognize
that outer space has an important role to play. That
is why in 2016 and 2017 we hosted two of the three
preparatory forums for UNISPACE+50, held under the
topic “Outer space as a driver for economic and social
sustainable development”. That led to the adoption of
18-34313

26/10/2018

the Dubai Declaration, which includes many important
recommendations to be adopted within the United
Nations Space2030 agenda. In addition to participating
in the discussion sessions of the Conference, the United
Arab Emirates helped to organize the UNISPACE+50
exhibition, as well as an event on the United Arab
Emirates and UNISPACE+50.
The United Arab Emirates is working to establish
a robust and sustainable outer-space sector that
can contribute to regional and international efforts
promoting space exploration. That will help develop
advanced technologies that could have a positive impact
on people’s lives and contribute to the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Outer space is a major area of investment for our
State with a view to achieving a promising future for
generations to come. We have developed plans and
policies for outer space that extend as far as 100 years
from now. The most prominent of them is our 2117 Mars
programme, which includes building the first human
city on Mars by 2117.
Given the important role that young people play
in shaping and preparing for the future, with its
opportunities and challenges in the outer-space sector,
the United Arab Emirates has developed a strategy
training young nationals in this area with a view to
becoming active and essential partners in leading efforts
at the local, regional and international levels to explore
space and use it in peaceful ways. In that context, my
country has created a council for an outer-space agency
for young people of the United Arab Emirates that aims
to encourage the efforts of distinguished young people
from the agency and provides them with a platform
where they can exchange ideas and aspirations on
outer space, enabling them to come up with innovative
concepts and get help in implementing them. As part
of our astronaut programme, two young Emiratis were
recently chosen to be the first Arabs to participate in
the activities of the international space station with a
view to carrying out space exploration projects.
In order to implement our plans for training a new
Emirati generation capable of carrying out ambitious
space projects over the next decade, a large group of
elite young Emirati engineers, both men and women,
have designed and executed the KhalifaSat project,
the first satellite made in the United Arab Emirates
for monitoring purposes. Alia Al-Mansouri, a female
Emirati student, conducted a scientific space experiment

A/73/PV.26

that won first place in a contest in Abu Dhabi on the
theme “Genes in space”, and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration will be launching a Falcon 9
rocket carrying Al-Mansouri’s experiment, which will
undoubtedly motivate her fellow students to develop
more such experiments.
The year 2020 will be a unique one for young
Emiratis engaged in the space sector, as my country
will be hosting the International Conference on Space
Navigation in Dubai. We will be the first Islamic-Arab
State to host that conference, which was first held in
1950. That year we will also launch the first Islamic-Arab
probe to Mars, making us one of nine States seeking to
explore that planet. The Hope probe will help to acquire
scientific knowledge, create space applications and find
highly competent human resources in the Emirates.
By 2020, more than 150 Emirati engineers, men and
women, will be contributing to the project.
In conclusion, as a representative of the young
people of the United Arab Emirates, I want to assure
the Assembly that we will continue to work diligently
to create a better and more promising future for
succeeding generations, and in every sector, not just
outer space. In that regard, we call on the international
community to step up its efforts to empower and invest
in young people. Young people have great potential and
unlimited capabilities that can build prosperous, stable
societies if used constructively.
Ms. Mozolina (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation supports the
Assembly’s adoption today of draft resolution A/73/L.6,
entitled “Fiftieth anniversary of the first United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space: space as a driver of sustainable
development”.
The preparatory process for the conference
celebrating 50 years since the first United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (UNISPACE+50) was enriching and
important both for understanding the areas of activity
of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space on which States have achieved
a mutual understanding and those on which there are
differences of position. In particular, some States
opposed strengthening the draft resolution’s provisions
on developing international regulations for outer-space
activities based on their belief in the importance of
developing exclusively national regulatory systems.

18-343133/8

A/73/PV.26

While we believe that national regulation should
certainly be developed, it must be done so that it does
not conflict with international norms and rules. Besides
that, significant differences of opinion were expressed
about the introduction into the political lexicon a few
years ago of the term “global governance of outerspace activities”. We think it would be a good idea for
the term to be clarified within the framework of the
Committee. We hope that States’ efforts to implement
the draft resolution will contribute to the development
of international cooperation on the exploration of
outer space and ultimately to the achievement of
the sustainable development agenda. However, it is
important to strive to consistently address the issue of
the safety of outer-space activities and security in space
in general.
Among other things, working to achieve the goals
set by UNISPACE+50 means convening a large number
of so-called high-level forums organized by the United
Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs in cooperation
with host countries. We can only welcome the
development of that type of dialogue. Together with the
United Nations, in Moscow in September we ourselves
successfully held the first United Nations Conference
on Space Law and Space Policy, in which more than
200 representatives of various countries, academia and
businesses took part.
In general, my country attaches great importance
to issues related to promoting the implementation of the
sustainable development agenda through outer-space
activities. Our Government policy stipulates that the
results of outer-space activities must be used for the
socioeconomic development of the Russian Federation
and its regions both for the period between now and
2030 and beyond. This year Russian spaceports
launched 10 rockets putting 22 spacecraft into orbit,
10 of them foreign. As part of its basic space research,
the Russian Federation is conducting ExoMars, an
international Mars exploration project, as well as moon
exploration projects with automated spacecraft. We are
continuing our activities in the area of manned space
flight, in which we are a world leader. Work is currently
under way on a new generation of Federatsia manned
transport spaceships designed to send people and goods
to stations orbiting Earth and to the moon.
We are focusing seriously on issues related to the
normative and legal regulation of outer-space activities,
and in particular we are working on improving the
system of registering objects launched into outer space,
4/8

26/10/2018

as well as studying possible options for implementing
long-term guidelines for the sustainability of space
activities based on our experience.
Like other participants in outer-space activities,
Russia greatly values the development of international
cooperation, including in areas such as scientific and
technical cooperation, the training of personnel and
cosmonauts, joint development of space technology
and its components and carrying out collaborative work
in space. That also includes the monitoring of objects
and events in near-Earth space, as well as the general
state of the near-Earth space environment. We believe,
indeed we are certain, that the Committee can become
a platform for sharing experiences on a broad range
of outer-space activities in the interests of sustainable
development.
Mr. Hodgkins (United States of America): In 1958,
soon after the launching of Earth-orbiting satellites
had imparted new intensity to the cold war, the United
Nations created the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (COPUOS) in the hope that the use
of outer space would avoid extensions of national
rivalries and instead be harnessed for the benefit of
humankind. Recognizing space as a new frontier of
human endeavour that held both promise and danger
in equal measure, nations aimed to erect a structure
within the framework of the United Nations that would
foster cooperation and shared benefits.
Over the past six decades, the Committee has
followed these principles in developing and supporting
the four core outer-space treaties and in promulgating
new legally binding consensus principles and guidelines
for activities in outer space, which by the end of this
meeting will include a set of voluntary guidelines for
the long-term sustainability of outer-space activities. In
doing so, the Committee continues to make important
contributions to the global governance framework for
outer space. COPUOS has also acted as a catalyst,
promoting international cooperation in space activities
and fostering information exchanges among developed
and developing countries on the latest advances in
space exploration and applications.
The American space programme was born at the
height of the Cold War, when fears of a super-Power
space race over time reached their zenith. Fortunately,
these fears abated in no small part because of
information collected and conveyed by satellites. Today
we are now able to see our space activities primarily
18-34313

26/10/2018

as an instrument of human advancement. Over the
past six decades the Committee’s growing roster of
members has continued to serve as the United Nations
leading forum for advancing the peaceful exploration
and uses of outer space. The most recent way station in
our shared voyage is the 2018 session of COPUOS and
its Scientific and Technical and Legal Subcommittees
(UNISPACE+50), which celebrated the fiftieth
anniversary of the first United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, held
in 1968.
UNISPACE I, which was held just 11 months
before the first humans landed on the moon, raised
awareness of the vast potential for space benefits for
all humankind. UNISPACE II, in 1982, continued those
efforts particularly in promoting space-technology
applications for developing countries. UNISPACE
III, in 1999, took into account the growing number
of developing countries involved in space activities.
Building on its success, UNISPACE+50 recognized
the growing importance of private-sector involvement
in space exploration and applications. We were
pleased with the breadth and the scope of the topics
considered, as well as the presentations by leading
scientists, Government officials and private-sector
representatives.
UNISPACE+50 has continued this impressive
legacy of the ways that Governments, the United Nations
and civil society can partner to advance innovative
space applications for the benefit of everyone. To that
end, the United States was pleased with the success of
the UNISPACE+50 commemoration that took place in
conjunction with the sixty-first session of COPUOS in
June. We were particularly pleased that UNISPACE+50
initiated a process for the Committee to develop a
Space2030 agenda over the next two years, setting the
course for the Committee’s work through 2030.
My delegation would like to take note of the
progress made during the first meeting of the Working
Group on the Space2030 Agenda, held in Vienna from
1 to 5 October. In this regard, the United States would
like to thank Ambassadors Maria Sabbatini of Italy
and Dumitru-Dorin Prunariu of Romania for their
outstanding leadership during the first meeting, which
resulted in the development of a work plan and methods
of work setting the Working Group on a path for success
moving into next year.

A/73/PV.26

The United States looks forward to continuing its
participation in these efforts to develop a visionary
document that lays the foundation for the future work
of the Committee and its Subcommittees, taking into
account new directions that Member States are taking to
move beyond low-Earth orbits to go to the moon, Mars
and other celestial bodies, as well as incorporating new
and innovative commercial ventures.
Mr. Ghaniei (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today
space science and technology are an indispensable
part of our daily lives. Our dependence on them could
be compared to our dependence on air and the seas
and oceans. That is why outer space is considered
part of the common heritage and the province of all
humankind. It must be explored and used for the benefit
of the present and future generations of all peoples, and
it must be free for equitable exploration, use and access
by all countries. That is the inalienable right of any
State, regardless of its level of economic or scientific
development.
Accordingly, as a founding member of the United
Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(COPUOS), Iran underlines the importance of ensuring
the full application of universally agreed principles on
outer space. This is the only approach whereby we can
ensure the sustainable and equitable use of outer space by
all States. In this context, we underline the importance
of such principles as equality, the non-appropriation of
outer space by claims of sovereignty, use, appropriation
or other means, non-discriminatory cooperation
in outer-space activities and non-intervention and
non-interference in the activities of States in exploring
and using outer space for peaceful purposes. Those
principles must be fully respected by all.
Accordingly, access to outer space through space
science, technologies and their applications should be
available to all States without discrimination of any
kind. They are indispensable tools for sustainable
development. To that end, and taking into account the
urgency of developing countries’ need to be able to use
space science and technologies in their socioeconomic
development, cooperation with developing countries in
outer-space activities should be promoted. Similarly, the
non-discriminatory transfer of related science, knowhow and technology must be promoted and ensured.
Iran also attaches great importance to the long-term
sustainability of outer-space activities, which should
be an integral part of such activities and respected by

18-343135/8

A/73/PV.26

26/10/2018

all. However, long-term sustainability should not be
used as a pretext for imposing limitations on the space
activities of developing countries.

exploration endeavours, space will continue to inspire,
innovate and provide real-world applications for the
benefit of humankind.

Equality is one of the most important principles of
international space law and must be strictly applied.
For instance, the exploitation of the geostationary
orbit should be rationalized and made available to all
States on an equal basis and without discrimination.
Unfortunately, the existing regulations for allocating
slots on this orbit, which basically set forth a first-come,
first-served regime, have limited many countries’
capacity to gain access to it. Indeed, many orbital slots
are occupied only by the most developed countries. At
the present time, therefore, there is little chance for
developing countries to enter outer space and place
their own geosatellites in appropriate orbital slots,
which means they are deprived of more useful satellite
services and excluded from enjoying the benefits of
geostationary orbits. That is an inequality that must
end.

(spoke in French)

One of the cardinal principles of international
space law is that outer space may be explored and
utilized exclusively for peaceful purposes. Any attempt
to militarize or weaponize outer space would seriously
challenge that principle.
The announcement by the United States that
it will create a new military force for outer space is
an alarming development. As United States officials
have stated, they seek dominance in space, view space
as a war-fighting domain, and plan to work on the
development of a space-based weapon system. Such
policies and measures increase the possibility of an
arms race or even actual conflict in outer space.
We should make every effort to ensure that
outer space will be explored and used exclusively for
peaceful purposes. In this context, Iran fully supports
the negotiation of a legally binding instrument on the
prevention of an arms race in outer space.
I would like to conclude by stressing that
promoting the greatest possible use of space science
and technology, ensuring the sustainability of outerspace activities and ascertaining that space will remain
a zone of peace are common responsibilities. We should
fulfil them responsibly.
Ms. Chan (Canada): Space brings an abundance
and diversity of unique and fundamental benefits to
Earth. As the space community moves forward with its
6/8

Canada, through its national space programme, is
fully committed and actively working to ensure that
space science and technology provide fundamental
social and economic benefits to all Canadians and to
the global community.
(spoke in English)
In the past three years, through the preparatory
process for the United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space+50
(UNISPACE+50), the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (COPUOS) and the United Nations
Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) have
successfully promoted the use of space as a driver for
sustainable development and increased the recognition
of its unparalleled contribution to and indispensability
in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. The
high-level UNISPACE+50 segment, which took place
in Vienna in June, was an excellent opportunity for
the international space community to showcase and
promulgate the socioeconomic benefits of space. From
environmental monitoring to disaster management,
agriculture, rural connectivity and job creation, space
tremendously benefits people and the planet and is a
dynamic driver for sustainable development.
(spoke in French)
Canada is honoured to have played a leading role
throughout the preparatory process for UNISPACE+50.
As the Chair of COPUOS for the 2016-2017 biennium
and leader of thematic priorities 4 and 5, on outer-space
weather and space and global health, respectively,
Canada has sought to make a significant contribution
to UNISPACE+50 and to the development of the
Space2030 agenda for the Committee, its subcommittees
and UNOOSA. Over the past three years, we have
worked closely with colleagues from COPUOS and
UNOOSA to achieve significant results. In addition
to highlighting the many benefits of space, Canada
considers UNISPACE+50 an excellent opportunity for
addressing the rapid evolution of the space agenda and
the unique role played by the Committee and UNOOSA
in international space cooperation and the global
governance of space activities. We fully support the
adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.6.
18-34313

26/10/2018

(spoke in English)
The UNISPACE+50 process is not yet over, and
through its follow-on working group to develop a
Space2030 agenda, Canada will continue to deliver on
promoting the peaceful use and development of space,
advancing knowledge of space through science and
ensuring that space science and technology provide
social and economic benefits to all, with a focus on
promoting diversity and women in space.
Canada is committed to making concrete and
measurable progress on the Sustainable Development
Goals. In many instances, reporting on such progress
will require data and information derived from space
assets. With the second largest landmass in the world,
Canada relies heavily on Earth observation as an
essential and sometimes its only source of information.
Canada’s long-standing expertise and advanced
achievement in space-based Earth observation is a
key asset supporting decision-making in sustainable
development.
For example, space-based Earth observation
data has proved instrumental in providing reliable
information on conditions in the Arctic. For northern
communities, the ability to travel safely over coastal
sea ice is an essential part of their basic routine, which
is becoming increasingly dangerous because of climate
change. Given the extent, remoteness, and isolation of
these regions, Earth observation is often the only costeffective and technically feasible means of obtaining
reliable information on ice conditions.
In addition, over the next few months, we will
launch the third generation of Canada’s Synthetic
Aperture Radar Satellite (RADARSAT) programme,
the RADARSAT Constellation Mission (RCM). RCM
will have a significant role to play in supporting and
tracking progress of the Sustainable Development
Goals. It will revisit Canada’s vast territory and
maritime approaches on a daily basis and provide daily
access to 90 per cent of the world’s surface. It will help
lead our efforts to monitor our changing northern lands
and coastal waterways, providing valuable information
on how these remote regions are responding to both
climate change and increasing resource development.
Although national commitments and advances
are key steps towards progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals, it is critical that we continue to
share expertise and work together regionally and

A/73/PV.26

globally to ensure success. No country can do this
alone.
The Canadian delegation would like to once again
applaud the United Nations for its continued work in
challenging all Governments to work in a collaborative
manner towards ending poverty, building more
prosperous and peaceful societies and protecting our
planet.
In conclusion, Canada is proud to support the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the work of
COPUOS and the Office for Outer Space Affairs on
the Space2030 Agenda. We will continue to leverage
space and its assets in support of the successful
implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, thereby increasing the socioeconomic benefits
to humankind. As an innovative, inspirational tool for
peace, diplomacy and collaboration among nations,
space is already seen as and will increasingly prove to
be a driver for sustainable development.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.6, entitled “Fiftieth anniversary of
the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: space as a driver of
sustainable development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.6, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
France, Greece, Guinea, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malawi,
Malaysia, Paraguay, Portugal, Singapore, Spain,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
the United Arab Emirates, Ukraine and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.6?
Draft resolution A/73/L.6 was adopted (resolution
73/6).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption of the resolution,

18-343137/8

A/73/PV.26

I would like to remind speakers that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hodgkins (United States of America): My
delegation fully supports resolution 73/6, concerning
the fiftieth anniversary of the first United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space. However, we would like to explain our
views on three parts of the resolution, which by no
means signifies that we have any objection to it.
The United States recognizes the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as a global framework
for sustainable development that can help countries to
work towards global peace and prosperity. We applaud
that call for shared responsibility, including national
responsibility, within the 2030 Agenda, and emphasize
that all countries have a role to play in achieving this
vision. The 2030 Agenda recognizes that each country
must work to implement the Agenda in accordance with
its own national policies and priorities.
The United States also underscores that paragraph
18 of the 2030 Agenda calls for countries to implement
the Agenda in a manner than is consistent with the
rights and obligations of States under international law.
We also highlight our mutual recognition in paragraph
58 that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda must
respect and be without prejudice to the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations, and that it does not prejudice or serve as a
precedent for decisions and actions that are under way
in other forums.

8/8

26/10/2018

In terms of the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030, which is also mentioned in
resolution 73/6, the United States reiterates its view on
the Framework, which was set out in its explanation of
position delivered in Sendai in March 2015. We have
been a strong supporter of disaster-risk-reduction
initiatives that are designed to reduce the loss of life
and the social and economic impact of disasters. This
assistance helps the recipients to build a culture of
preparedness, promote greater resilience and achieve
self-reliance.
Finally, with respect to the specific reference to the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change in resolution 73/6,
we want to note that the United States announced that
it intends to withdraw from the Agreement as soon as
it is eligible to do so, consistent with the terms of the
Agreement, unless suitable terms for re-engagement
are identified. The language on the Paris Agreement in
the resolution is therefore without prejudice to United
States positions. We recognize that climate change is
a complex global challenge and affirm our support for
promoting economic growth and improving energy
security while protecting the environment.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
30?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

18-34313
