II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

number of votes and not less than a majority of the votes
of the Members present and voting shall be elected'';
3. Decides further that the thirty-four members of the
International Law Commission shall be elected according
to the following pattern:
(a) Eight nationals from African States;
(b) Seven nationals from Asian States;
(c) Three nationals from Eastern European States;
(d) Six nationals from Latin American States;
(e) Eight nationals from Western European or other
States;
(fJ One national from African States or Eastern European States in rotation, with the seat being allocated to a
national of an African State in the first election held after
the adoption of the present resolution;
(g) One national from Asian States or Latin American
States in rotation, with the seat being allocated to a national
of an Asian State in the first election held after the adoption
of the present resolution;
4. Decides, by way of exception and in consequence
of the enlargement of the Commission, to request the Secretary-General to include in the list of candidates for the
election to be held at the current session, in addition to the
nominations already received, such names as shall have
been communicated to him in writing before 21 November
1981.
63rd plenary meeting
18 November 1981

36/64.

Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December
1972, 3 I 48 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3 I 87 (XXVIII)
of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19 November 1975,
31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/ l 8 of 11 November 1977,
33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of 29 November 1979
and 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December 1980,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 26 adopted on 14 November 1970 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Emphasizing that the cultural heritage of a people conditions the present and future flowering of its artistic values
and its over-all development,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report submitted by
the Secretary-General in co-operation with the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 27
Aware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they may
constitute collections representative of their cultural heritage,
Noting with satisfaction that the countries of origin have
already reinforced the steps they have taken for the organization and maintenance of their museums, in order to accommodate their cultural treasures, and for the classification, restoration and conservation of their objets d'art with
national experts of international repute,
26
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session, vol. 1. Resolutions.
pp. 135-141.
27
A/36/651.

19

Noting also with sati:,faction that some countries have
taken positive steps for the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and objets d'art to their countries of origin,
Deeply concerned at the persistence of the illicit traffic
in cultural property. which continues to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples.
I. Renews its support for the solemn appeal launched
on 7 June 1978 by the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
the return to those who created it of an irreplaceable cultural
heritage;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its objets
d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures contributes to the strengthening of international co-operation
and to the preservation and flowering of universal cultural
values through fruitful co-operation between developed and
developing countries;
3. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit
Appropriation on the work they have accomplished, particularly through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for
the return or restitution of cultural property. the preparation
of inventories of movable cultural property, the development of infrastructures for the protection of movable cultural
property, the reduction of illicit traffic in cultural property
and the dissemination of information to the public;
4. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to intensify its efforts to help the
countries concerned to find suitable solutions to the problem
relating to the return or restitution of cultural property and
urges Member States to co-operate with that organization
in this area;
5. Invites Member States to take adequate measures to
prohibit and prevent the illicit import, export and transfer
of ownership of cultural property. and to put an end to the
illicit trafficking in priceless objets d'art and museum pieces
by all necessary measures within each country's jurisdiction
with the full co-operation of the courts and customs
authorities;
6. Also invites Member States to draw up, in cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization. systematic inventories of cultural
property existing in their territories and of their cultural
property abroad;
7. Appeals to museums and public and private collectors
to return totally or partially. or make available to the countries of origin, particularly the items kept in the storehouses
of such museums, and to help the countries of origin, with
the co-operation of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in their endeavours to
prepare an inventory of those collections;
8. Reminds Member States of the need to strengthen
museum infrastructures, in particular conservation techniques, museographic facilities and procedures adapted to
local conditions and the training of qualified personnel;
9. Calls upon the United Nations Development Programme to continue to assist the development of national
capacity in respect of museum infrastructures and invites
Member States as well as national agencies and regional
organizations to strengthen their technical co-operation in
this area;
_10. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely
with the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conclude
bilateral agreements for this purpose;

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

20

11. Also appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin;
12. Urges all Governments to reproduce the reports and
studies made by archaeologists and explorers from the developed countries, especially if those studies are out of print,
and to make them available to the countries of origin;
13. / nvites once again Member States to sign and ratify
the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
Cultural Property;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to take the necessary measures to alert and
mobilize international public opinion in favour of the return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin,
in particular by mobilizing the United Nations information
media for this purpose;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
16. Reiterates its desire that the second World Conference on Cultural Policies, to be held in 1982, should devote
considerable attention to the question of return or restitution
of cultural property with a view to improving international
cultural co-operation;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Return or restitution
of cultural property to the countries of origin".
74th plenary meeting
27 November 1981

36/67.

International Year of Peace and International
Day of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the promotion of peace, both at an international and a national level, is among the main purposes
of the United Nations, in conformity with its Charter,
Reaffirming that, as set forth in the preamble of the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, since wars begin in the minds of
men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed, that a peace based exclusively upon
the political and economic arrangements of Governments
would not be a peace which could secure the unanimous,
lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and
that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not to fail,
upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind,
Further recalling that, on the basis of similar considerations, the General Assembly established the United Nations
University in 197228 and, more specifically, the University
for Peace in 1980, 29 and entrusted other organs and organizations of the United Nations system with the promotion
of peace, mainly through education in all its aspects,
Noting with appreciation the initiative taken by the International Association of University Presidents at its Sixth
Triennial Conference, held at San Jose from 28 June to 3
2

Resolution 2951 (XXVII).
29
Resolution 35/55.
•

July 1981, to propose the Declaration of a Peace Year, a
Peace Month and a Peace Day, 30
Acknowledging the conclusions of the Conference that it
would be appropriate to devote a specific time to concentrate
the efforts of the United Nations and its Member States, as
well as of the whole of mankind, to promoting the ideals
of peace and to giving positive evidence of their commitment
to peace in all viable ways,
Considering that, through the declaration and proper celebration of an International Year of Peace and an International Day of Peace, it would be possible to contribute to
strengthening such ideals of peace and alleviating the tensions and causes of conflict, both within and among nations
and peoples,
I. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider,
at its first regular session of 1982, the possibility of declaring
an International Year of Peace at the first practicable opportunity, taking into account the urgency and special nature
of such an observance as well as the guidelines for international years and anniversaries adopted by the General
Assembly in its decision 35/424 of 5 December 1980, and
to submit its recommendations to the Assembly at its thirtyseventh session on the basis of appropriate arrangements for
the timing, organization and financing of the Year;
2. Declares that the third Tuesday of September, the
opening day of the regular sessions of the General Assembly, shall be officially proclaimed and observed as International Day of Peace and shall be devoted to commemorating
and strengthening the ideals of peace both within and among
all nations and peoples;
3. Invites all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, regional organizations, nongovernmental organizations, peoples and individuals to
commemorate in an appropriate manner the International
Day of Peace, especially through all means of education,
and to co-operate with the United Nations in the observance
of that Day.
77th plenary meeting
30 November /981

36/68.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 11
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/l I 8
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 35/
119 of 11 December 1980, as well as the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 concerning the question of Namibia and taking

·'° See Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 133, document A/36/197, annex. ·
"Ibid., Thirtv-sixth Session. Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I).
