S/PV.8386*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8386

th meeting
Tuesday, 30 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

* Reissued for technical reasons 10 December 2018.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-34901 (E)
*1834901*

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
The presidency has also received a request from the
Russian Federation to invite Ms. Elena Kravchenko to
participate in this meeting, in accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Do I hear any objection to extending an invitation
to Ms. Elena Kravchenko?
The representative of Sweden has asked for
the floor.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden, together with
France, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Poland, the
United Kingdom and the United States, has asked that
the situation in Ukraine be addressed in the Council
today, with updates on the broader situation from the
Department of Political Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in view of the
upcoming so-called elections in what are misleadingly
referred to as the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s
Republics, in eastern Ukraine.
We welcome the fact that Council members agreed
to this briefing, which is now convened, as stated by
the President, with reference both to the letter dated
28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative
2/19

30/10/2018

of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/136) and
the letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2014/264), without the formal creation of a
new agenda item. The two agenda items remain separate
and distinct, and future Security Council meetings can
be held on each of them separately.
The so-called elections, to be held on 11 November,
are being organized in violation of the Minsk
agreements. The issue at hand is not about technicalities
relating to the proposed elections but about holding the
elections in the first place. The organization of those
elections should be the result of the agreement of all
parties, which is still being negotiated. The elections
are an infringement on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, and in breach of the letter and the
spirit of the Minsk agreements. The suggested briefer
does not represent the legal authorities or civil society of
Ukraine. To allow the participation of a representative
of an illegal separatist entity in a Council meeting
would set a dangerous precedent. We therefore do not
consider the briefer proposed by the Russian Federation
competent to the purpose at hand, as stipulated in
rule 39 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure. If the matter is put to a procedural vote,
France, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Poland,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States
will therefore oppose an invitation by the Council to the
additional briefer proposed by the Russian Federation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is no secret to Council members that the idea
of discussing the situation regarding the forthcoming
elections in eastern Ukraine on 11 November came from
six delegations — Sweden, the Netherlands, Poland,
the United Kingdom, the United States and France.
However, it occurred to none of them to invite the the
people that the meeting is about, the representatives of
the area, to participate in it. Furthermore, its initiators
proposed holding it as a closed meeting so that they
could then report to the media only on the elements that
they wanted to.
We have long been familiar with these ways of
working in the Security Council, and we condemn
18-34901

Ukraine

30/10/2018

such blatant examples of double standards. For reasons
of transparency, therefore, we insisted on a public
meeting and requested the participation of the heads
of the central electoral commissions of the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics. We hope that the
members of the Council are just as interested as we
are in receiving complete information on the true state
of affairs in Ukraine. We call on them not to submit
to these delegations’ pressure or to obstruct a briefing
to the Council by the representative of the Donetsk
and Luhansk People’s Republics and parties to the
Minsk agreements.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In the light of the
comments made by Council members, I propose to put
to the vote the proposal to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure
to Ms. Elena Kravchenko, in order to brief the Security
Council under the agenda items entitled “Letter dated
28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of
Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/136)” and “Letter dated
13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2014/264)”.
I shall put the proposal to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Russian Federation
Against:
France, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kuwait
The President (spoke in Spanish): The proposal
received one vote in favour, seven against and
seven abstentions. The proposal to invite Ms. Elena
Kravchenko has not been adopted, it having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The previous Security Council
meeting on the situation in Ukraine took place five

S/PV. 8386

months ago on 29 May (see S/PV.8270). As I stated then,
the United Nations has been consistent in its strong
support for the lead role of the Normandy Four, the
Trilateral Contact Group, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other key actors
to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict in Donbas.
The Secretary-General has also repeatedly called for
revitalizing efforts in those negotiation formats and
bilateral channels. We therefore welcome presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/12, of 6 June, which encouraged
all the parties to recommit to the peace process,
recalled the centrality of the Minsk agreements and
urged scaled-up support for humanitarian efforts. We
also note the 11 June meeting in the Normandy format,
the first at the ministerial level in over a year. Despite
those efforts, however, there has been little progress
in talks to end the fighting. The conflict in eastern
Ukraine, now in its fifth year, remains an active threat
to international peace and security.
On the ground, continued and unpredictable
escalations of hostilities aggravate the climate of
insecurity and breed uncertainty about the parties’
intentions. As negotiations on different tracks
continue to search for points of convergence, effective
implementation of any agreements is still lacking.
It is noteworthy, nonetheless, that the incidence of
violence this summer was the lowest of any equivalent
period since the conflict broke out in 2014. The
so-called harvest ceasefire and the back-to-school
ceasefire — two recommitments to the ceasefire
negotiated by the Trilateral Contact Group — were
instrumental in reducing shelling and fire from small
arms and light weapons, in turn resulting in the relatively
low, although still tragic, figure of four civilian deaths
from 1 June to 31 August. Clearly, with sufficient
political will and genuine commitment to agreements,
it is possible to stop the violence on the ground and
drastically reduce the impact of the conflict on the
civilian population. Regrettably, however, over the past
six weeks, ceasefire violations have once again increased
and casualty levels have risen. In September alone, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights recorded 20 conflict-related civilian
casualties. More than half of the civilian casualties
in September were the result of mines or explosive
remnants of war.
The United Nations continues to call on the parties
to ensure the full and immediate implementation of
the ceasefire agreements and exercise the utmost

18-349013/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

restraint in order to protect the civilian population in
the conflict-affected areas. The priority of the parties
should be, without delay, to withdraw heavy weapons
from populated areas, disengage forces and protect
civilian infrastructure. The United Nations is also
following reports of increased tensions in the Sea of
Azov, which negatively affect the overall atmosphere in
the region. We underline the need to avoid any risk of
escalation, provocation or miscalculation.
The Minsk agreements, endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 2202 (2015), form the
only agreed framework for a negotiated peace in
eastern Ukraine. Echoing the Security Council’s
expectations,
expressed
through
presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/12, the United Nations calls
for swift progress in the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. We welcomed the most recent extension
by the Ukrainian Parliament, on 4 October, of the
law on special order regarding the local governance
of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
consistent with Ukraine’s commitments under the
Minsk agreements.
The United Nations urges all parties to avoid any
unilateral steps that could deepen the divide or depart
from the spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements.
On 7 September, the de facto entities in Donetsk and
Luhansk announced the holding of so-called leadership
elections scheduled for 11 November. Despite Ukraine’s
objections, media report that preparations are still
going ahead. As we understand, two separate ballots
in both Donetsk and Luhansk are reportedly being
planned — one for the Head of Republic and one for the
People’s Councils. Those will reportedly be voted in for
terms of five years. I wish to recall that election-related
matters are addressed in the Minsk agreements as
part of a comprehensive package, and they are under
consideration in the existing negotiating mechanisms. I
therefore caution that any such measures, taken outside
Ukraine’s constitutional and legal framework, would be
incompatible with the Minsk agreements.
On this occasion, I wish to acknowledge the tireless
work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission on the
ground in the face of extremely challenging conditions.
I reiterate our call on all to ensure the safety and the
freedom of movement of the monitors. As the Council
will hear from Assistant Secretary-General Mueller,
the human cost of the conflict for the people of Donbas
continues to increase. The United Nations spares no
effort to fulfil its responsibilities in the delivery of
4/19

30/10/2018

humanitarian assistance and the monitoring of human
rights. It is essential, however, that that role not be
politicized or instrumentalized by any side.
It is time for renewed and constructive action by
all concerned to overcome the apparent impasse in
diplomatic negotiations. The United Nations underlines
the need to fully respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
Once again, we urge all the parties to display the
necessary political will and to recommit to the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements to ensure
the earliest possible end to the conflict and help bring
about peace and stability to all of Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller,
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
challenging humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.
Five months ago, I briefed the Council (see S/PV.8270),
together with Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo. Today
I regrettably advise that millions of men, women
and children continue to face dire humanitarian
consequences in Europe’s forgotten armed conflict, and
that the effects are worsening as the situation becomes
more protracted.
More than 3,000 civilians have been killed and
up to 9,000 have been injured since the conflict began
in 2014. This crisis affects the highest proportion
of elderly people — more than 30 per cent — in the
world. A 400-plus kilometre contact line divides the
area of hostilities. The households close to that line
live in fear of shelling, sniper fire and pervasive mine
contamination. People’s access to basic services is
constantly disrupted. There is extensive damage to
homes, hospitals, schools and other critical civilian
infrastructure. In 2018, more than 70 serious incidents
have disrupted the vital supply of water to millions of
people. Risks from communicable diseases are rising
due to the water shortage, extensive damage to health
facilities, lack of access to health care and extremely
low immunization rates. It is imperative that parties
to the conflict respect civilians and civilian objects,
consistent with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Civilians are not a target.
18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

S/PV. 8386

The contact line has dramatically altered the lives
of millions of civilians. People are separated from
their families, services and livelihoods. In October
2017, I met people making the arduous journey at the
Mayorsk checkpoint. Since then we have seen more
than 1.1 million civilian crossings per month through
the five official contact points. Half of the people who
cross are over 60 years old. Most are women. They
are regularly exposed to harm as they wait in long
lines with limited facilities amid hostilities. So far
50 civilians have died or been injured while crossing
this year. I welcome the efforts of the Government to
improve crossing conditions, but I appeal for more to be
done on both sides. Essential services at crossing points
require urgent improvement, especially water and
sanitation facilities. Heating points are an acute need as
winter approaches. Addressing the specific needs of the
elderly, especially the long-standing barriers for them to
be able to easily access their pensions, remains critical.

efforts to deliver essential humanitarian assistance and
protection services to the people in the non-Governmentcontrolled areas. An allocation of $6 million from the
Central Emergency Response Fund was an important
catalyst. I appeal to donors to increase their support
for consolidating these humanitarian gains, especially
with Ukraine’s harsh winter fast approaching.

So far this year more than 100 civilians have been
killed or injured due to extensive mine and unexploded
ordnance contamination. On 30 September, an
explosive device killed three children and seriously
injured another close to the contact line. Earlier this
month, two workers were injured by a land mine when
trying to restore vital water supplies to 45,000 people.
For three years running, Ukraine has had the highest
anti-vehicle mine casualties in the world. I implore all
parties to immediately cease using mines, including in
populated areas and close to civilian structures. They
must respect international humanitarian law. Ukraine
also requires an appropriate national mine action
framework and coordination mechanisms.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the critical
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

Over 3.5 million people will require humanitarian
assistance and protection in 2019. Yet funding for
humanitarian action has steadily decreased over the
years. The 2018 humanitarian response plan, which
requires $187 million, is only 32 per cent funded. That
is simply not enough. Without adequate funds, food,
health care, water and sanitation and other life-saving
assistance cannot be provided. Humanitarians can
and do deliver. So far in 2018, the United Nations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations have assisted more
than 1 million people on both sides of the contact line.
While humanitarian access is often unpredictable,
particularly in the non-Government-controlled areas,
today we have slightly more access than before. Since
July 2018, humanitarians have rapidly scaled up their

It has been almost five years since Russia’s
illegal annexation of Crimea and the beginning of its
aggression in eastern Ukraine. This highly volatile
situation clearly poses a threat to international peace
and security, and Sweden has throughout its tenure on
the Security Council worked to ensure that the Council
remains seized of the matter.

I would like to conclude by commending the
Government of Ukraine’s efforts to implement a
national strategy and action plan in support of its
1.5 million internally displaced persons. I also welcome
the recent adoption of the law on the legal status of
missing persons. I look forward to its implementation,
which should facilitate the search and identification of
missing persons and provide support to family members.
I reaffirm the commitment of the United Nations and its
partners to supporting Ukraine’s displaced and conflictaffected people across the spectrum of emergency and
early recovery assistance.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I thank Ms. DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, as
well as Ms. Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings to the Security
Council today.

The continued high levels of violence in Donbas
and our deep concern about the so-called elections
planned for 11 November prompted us and several
other members to call for this meeting. Let me be clear
about why this issue belongs in the Council. What we
see is an attempt to redraw borders in Europe, backed
by military power. That is a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. It also represents a violation of
the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris for a

18-349015/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

New Europe. This challenge to the international legal
order is not a regional problem, but one with global
implications. We regret that there are no signs of Russia,
a member of the Council, reversing its actions to comply
with international law. Again, let me be clear: Russia’s
aggression is the origin of the conflict, and Russia has
the influence to end it whenever it so chooses.
We remain deeply concerned about the continuing
violence and the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine. The conflict has already caused
more than 10,000 deaths and affected more than
3.8 million people directly, 70 per cent of them
women, elderly persons and children. Almost two
thirds of the close to 2 million internally displaced
persons are women. We note slight improvements in
access for humanitarian organizations, but continue
to emphasize the need for full and unhindered access,
both in Government-controlled and non-Governmentcontrolled areas. Sweden will continue providing
principled humanitarian assistance to meet the most
urgent needs of the people affected by the conflict.
As we heard from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) today, the humanitarian
appeal remains underfunded. We join OCHA in calling
on donors to increase their contributions.
While the international community continues
to support the Minsk agreements, not even the
first provision in the agreements — a complete
ceasefire — has been implemented. In line with
consistent demands by the European Union, we call
for the full implementation of the agreements, starting
with an immediate and lasting ceasefire. We support the
efforts made within the Normandy format to that end
and commend the Government of Ukraine for recently
extending the special status law for the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.
The so-called elections in Donbas planned for
November are, in turn, a blatant violation of the
Minsk agreements. We call on Russia to assume its
responsibility and use its influence to stop them from
being held. The Minsk agreements clearly state that
local elections should take place only after proper
security conditions are put in place. That means
a complete ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, monitored by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Russia must
ensure that the armed formations controlling certain
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk observe the ceasefire,
and is must cease all military and financial support
6/19

30/10/2018

to those formations. The Minsk agreements further
stipulate that elections should be held under Ukrainian
legislation and be in accordance with OSCE standards
and monitored by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. We strongly support
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
which must be given full, safe and unhindered access
throughout the country, including along the RussiaUkraine State border and to the Crimean peninsula.
Finally, the ongoing militarization of Crimea and
the tensions in the Sea of Azov raise additional concerns
and create a very dangerous backdrop for the planned
so-called elections. The redeployment of military
vessels and the excessive inspections of commercial
traffic in an area already affected by conflict have
not gone unnoticed. By ceasing those activities, and
taking steps to ensure that the Minsk agreements are
finally implemented, Russia could send a signal that it
is serious about reducing tensions.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, in blatant
disregard of international law and the European security
order, has caused tremendous suffering and must come
to an end. Until such time, the Council must remain
actively seized of the matter.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for briefing the Security
Council today.
The United States joins others in condemning the
announcement by the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics that they intend to hold what they
call elections on 11 November. Such actions are clearly
illegitimate and have no basis in Ukrainian law. The
sham elections, staged by Russia, run directly counter
to efforts to implement the Minsk peace agreements.
They also obstruct and undermine efforts to end
the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine, which has
killed more than 10,000 people and causes more
casualties daily. The Minsk agreements state that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) must supervise elections, which are to be
held in accordance with Ukrainian law and OSCE
standards. The 11 November balloting will satisfy none
of those conditions.
The Minsk agreements also call for the disarmament
of illegal groups and the withdrawal of foreign armed
formations from eastern Ukraine. However, Russia is
using those so-called elections to achieve the opposite.
18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

It seeks to bolster the positions of the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic.
Both entities are inseparable from the illegal armed
groups controlled by Moscow.
We also express our concern about the humanitarian
crisis in eastern Ukraine, with 3.4 million Ukrainians
requiring assistance and more than 1.5 million internally
displaced. The humanitarian crisis will continue until
a ceasefire is implemented and basic commitments
under the Minsk agreements are met. We encourage all
parties to allow affected Ukrainians to have unfettered
access to humanitarian aid and Government services
and to guard against further civilian losses and damage
to critical infrastructure.
Beyond eastern Ukraine, Russia’s occupation of
the Crimean peninsula and its aggressive actions in the
Sea of Azov, where Russia is harassing and obstructing
international shipping bound for Ukraine’s ports, further
demonstrate Moscow’s blatant violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and its readiness to
undermine regional stability. We greatly appreciate the
efforts of France and Germany in the Normandy format
to push for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Unfortunately, Russia continues to impede the peace
process and is, we believe, deliberately stalling in those
discussions and in talks between United States Special
Representative Kurt Volker and Russian Presidential
Adviser Vladislav Surkov. We call on Russia to cease
its obstructionist activities and artificial delays.
The United States reiterates its strong condemnation
of Russia’s destabilizing actions in Ukraine. We will
continue to impose sanctions against Russia for its
action in Donbas and Crimea until it fully implements
the Minsk agreements and returns the Crimean
peninsula to Ukraine.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Ursula Mueller, for their
enlightening briefings about the ongoing tragic situation
in Ukraine, which, now more than ever, requires the
attention of the international community.
After more than four years of conflict in the
Donbas region, fighting continues unabated. Not one
day passes without a military and civilian victim or
without shots, including from heavy weaponry, being
fired into areas where civilians live. For more than four
years, including recently at a ministerial meeting held

S/PV. 8386

on 11 June, France and Germany, together with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), have spared no effort, within the framework
of the Normandy format, to bring the parties together,
facilitate the implementation of the Minsk agreements
and help end the conflict. My German colleague, whom
I am pleased to welcome to the Chamber, and I will
hold a press briefing at the end of today’s meeting, as
the representatives of two mediating countries of the
Normandy format.
Beyond Donbas, whenever possible, France
condemns the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and calls
on all States Members of the United Nations to reiterate
their support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
In that tense environment, three recent developments in
particular deserve our attention.
First, allow me to mention once again to the socalled elections planned for 11 November in the two
separatist areas of Donetsk and Luhansk. Whereas we
endeavour under the Normandy format to move towards
the holding of local elections according to Ukrainian
law and the Minsk agreements, the current initiative
is a flagrant attempt to undermine the sovereignty of
the Ukrainian State. It is contrary to the commitments
made, in particular by Russia, when the agreements
were signed. We therefore encourage all Member
States to firmly and publicly condemn the organization
of those illegal elections. We hope that Russia can use
its influence with the separatist entities to suspend the
organization of the so-called elections. Instead, it should
strive to foster the right conditions for the holding of
the local elections stipulated in the Minsk agreements,
which is one of the keys to restoring peace. It should
be noted that, for its part, Ukraine has signalled its
commitment to the political component of the Minsk
agreements by renewing the law on the special status of
Donbas, which it adopted in September 2014.
Secondly, we deplore the lack of progress on
security issues in Donbas. The ceasefire, which has
been renewed several times, has not materialized in a
sustainable manner on the ground. Moreover, we have
recently seen an increase in the level of violence, with an
average of more than 1,000 incidents per day, according
to the observations of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine. Similarly, the withdrawal of heavy
weaponry has still not been implemented. For four
years, the civilian population — including children and

18-349017/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

30/10/2018

the elderly, as Ms. Mueller reminded us — have been
targeted practically every day by such weapons.

initiated by Russia and systematically fuelled by Russia
with the purpose of destabilizing Ukraine.

We are still awaiting progress — especially from
Ukraine — on the three pilot disengagement areas.
All commitments made must be respected; this is not
a matter of pick-and-choose obligations. France cannot
emphasize enough the urgent need for progress on
each of the measures necessary to improve the security
situation, which is essential for reaching a settlement of
the conflict.

We asked for this meeting today to condemn the
announcement of the so-called elections to be held in
the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic and Donetsk
People’s Republic on 11 November. That announcement
is contrary to the letter and spirit of the Minsk
agreements; therefore, we call on the Russian Federation
to make full use of its influence over the separatists to
avoid any steps that would obstruct the advancement of
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is also
a setback to the efforts made in the Normandy format
and by the Trilateral Contact Group. It is yet another
demonstration of disregard for international norms and
of efforts to undermine the achievement of peace in
eastern Ukraine.

Thirdly, and finally, France expresses its deep
concern about the humanitarian situation described
by the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs. There are nearly 1.5 million displaced persons
in Ukraine, while more than 700,000, on both sides of
the line of contact, who are receiving humanitarian
assistance. As stated in the presidential statement
of 6 June (S/PRST/2018/12), the situation calls for
more robust action by United Nations humanitarian
agencies on the ground. To achieve that goal, France
calls on all the parties to facilitate humanitarian access
for United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to provide aid and assistance, not only to
civilian populations but also to prisoners of war. With
the harsh Donbas winter approaching, it is now more
necessary than ever to relieve the suffering of the most
vulnerable people.
The situation in Ukraine is not necessarily
inevitable. It is up to Russia to take the decision to
put an end to the illegal annexation of Crimea and use
its influence over the separatist entities in Donbas to
guarantee the immediate implementation of the Minsk
agreements. We also encourage Ukraine to show
greater political will and play its part in implementing
the agreements, which should lead to the return of
lasting peace.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
comprehensive briefings.
Poland strongly supports the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. We underline
the need for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements by all sides. It is the only way to achieve a
lasting solution to the conflict in and around Ukraine.
This conflict is not an ethnic, internal conflict, as
Russia tries to portray it. It is a State-to-State conflict
8/19

Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a
source of security threats in the whole region. Reports of
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) confirm
that Russia is consistently strengthening its military
presence in Donbas. Convoys of trucks are crossing the
Russian-Ukrainian border day and night — as well as
doing so where there are no border crossing facilities
and always without any OSCE or Ukrainian inspection.
The Special Monitoring Mission has observed such
convoys on seven occasions since August alone. With
little to no access in some areas, Special Monitoring
Mission capabilities are crippled. On a regular basis,
so-called separatists are identified as responsible for
the cases of intimidation of observers and firing or
jamming observation drones belonging to the Special
Monitoring Mission.
It is worrisome that similar activities concerning the
development of military capabilities are taking place in
Crimea and the Sea of Azov. For several months, Russia
has delayed hundreds of commercial vessels attempting
to reach Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov via the
Kerch Strait for extended periods and at great economic
cost to Ukraine. Further militarization and increased
tensions bring about even more instability to an already
troubled region.
The humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine has
further deteriorated since June. Fifty-one per cent of
the population living in territories up to five kilometres
from the contact line did not receive any support in the
past 12 months, while over 60 per cent of the population
has limited access to health care. The information
18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

presented by Ms. Mueller showed that we cannot turn
a blind eye to the humanitarian situation. A persisting
lack of respect for the ceasefire by the illegal, Russiasupported military formations and the indiscriminate
shelling of residential areas put at risk the lives
of the conflict-affected population. International
humanitarian law is not respected. Since the beginning
of the conflict, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded more
than 10,000 people killed and over 24,000 injured. At
least 2,500 of those killed were civilians.
With winter approaching, hundreds of thousands
of people in eastern Ukraine will require additional
assistance. Let me emphasize that Poland strives to
deliver assistance to those in need in eastern Ukraine.
In addition to supporting Ukraine at the political level,
since 2014 Poland has been providing the necessary
humanitarian aid to internally displaced persons from
areas affected by armed conflict in eastern Ukraine,
as well as the most vulnerable local population.
Poland has always provided humanitarian aid via
bilateral and multilateral channels. Poland contributed
financially this year to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Kyiv; we appeal to
Security Council members to kindly consider backing
the Office as well. Furthermore, I want to thank
Ms. Mueller and OCHA for the hard work, dedication
and determination shown in dealing with this crisis.
On a positive note, we must underline the decision
of the Supreme Council of Ukraine to extend the special
status of Donetsk and Luhansk until the end of 2019,
which confirms Kyiv’s determination to implement
the Minsk agreements, especially in the difficult
pre-election period.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings on the
alarming situation in parts of eastern Ukraine.
In line with General Assembly resolution 68/262,
adopted by an overwhelming majority on 27 March 2014,
let me reiterate our full support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. Let me be clear:
we will not accept the redrawing of borders in Europe
with the use of military force by Russia. Its actions are
in direction contravention of international law and in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8386

I will focus on three issues — first, elections;
secondly, the humanitarian situation; and, thirdly, the
security situation in the broader Black Sea region.
My first point concerns the announcement of local
elections in the non-Government-controlled areas in
eastern Ukraine. We condemn those illegitimate socalled elections. If held, those fake elections would
contravene commitments made under the Minsk
agreements and would violate Ukrainian law. In line
with the Minsk agreements, local elections in certain
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk can take place only in
accordance with Ukrainian legislation. Any such illegal
elections would be incompatible with the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Further talks on a
peaceful settlement should take place on the basis of the
Minsk agreements. Let me recall that resolution 2202
(2015) calls on parties to fully implement the Minsk
agreements. In that regard, the so-called elections are
not only illegitimate, but also run counter to the letter,
spirit and commitments of the Minsk agreements and
are a clear setback to the peace process. The Minsk
agreements remain the only viable and accepted path
to peace.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls on the
parties involved to refrain from any actions, such as the
holding of so-called elections, that would obstruct the
implementation of those agreements. We call on Russia
to bring its considerable influence to bear to stop the
so-called elections from taking place, in the interests
of the peace process and of the civilians who suffer the
daily consequences of the conflict. Russia must play
its part by ending its financial and military support to
the separatists and by withdrawing its armed forces and
military equipment from Ukrainian territory.
My second point pertains to the humanitarian
situation in the non-Government-controlled areas.
The Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has made tireless efforts to ensure that all
parties respect the Minsk agreements, including the
ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons. We
commend the courageous work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in often dangerous circumstances.
Meanwhile, the population in the affected areas
continues to suffer. In its latest report, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recorded a 30 per cent increase in civilian casualties
as compared to the previous reporting period. Both

18-349019/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

landmines and unexploded ordnance remain an
everyday threat to civilians in the conflict area. Civilian
infrastructure has been heavily damaged. Power and
water supplies are insecure. In the 6 June presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/12), the Council called for
United Nations agencies to address the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands calls on all parties to ensure that the United
Nations and international humanitarian organizations
can be fully operational in the non-Governmentcontrolled areas. As Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller said today, civilians are not a target.
My third point centres on the security situation in
the broader Black Sea region in the wake of the Russian
Federation’s illegal annexation and militarization
of the Crimean peninsula. The Russian military
presence in the Sea of Azov increased recently. The
militarization of the Sea of Azov can only destabilize
the delicate security situation in the wider Black Sea
region. Additionally, the Russian Federation has started
inspecting commercial vessels in the Sea of Azov
heading to and from Ukrainian ports. The resulting
lengthy delays only add to the economic damage
inflicted on south-eastern Ukraine by the illegally
constructed Kerch Strait Bridge. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomes Ukraine’s decision to seek
arbitration under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. We hope for a peaceful settlement of
the dispute. In the meantime, we call on all parties to
take all the necessary measures to de-escalate military
tensions in the Sea of Azov.

30/10/2018

one at that. That is why the United Kingdom, with other
members of the Council, called for this meeting today.
The international community must stand together to
condemn those illegal acts. Russia could demonstrate
its commitment to the rules-based international system
by using its considerable influence on the separatists
to ensure that the so-called elections do not take
place. To be clear: if the elections were free and fair
and with proper security conditions, as stated in the
Minsk agreements, that would be a different matter.
But the conditions for free and fair elections will never
exist as long as Russia continues to deny international
access to eastern Ukraine. Support for illegitimate
so-called elections is the latest attempt by Russia to
destabilize Ukraine.
As other representatives have done today, I
would now like to raise other recent actions that are
deeply concerning.
First, as recorded by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, the increasing militarization of Crimea is
nothing short of alarming. We urge Russia to desist from
destabilizing transfers of weapon systems and troops
and to demonstrate its commitment to regional stability.
Secondly, opening the Kerch Strait Bridge is yet
another flagrant violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Russia’s systematic harassment and detention of both
Ukrainian and third-country-flagged vessels in the Sea
of Azov since April is yet another attempt to destabilize
Ukraine and its economy.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the UnderSecretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General
for briefing the Security Council today.

Thirdly, we are concerned by Russia’s ongoing
cyberattacks on Ukraine, which attempt to interfere with
Ukraine’s financial, energy and Government sectors.

The United Kingdom is committed to Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We do not and will
not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea.
The illegal seizure of Crimea by Russia in March 2014
directly contravenes the Charter of the United Nations.
The action threatens international peace and security
and has global consequences.

I will now turn to humanitarian issues. As
the Assistant Secretary-General indicated in her
briefing, the conflict continues to have a devastating
humanitarian impact on those who live on both sides
of the contact line. What we heard about mines,
injuries and millions being at dire humanitarian risk
ought to shock us. The lack of access to humanitarian
organizations in non-Government-controlled areas is
greatly contributing to the escalation of the crisis. We
strongly urge the Russia-backed separatists to grant safe
and unhindered access so that essential humanitarian
assistance can be delivered to the 1.8 million people in
need within non-Government-controlled areas. We also
urge donors to respond to the United Nations annual

If I may, I will address the issue of the elections.
Like my European and American colleagues, we see
those so-called elections as illegitimate. They are the
latest example in the Russian campaign to destabilize
Ukraine. They are a clear breach of the Minsk
agreements. And they are illegal under Ukrainian law.
In plain speaking, they are a charade — and a grisly
10/19

18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

S/PV. 8386

humanitarian response plan for Ukraine, which remains
woefully underfunded.

of Ukraine and between Ukraine and the countries of
the region.

In conclusion, we urge all sides, particularly
the Russian-backed separatists, to commit to the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
beginning with a comprehensive ceasefire and the
withdrawal of heavy weaponry. That is the best way
to achieve stability in Ukraine and end the suffering
of the Ukrainian people. To be clear: it was Russian
aggression in 2014 that gave rise to this conflict — in
complete disregard for international law. Russia has a
responsibility, particularly as a permanent member of
the Council, to desist from destabilizing behaviour and
to use its considerable influence on the separatists to
ensure that the Minsk agreements are implemented and
the conflict brought to an end.

Of concern is the impact on the civilian population
of the violence and instability of the protracted conflict,
which is causing economic and human losses in the
region, aggravating the suffering of the population and
forcing the displacement of people from their homes.
In that regard, we appreciate the work and effort of the
humanitarian actors and the Office of the Coordinator
of Humanitarian Affairs in providing humanitarian aid.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me begin by thanking Ms. Rosemary A.
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ms. Ursulla Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for their comprehensive and
detailed briefings on the political situation in Ukraine,
as well as the humanitarian situation.
The Minsk agreements remain the basis of the
international community’s commitment to the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Ukraine. We therefore
call on the parties to the conflict to respect the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, signed in
February 2015 and endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015),
as the only way to achieve stability in the region.
Reducing tensions requires the cooperation and
effort of the parties involved in the conflict. That is
why the continued non-compliance with the ceasefire
on both sides is of great concern. In that regard, we
condemn and regret the assassination of Mr. Alexander
Zakharchenko on 31 August and call on the parties
to respect the maintenance of the ceasefire and to
cooperate and assist in reducing tension.
We encourage the parties to refrain from actions
that could aggravate and destabilize the situation,
thereby undermining the efforts of the international
community, including those of the Security Council, to
seek a peaceful solution to the crisis. We remind the
parties that the solution to the crisis in the region can be
achieved only by peaceful means through direct, frank
and inclusive negotiations, and that they should aim
for a final and just solution that will help to strengthen
harmonious relations among the different ethnic groups

The solution to the crisis in Ukraine cannot
be military but must be political. Therefore, the
international community must continue to support
all diplomatic efforts for a political solution to the
crisis. In conclusion, we stress the need for the parties
to continue to make use of established means to help
resolve the conflict, such as the Normandy quartet, the
Trilateral Contact Group and other key actors.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
should like to express our thanks for the convening
of this meeting and for the briefings provided by
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
We wish to reiterate Peru’s commitment to the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
At the same time, we express our concern about the
complex and unstable situation in the east of the country,
where the civilian population continues to suffer the
consequences of the conflict. In particular, Peru shares
the concern expressed by several delegations of the
Council regarding the claimed intention of the selfproclaimed republics to hold elections in the territories
of Luhansk and Donetsk on 11 November, which could
be detrimental to the process of dialogue between
the parties.
We believe that the scheduled elections contravene
the provisions of the Minsk agreements and the
package of measures for their implementation endorsed
by the Council, which constitute the legal basis for
achieving the political solution required to put an end
to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. We underline that
a free and fair electoral process is needed to ensure
the appointment of legitimate and representative
authorities. In that regard, we note that much of the
population of those territories — 1.5 million internally
displaced persons — have abandoned their homes, and

18-3490111/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

that those who remain — approximately 4.4 million
people out of a total population of 6.5 million — are in
dire need of humanitarian assistance.
We conclude by stressing the importance of the
work of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Special Monitoring Mission, and of efforts
to facilitate dialogue between the parties, in particular
the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States, including Ukraine, and opposes
interference in Ukraine’s internal affairs by any external
forces. China has closely followed developments in
the situation in eastern Ukraine. China hopes that
all parties concerned will take concrete measures to
prevent the escalation of conflict and confrontation and
work together to ease tensions.
The situation in Ukraine has complex historical
and contemporary factors and its handling requires
comprehensive and balanced considerations.
First, the general direction of a political settlement
must be upheld. On the one hand, the legitimate rights,
interest and aspirations of all regions and ethnic groups
in Ukraine should be fully accommodated; on the other,
attention must also be paid to addressing the reasonable
concerns of all relevant parties to achieve a balance
among all interests.
Secondly, we continue to call for the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk
II agreements, as well as the ceasefire and the cessation
of hostilities in eastern Ukraine so that a comprehensive,
lasting and balanced solution to the Ukrainian issue can
be found through dialogue and consultation.
Thirdly, the international community must continue
to promote diplomatic efforts to find a political solution
to the issue. The members of the Security Council
should remain united. Discussions in the Council should
contribute to achieving a genuine de-escalation in the
relevant regions of Ukraine and play a constructive role
in achieving a political settlement. China has always
maintained an objective and impartial position on the
Ukrainian crisis and remains committed to playing a
positive role in the political statement of the crisis.
12/19

30/10/2018

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, as well as Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their useful briefings on the situation in
eastern Ukraine.
At the outset, we renew our commitment to
respecting the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders, without interference in its internal
affairs. We hope that all relevant stakeholders will
fully implement resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk
agreements for peace, as well as presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June. We hope that they will seek
a comprehensive and balanced solution to this issue
through dialogue, especially in line with the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group, in order to
achieve immediate progress on the implementation of
the Minsk Agreements. We also urge both Ukraine and
the Russian Federation to reach a peaceful solution to
the crisis and to show greater political will not only
to strengthen the ceasefire and implement previous
agreements, but also to revitalize a lasting and
comprehensive negotiation process.
The announcement of so-called early elections in
the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk on 11 November
contradicts the spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements
for peace, which include specific provisions on holding
local elections in those areas. In that regard, any steps
that could hinder progress in implementing the Minsk
agreements must be avoided.
Following the briefing given by Ms. Mueller, we
note that the humanitarian situation is still bad, owing
to the many obstacles to the relief work and the lack of
funding for the response plan. The hostilities continue
in eastern Ukraine, despite a relative improvement in
the situation. Shelling, light weapons and landmines
still represent a deadly threat to civilians, who continue
to be killed and maimed. In that regard, we stress the
importance of ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all the areas affected in order to improve
residents’ living conditions.
In conclusion, we call for a peaceful solution to
the crisis in eastern Ukraine, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the agreements
signed by the parties involved, including the Minsk
agreements, which are the appropriate way to settle the
18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

crisis in the region, along with the mediation efforts of
the stakeholders who enjoy the respect and appreciation
of the two parties to the conflict and the international
community as a whole.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I want to express
my appreciation to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their important updates.
Kazakhstan takes a balanced approach to resolving
the Ukrainian crisis through peaceful negotiations,
maintaining a mediation process based on key
principles, international legal norms and the Charter
of the United Nations. My country continues to take
part in multilateral consultations on the quest for a
settlement of the crisis. Kazakhstan is determined to
work with all members of the Council on the issue,
without resorting to political expedients and in an open,
objective, responsible and constructive way.
President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan
contributed significantly to the launch of the Normandy
format and the eventual conclusion of the Minsk
agreements, and has repeatedly expressed Kazakhstan’s
readiness to give comprehensive assistance in the
process of the peaceful settlement of the situation in
south-eastern Ukraine. We therefore support the efforts
of the international community to resolve the conflict
by political and diplomatic means, including through
dialogue and confidence-building measures. We are
in favour of intensifying the work of the Normandy
format and increasing the effectiveness of the Trilateral
Contact Group for the peaceful settlement of the
situation in the south-east of Ukraine.
Kazakhstan fully endorses the activities of the
Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups
on implementing confidence-building measures.
In that regard, we are concerned about the fact that
the negotiation process to resolve the Ukrainian
conflict has actually been suspended in the past few
months, as evidenced by the lack of contacts in the
Normandy format at higher levels. It seems that the
key international participants in the Ukrainian crisis
cannot devise a common plan of action. Kazakhstan,
like other members of the international community,
recognizes the importance of the Minsk agreements
for settling the conflict in the south-east of Ukraine,
and the implementation of those agreements as the

S/PV. 8386

only mechanism currently agreed to by the parties. We
want to point out that they were endorsed by resolution
2202 (2015) of 17 February 2015, which reinforces
their importance and the responsibility of the parties
for strictly implementing the agreements reached,
including a sustainable and long-term ceasefire, the
withdrawal of heavy weapons and a resolution of
political challenges.
To that end, with regard to the upcoming elections
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
Kazakhstan calls on all participants in the negotiation
process to resolve the situation in south-eastern Ukraine
and adhere to the provisions of the Minsk agreements.
We have repeatedly called for strict compliance with
resolution 2202 (2015) on those agreements, which
we consider the only viable existing mechanism for a
peaceful solution to the conflict. It is vital to preventing
further escalation of the conflict and an intensified
exchange of sanctions, as well as to continuing the
search for peaceful ways to overcome differences.
It is especially important to our plurinational
country that Ukraine remain sovereign, stable and
independent, with an ethnically and religiously diverse
society in which all human rights are upheld within
the humanitarian space and all civilians are secure.
We thank Ms. Mueller for bringing the humanitarian
dimension to our attention and for her important
information. We believe that sustainable peace and the
full normalization of the situation can also be achieved
through economic recovery. We therefore call for the
establishment of confidence-building measures on the
economic front as well. We should not enable tensions
to escalate further, for the sake of the people who are
suffering under horrible living conditions and the
constant threat of renewed active warfare.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller for their briefings on the latest
situation in eastern Ukraine.
We note the recent status report and the daily
reports of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which indicate that there is a volatile
security situation on the ground and an increase in the
levels of violence and civilian casualties. In the recent
thematic report of the Special Monitoring Mission we
also noted the impact of the ongoing situation on efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation. We understand

18-3490113/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

the effects of the deteriorating security situation
on civilians and infrastructure and the resulting
importance of responding to humanitarian needs on
the ground. We believe that the implementation of
the ceasefire regime agreed to by the parties is vital
to de-escalating the increasing tensions and helping
to address the needs of the civilian population. In that
regard, we should note the recent call for restraint by
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, who also urged
all sides to protect the population and deliver on their
commitments to ending the violence, and especially
to withdrawing weapons, disengaging, demining and
adhering to the ceasefire.
There is no doubt that only a peaceful settlement
can resolve the situation in eastern Ukraine. That is
why it is absolutely imperative that the parties remain
fully committed to the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and strictly adhere to resolution 2202
(2015), which endorsed the package of measures for
their implementation. We can only hope that the parties
will be able to make progress within the framework
of the Normandy format and other relevant formats in
order to tackle outstanding issues in the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. As some of my colleagues
have said, that is the only way to find a lasting political
solution to the situation in Ukraine.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia insisted that today’s meeting be held
as an open briefing, because we want everybody to hear
the truth. On 31 August Mr. Alexander Zakharchenko,
the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic, died
in a terrorist attack. His signature was on the Minsk
agreements and his death has had a negative impact on
the settlement of the crisis. It is clear that his murder
was designed to destabilize the situation in the region.
There is strong evidence to suggest that the Ukrainians
were involved in his murder, and that is fully consistent
with Kyiv’s confessed logic of dealing with its internal
crisis by force. Our Western colleagues have not
expressed any views on the crime and today were too
afraid to give the floor to the republics’ representatives,
who could have informed the Council about the progress
of the investigation.
On 11 November, elections are due to be held to
elect the Republics’ leaders and deputies to the people’s
councils, owing to the need to fill the power vacuum left
by Mr. Zakharchenko’s murder. As far as the elections’
legitimacy is concerned, they have nothing to do with
14/19

30/10/2018

the Minsk package of measures, which covers municipal
elections. It is simply that people need to live and make
their region habitable in the current circumstances,
with a blockade by Kyiv and the Ukrainian leadership’s
constant threats of the use of force.
The situation in south-eastern Ukraine remains
volatile. Kyiv is not adhering to the ceasefire
agreements and has moved at least 15 kilometres farther
into the so-called grey zone. It is obstinately refusing to
fulfil its political commitments, trying to marginalize
the mechanisms of the Trilateral Contact Group and
launch a second round of discussions on matters that
have already been agreed. Its Western partners are
encouraging that, declaring, like Kurt Volker, that
there is no place under the Minsk agreements for the
proclaimed Donbas republics and that they should
not exist. And President Poroshenko declares that there
is no Minsk format. What sort of reaction are we to
expect from Donbas to such rhetoric?
Today we witnessed yet another round of hypocrisy.
Kyiv’s total, shameless and prolonged sabotage of the
Minsk agreements practically from day one has been
completely ignored. Instead of admitting that fact, the
discussion in the Security Council is about the elections
coming up in November, which represent an essential
measure considering the circumstances of Kyiv’s
sabotage of its political obligations, when the people of
Donbas — who are Ukrainian citizens, by the way — have
been abandoned by the Ukrainian authorities.
We discussed the situation in Ukraine in the Security
Council at the end of May (see S/PV.8270). At the time,
in this Chamber, we laid out the details, point by point,
of the content of the Minsk agreements, which some
people here never tire of calling on Russia to implement.
Every item in the package of measures is about Ukraine
and the militias, and none of them has to do with Russia.
And Ukraine has not implemented a single one of them.
For two years now Kyiv has refused to consolidate the
Steinmeier formula that the Ukrainian President signed
on to, specifying the procedure for implementing the
package of measures, including the holding of elections.
And yet we are constantly being told that Kyiv is
allegedly implementing the agreements. References are
made to the Verkhovna Rada’s enactment and recent
extension of a law on Donbas’s special status. But has
anyone here read further down the law than its title?
We have repeatedly appealed to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to conduct
a comparative analysis of the Minsk package and this
18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

law, since it is completely obvious that it contradicts
it. Unlike the Minsk package, the law was developed
without the consent of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics and the special status it creates is
only temporary. Its entry into force is conditional on the
implementation of other steps that violate the carefully
established sequence in the Minsk agreements. The
amendments to the Constitution on decentralization
have been indefinitely postponed, and the amnesty law
has not entered into force.
It is the European Union and the United States that
are to blame for the Kyiv authorities’ non-compliance
with the Minsk agreements. They keep telling us that
the anti-Russian sanctions will be lifted when the
Minsk agreements are implemented. And as long as
those currently in power in Kyiv are not implementing
them, that position represents an invitation to Ukraine
to continue sabotaging the Minsk agreements, since
it is Russia that will have to pay for it. And Kyiv is
happy to take advantage of that. The same goes for
the elections. Kyiv has done nothing to implement the
political parts of the Minsk package, including the
election provisions, but it protests when the people of
Donetsk start preparing to fill the vacuum created by
Zakharchenko’s murder.
A feature of our Western colleagues is that they
prefer not to hear anything that does not suit them
or that they do not like. That also applies to the
package of measures for implementing the Minsk
agreements. We urge everyone once again to read the
actual document, which is an aid to understanding.
Our Western colleagues were political and financial
sponsors of the so-called revolution of honour, or
rather, the coup d’état, something they do not like to
hear. They were the guarantors of the agreement signed
between Yanukovych and the opposition, which the
opposition immediately violated when it seized power.
They do not like to hear about that either. They prefer
to go on about Russian aggression and the Russian
military presence, which Alexander Hug, the Principal
Deputy Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, did not observe. True, he was
immediately disavowed and that part of his interview
was simply deleted.
The problem is that they have given the Ukrainian
authorities carte blanche. They close their eyes to
everything that goes on there. They let them do and
say whatever they please, and the Kyiv authorities do
just that. Look at Ukraine’s foreign policy or, more

S/PV. 8386

precisely, the lack of it. Everything that the Kyiv
authorities’ mouthpieces do and say in the international
arena, their entire foreign policy agenda, comes down
to one thing, invective and philippics directed at Russia
and anti-Russian initiatives. That is it. The Roman
senator Cato, with his endless call for Carthage to be
destroyed, pales by comparison. But unlike us, our
Western colleagues are deprived of the rare pleasure of
hearing, without interruptions or translations, Ukraine’s
internal political discourse or, as they pompously term
it, the dialogue in their politicum. To take just one
quote from Verkhovna Rada deputy Oleh Barna on the
leading Ukrainian TV channel:
“Russians are not a people. They are a
population without a history. They are bastards,
Tatar-Mongolian mongrels. People who have
always stolen from everyone.”
That is word for word, and I could cite a bunch more
like it.
Why am I doing this? Because everyone in Ukraine
knows Russian. Approximately half of the population
speaks it as if it were their first language. And in fact
the ratio in favour of the Russian language is greater
than that. For the Council’s information, the Ukrainian
authorities, including President Poroshenko, speak
Russian among themselves and in their everyday
life. Only on television do they speak Ukrainian.
Not to mention the fact that a significant part of the
population of Ukraine is Russian. Ukraine enacted a
discriminatory language law that in effect has left
no room for the Russian language in the educational
arena. The same goes for Hungarian, by the way. Ask
the Hungarians. But the scale of the damage to the
Russian language is greater. That was what the Venice
Commission concluded about the discriminatory
nature of the law. But the Kyiv authorities are not about
to change anything, they just keep stepping on the
same rake. After all, the language issue was one of the
main reasons for the start of the conflict in Donbas.
But it is not just about that. Our Western colleagues
do not want to understand, or cannot, that for the
people of Donbas — and not only Donbas, believe
me — living in a country where politicians like Barna
are mainstream — and they are mainstream — the issue
is not merely political or economic, it is existential. The
people in the Crimea breathed a sigh of relief when they
chose to join Russia through a voluntary referendum.
If they had not, things would be worse there now than
they are in Donbas.

18-3490115/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

During the so-called revolution of honour in
Kyiv, the following one-word hashtag appeared:
#theyarejustchildren. It meant “Why take this away
from them? Just indulge them and it will pass.” We have a
saying similar to “Don’t play with matches” — “Matches
are not children’s toys”. Now those children are walking
around Kyiv with torchlight processions and Nazi
slogans and fighting in Donbas with the nationalist
volunteer battalions. That is something else our Western
colleagues prefer not to notice. They have let the genie
out of the bottle, but now it is not that they do not want
to put it back. They cannot.
The great Russian poet Alexander Pushkin wrote
the following lines: “Oh, it isn’t hard to deceive me. / I
am happy to deceive myself.”
That is about these gentlemen in the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Bolivia.
My delegation thanks Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
We reiterate that the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements continues
to be the basis on which the international community
is committed to pursuing a durable peace in eastern
Ukraine. In that regard, we call on all parties to comply
strictly with it. The provisions of these agreements,
along with the development of confidence-building
measures, are essential to consolidating the efforts that
the parties should make in seeking a political solution
to the crisis in Ukraine. In that regard, we call on the
parties to comply with the principles and purposes
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and to
respect international humanitarian law.
We call on all parties to refrain from attacks and
from activities that incite violence or an escalation
of hostilities, to abide by the ban on the use of heavy
artillery, respect the ceasefire, allow unconditional
humanitarian access and facilitate full and safe access
for the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) so that it can carry out its functions
on the ground. In that regard, we call on the parties
to address the root causes of the conflict in order to
16/19

30/10/2018

achieve a lasting solution that takes into account the
rights, interests and legitimate claims of all the parties,
including ethnic groups, so as to achieve a balance of
interests and a political solution to the issue.
With regard to the humanitarian situation,
successive violations of the ceasefire have had a
devastating effect on the lives of millions of civilians.
To that we have to add the attacks on urban areas
and civil infrastructure that affects 60 per cent of
the people living along the so-called line of contact,
which is one of the areas most contaminated by
anti-personnel mines. In that regard, we call on all
parties to adhere strictly to their obligations regarding
the protection of civilians, including resolution 2286
(2016), within a framework of respect for international
humanitarian law. We also firmly support the efforts of
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is carrying
out important work in difficult circumstances.
Lastly, we reiterate that there is no military solution
to this conflict. The international community and the
Council must unite in making every effort possible to
achieve a lasting peace that will benefit the region in
the long term.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. I also appreciate the
briefers’ presentations and analyses of the situation, as
well as their expressed support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. My sincere thanks also
go to the delegations of Sweden, France, the Netherlands,
Poland, the United Kingdom and the United States for
their initiative to bring to the Council’s attention the
issue of preparations for the holding of illegal elections
to be held on 11 November in the occupied areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
Apparently, I am also supposed to thank the Russian
delegation for the proposal to hold this meeting in the
Chamber for the sake of transparency. However, as has
become plainly obvious from the Russian statement,
the Russian delegation is preoccupied first and
foremost with using the Council as a platform to wage
its disinformation campaign with regard to Ukraine
and to accuse the Ukrainian Government of everything
and anything that happens in the occupied territories.
18-34901

30/10/2018

Ukraine

Such behaviour has nothing to do with enhancing
transparency, but it definitely has everything to do with
desperate attempts to avoid responsibility for Russia’s
well-documented wrongful acts against Ukraine — its
military aggression, occupation and attempted illegal
annexation of Ukraine’s territories. It is the behaviour
of a hardened and unrepentant criminal determined to
make a mockery of the justice system. I would therefore
like to express my deepest disappointment over the
stance of the Russian side, which appears to be hellbent on sabotaging all genuine efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict and to bring peace to the wartorn regions of Donbas.
The main trigger for today’s discussion is the
intention of the Russian occupation administration in
the temporarily occupied territories of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine to hold so-called early
elections, which in reality would amount to putting
the leaders of armed gangs in the seats of illegitimate
representative bodies. That is nothing but a provocation
and an outrage against the Minsk agreements and
Ukraine’s sovereignty. It is very unfortunate that the
Kremlin chose the path of further escalation of the
situation instead of the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
As Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry stated on
7 September, the results of those fake elections will be
null and void, will not have any legal effect and will be
recognized neither by Ukraine nor by the international
community. Moreover, such actions only undermine
the Minsk agreements and inflict serious harm on
international efforts to resolve a situation that arose as a
result of the Russian military aggression and occupation
of parts of Ukraine’s territory. The Russian Federation
knows very well that those so-called elections violate
the Constitution of Ukraine and Ukraine’s law on
interim local self-government order in certain areas
of the Donetsk and Lugansk regions, and goes against
both the letter and the spirit of the Minsk agreements,
which, as the Russian Federation is fond of recalling,
were endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015) in 2015.
On 4 October this year, the Ukrainian Parliament
extended the validity of the aforementioned law until
the end of 2019, yet again confirming Ukraine’s
adherence to its commitments under the Minsk
agreements. Despite having more than enough time to
assess the damage to the political process that those
so-called elections will inflict, the Russian Federation
is deliberately pushing forward with carrying out that

S/PV. 8386

provocation. None of us here has a crystal ball into the
future, but there are indications that those so-called
elections might serve as a stepping-stone towards
a new cycle of Russian armed aggression. In that
regard, I thank all members of the Security Council
that have given their clear assessment of such actions
by the Kremlin regime. Let me make it clear that only
legitimately and lawfully elected officials can represent
the local communities in Donbas, and not the Kremlin’s
puppets sent from or appointed by Moscow. Therefore,
any elections that are to be recognized as such have
to be conducted according to Ukrainian legislation, in
line with the standards of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and under proper
international monitoring.
Since the scope of today’s discussion was broadened
by the Russian Federation with its sweeping assessments,
unequivocal characterizations and historical overview,
I wish to highlight the following points with regard to
a much larger picture of Russia’s destructive activities
in and around Ukraine. By the way, I was somewhat
surprised by the tone of the representative of the
Russian Federation, which is becoming more and more
undiplomatic, if not vulgar, with every successive
Security Council meeting on Ukraine.
We have all heard on numerous occasions the
Russian mantra, which has also been repeated today,
that the Ukrainian Government should engage directly
with representatives of Luhansk and Donetsk. A very
inconvenient truth for the Russian side lies in the fact
that there are no legitimate representatives of Luhansk
and Donetsk, freely elected by the people. The persons
sitting in the administrative buildings in Luhansk and
Donetsk are simply Moscow’s puppets, who are installed
or removed from their positions at the whim of their
Kremlin masters. The presence of Russian citizens and
security personnel in those administrations, in addition
to the provision of crucial financial and military
support, continues to this day and remains a decisive
factor in running the day-to-day governance in the
occupied areas of Donbas. Russia continues to exercise
full political and administrative control over the
region. Moscow has created and supported the illegal
armed formations in Donetsk and Luhansk. Their very
existence would be impossible without Russia’s direct
financial aid, which amounts to $1.3 billion per year.
The Russian armed forces exercise full command and
control over military formations in the occupied areas
of Ukraine.

18-3490117/19

S/PV.8386

Ukraine

Here are just a few facts from the latest reports
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
(SMM), since the Russian representative mentioned
the interview with Mr. Hug. In August, its unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAV) detected convoys of cargo
trucks illegally crossing at night the segment of the
Ukrainian-Russian State border currently controlled
by the Russian side. The convoy then drove to the
town of Khrustalny, a well-known storage facility for
Russian heavy weapons. Later, in the same village, the
SMM spotted hundreds of ammunition crates, some
of which were assessed to be brand new, as well as
118 crates of multiple-launch rocket-system rockets.
According to reports of the SMM, its monitors also
identified four distinct electronic warfare systems
near a non-Government-controlled village. Do I have
to say that those systems are employed exclusively by
the Russian army? In September, the SMM reported a
convoy of 10 Kamaz canvas-covered cargo trucks near
the border with the Russian Federation where there
are no border crossing facilities. On three occasions,
from 9 to 12 October, an SMM UAV spotted vehicles,
including an anti-aircraft gun and an armoured personnel
carrier, entering and exiting Ukraine in the middle of
the night via an unpaved road near another village in a
non-Government-controlled area of the Donetsk region,
near the border with the Russian Federation.
In a final stroke, on 27 October an SMM UAV
spotted, in non-Government-controlled territories, a
surface-to-air missile system known in Russian as Osa,
which means “wasp” and English, and subsequently a
convoy of seven trucks on a dirt road near the border
with the Russian Federation. The UAV then experienced
signal interference, which was determined to be caused
by jamming, after which all communication with it
was lost. The UAV did not return to its ground-control
station and is considered lost. Maybe, as Russia often
claims, that should be attributed to peaceful retired
local coal miners, or maybe to the Russian military
officers who decided to spend their vacation time
picking mushrooms in the nearby forest.
In just the past three months, the SMM has observed
convoys, including trucks, on seven occasions on the
same aforementioned unpaved road in the area near the
border. We are just talking about one small area near the
border with the Russian Federation. Does anyone have
any doubt as to who is in charge there? Does anyone
believe the Russian narrative that there are independent
18/19

30/10/2018

authorities in Luhansk and Donetsk, and that Moscow
is merely playing the role of mediator? Really?
If anyone thinks that the only flash point in
Ukraine-Russian relations is in Donbas, they would
be gravely mistaken. Let us have a look at the Sea of
Azov, which has been turned into another theatre of
belligerent Russian actions against Ukraine. In the
past six months, the Russian Federation has stopped,
in an abusive manner, over 200 vessels bound for
the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk.
As confirmed by the SMM, those interruptions to
commercial shipping have caused economic and trade
disruptions resulting in commercial losses for the ports,
which employ thousands of people. Such actions are
inconsistent with Russia’s obligations under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and breach
the navigational rights of Ukraine and of the flag States
of the stopped vessels. Vessels bound for Russian ports
in the Sea of Azov have not been subjected to similar
disruptive stoppages.
Then there is the Kerch Strait Bridge, built
unlawfully and unilaterally in violation of Ukraine’s
rights. It has become a major hindrance to international
navigation. The bridge is only 35 metres high, and only
vessels with an air draft of less than 33 metres and a
length of less than 160 metres may safely pass under
it. As a result, panamax vessels and many handymax
vessels are now prevented from transiting the Kerch
Strait. That has had a major impact on traffic to
Ukraine’s ports.
Russia also uses the Sea of Azov as an additional
channel to supply its forces in Donbas with weapons
from the occupied territory of Crimea. According to
our information, Russia has not given up on the idea
of having a land corridor to Crimea. Furthermore, the
threat of a maritime assault from the Azov direction in
the case of a large-scale military confrontation remains a
source of security destabilization in the Donetsk region.
In the occupied Crimea, active militarization proceeds
at full speed. Russia has more than doubled the strength
of its military on the peninsula and continues to prepare
Crimean military infrastructure for the deployment of
nuclear weapons. That includes refurbishing Soviet-era
nuclear warhead storage facilities.
The human rights situation on the peninsula also
remains highly alarming. The findings of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights confirm the continuing failure of the Russian
18-34901

30/10/2018

S/PV. 8386

Ukraine

Federation authorities, as the occupying power, to
adequately guarantee and protect a wide range of
human rights in Crimea. Russia keeps ignoring the
order of the International Court of Justice, issued one
year ago, that requires, among other things, for Russia
to refrain from maintaining or imposing limitations on
the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to preserve
its representative institutions, including the Mejlis, as
well as to ensure the availability of education in the
Ukrainian language. Despite the clear meaning of
that order, an entire year has passed in which Russia
has continued its ban on the Mejlis and the number of
students studying in the Ukrainian language dropped
from more than 13,000 in the 2013-2014 academic year
to just 172 in the 2017-2018 academic year. Let us take
a moment and think of those numbers — more than
13,000 and 172. It is a great difference.
I would add to that the fact that during the period
from 2014 to 2017, 108,000 people moved from the
Russian Federation to Crimea and Sevastopol. What is
that if not a deliberate policy to change the demographic
composition of the region? Over 70 Ukrainian citizens
have been detained in Russia and the occupied Crimea
by Russian authorities under trumped-up, politically
motivated charges. Oleg Sentsov, facing the threat of
torture by force-feeding, had to terminate his hunger
strike after a four-month struggle. His health has
deteriorated dramatically and his condition remains
critical. The recent decision of the European Parliament
to award the Sakharov Prize to Oleg Sentsov is a
powerful signal to all those illegally detained that they
are not forgotten. The health conditions of Volodymyr
Balukh, Asan Chapuch, Emir-Usein Kuku, Stanislav
Klykh, Ihor Hryb, Yevhen Panov and many others who

do not receive appropriate medical assistance remains
of great concern.
I have behind me today Ms. Emine Dzhaparova,
First Deputy Minister of Information Policy of Ukraine.
She is a Crimean Tatar; she was born there. She lived
and worked in Crimea and she had to leave after the
Russian occupation. And she can tell a thousand stories
about what is happening in the current reality of Crimea.
That whole bleak picture would be incomplete
without mentioning the massive campaign of
propaganda and incitement of hatred against Ukraine
and Ukrainians launched by the Russian Government.
Russian State-owned media and public figures spend
hours on prime-time television to promote insinuations
about the Ukrainian people. That has already played
a significant role in the occupation of Crimea and in
fuelling the conflict in Donbas.
What is to be made of all this? It is both quite
simple and extremely difficult at the same time. The
keys to the resolution of the conflict lie in Moscow. On
our part, we are ready for constructive engagement to
end the conflict. Alas, such readiness is not yet present
in Russia. As regrettable as it may be, until there is
a tangible change in Russian policy towards building
genuine neighbourly relations with countries around its
borders, based on respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, instead of creating areas of instability and
waging wars, the Council will continue to gather around
this table to discuss the never-ending follies of Russia’s
expansionist and aggressive policies. One thing is for
sure — appeasing the Kremlin and playing along will
not contribute to building a more stable and safer world.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

18-3490119/19
