11.

Resolutions adopted withoat reference to a Main Committee

Noting with deep concern that, through a combination of
military and economic pressures, in violation of international law, the South African authorities have sought to
destabilize the front-line and other neighbouring States,
Considering that contacts between apartheid South
Africa and the front-line and other neighbouring States,
necessitated by geography, colonial legacy and other reasons, should not be used by other States as a pretext for
legitimizing the apartheid system or justifying attempts to
break the international isolation of that system,
Convinced that the existence of apartheid will continue
to lead to ever-increasing resistance by the oppressed
people, by all possible means, and increased tension and
conflict that will have far-reaching consequences for southern Africa and the world,
Convinced that policies of collaboration with the apartheid régime, instead of respect for the legitimate aspirations ofthe genuine representatives ofthe great majority of
the people, will encourage its repression and aggression
against neighbouring States and defiance of the United
Nations,
Expressing itsfu/1 support for the legitimate aspiration of
African States and peoples, and of the Organization of
African Unity, for the total liberation of the continent of
Africa from colonialism and racism,
1. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid which
deprives the majority of the South African population of
their citizenship, fundamental freedoms and human rights,
in particular the right to self-determination;
2. Strongly condemns the South African authorities for
the killings, arbitrary mass arrests and the detention of
members of mass organizations as well as individuals, the
overwhelming majority of whom belong to the majority
population, for opposing the apartheid system, the socalled "new constitution" and the state of emergency;
3. Further condemns the overt and the covert aggressive actions of South Africa directed at the destabilization
of,neighbouring States, and those aimed against refugees
from South Africa and Namibia;
4. Demands that the South African authorities:
(a) Release immediately and unconditionally Nelson
Mandela and all other política! prisoners, detainees and
restrictees;
(b) Immediately lift the state of emergency;
(e) Abrogate discriminatory laws and lift bans on ali
organizations, news media and individuals opposing
apartheid;
(d) Grant freedom of association and full trade union
rights to ali workers of South Africa;
(e) Initiate without preconditions a política! dialogue
with genuine leaders of the majority population with a
view to dismantling apartheid without delay and establishing a representative government;
(j) Dismantle the bantustan structures;
(g) lmmediately withdraw ali their troops from southern Angola and end the destabilization of front-line and
other States;
5. Urges the Security Council to consider without
delay the adoption of effective mandatory sanctions
against South Africa;
6. Further urges the Security Council to take steps for
the strict implementation of the mandatory arms embargo
instituted by its resolution 418 ( 1977) and of the arms
embargo requested in its resolution 558 (1984) and, within
the context of the relevant resolutions, to secure an end to
military and nuclear co-operation with South Africa and

41

the import of military equipment or supplies from South
Africa;
7. Appea/s to ali States that have not yet done so,
pending mandatory sanctions by the Security Council, to
consider national legislative or other appropriate measures
to increase the pressure on the apartheid régime of South
Africa, such as:
(a) Cessation of further investments in, and financial
loans to, South Africa;
(b) An end to ali promotion of and support for trade
with South Africa;
(e) Prohibition of the sale of krugerrands and ali other
coins minted in South Africa;
(d) Cessation of ali forros of military, police or intelligence co-operation with the South African authorities, in
particular the sale of computer equipment;
(e) An end to nuclear collaboration with South Africa;
(/) Cessation of export and sale of oil to South Africa;
8. Appea/s to ali States, organizations and institutions:
(a) To increase humanitarian, legal, educational and
other such assistance to the victims of apartheid;
(b) To increase support for the liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity and to ali
those struggling against apartheid and for a non-racial,
democratic society in South Africa;
(e) To increase assistance to the front-line States and
the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference in order to increase their economic strength and
independence from South Africa;
9. Appea/s to ali Governments and organizations to
take appropriate action for the cessation of ali academic,
cultural, scientific and sports relations that would support
the apartheid régime of South Africa, as well as relations
with individuals, institutions and other bodies endorsing
or based on apartheid;
1O. Commends those States that have already adopted
voluntary measures against the apartheid régime of South
Africa in accordance with General Assembly resolution
39/72 G of 13 December 1984 and invites those that have
not yet done so to follow their example;
11. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa for the total eradication
of apartheid and for the establishment of a non-racial,
democratic society in which ali the people, irrespective of
race, colour or creed, enjoy human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
12. Pays tribute to and expresses so/idarity with organizations and individuals struggling against apartheid and
for a non-racial, democratic society in accordance with the
principies of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights; 39
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
111th plenary meeting
JO December 1985

40/95.

United Nations Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy

The General Assemhly,
Reaffirming the principies and provisions of its resolution 32/50 of 8 December 1977,
Recal/ing its subsequent resolutions 33/4 of 2
November 1978, 34/63 of 29 November 1979, 35/ 112 of

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

42

5 December 1980, 36/78 of9 December 1981, 37/167 of
17 December 1982, 38/60 of 14 December 1983 and 39/
74 of 13 December 1984,
Noting that the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses ofNuclear Energy at its
sixth session decided to establish a Working Group to
carry out formal/official inter-sessional intergovernmental
work under the guidance ofthe Chairman ofthe Committee, participation being open to members of the Preparatory Committee and to other interested Member States,
and that the Working Group will conclude its deliberations
in time to submit its report to the Preparatory Committee
for consideration at its seventh session to be held at
Vienna from lO to 21 November 1986, 73
Noting further that the Preparatory Committee, upon
reconsideration of the dates of the Conference on practica!
considerations and on the understanding that this did not
constitute a reopening of the question of timing in any
substantive sense, decided that the Conference should be
held at Geneva from 23 March to lO April 1987, 74
l. Approves the conclusions and decisions contained in
the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses ofNuclear Energy on its
sixth session, including the dates for the seventh session of
the Preparatory Committee, from 10 to 21 November
1986, and the new dates ofthe Conference, from 23 March
to lO April 1987;

2. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and the Secretary-General of the Conference in pursuance of paragraph
3 of General Assembly resolution 39/74;
3. Notes wrth satisfaction the progress made in the
preparations for the Conference and requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to continue with the preparations;
4. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
specialized agencies and other relevant organizations of
the United Nations system to contribute further to the
preparations of the Conference by revising and updating,
as necessary and appropriate, their input documents for
the Conference, bearing in mind paragraph 7 of General
Assembly resolution 39/74 and in the light of the comments by the members ofthe Preparatory Committee at its
sixth session;
5. Invites ali States to co-operate actively in the preparations for the Conference and to make available at the
earliest the information requested in paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 36/78 and in the broad questionnaire circulated by the Secretary-General of the Conference in March 1984;

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the ítem entitled "United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".
114th plenary meeting
12 December l 98 5
71 See O/fiáa/ Re, ords v( thc General .~uemNv. Fortieth Session, Supplcmenr No. 47 (A/40/47). para. 25.

74 /bid., para. 41.

75 /bid,, Supp/ement Nv. 35 (A/40135).

40/96. Question of Palestine
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3376 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976, 32/40 of 2 December
1977, 33/28 of 7 December 1978, 34/65 A and B of 29
November 1979 and 34/65 C and D of 12 December
1979, ES-7/2 of 29 July 1980, 35/169 of 15 December
1980, 36/120 of lO December 1981, ES-7/4 of 28 April
1982, ES-7/5 of 26 June 1982, ES-7/9 of 24 September
1982, 37 /86 A of 10 December 1982, 38/58 A of 13
December 1983 and 39/49 A of 11 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 75

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on the
Exercise ofthe Inalienable Rights ofthe Palestinian People
for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the
General Assembly;
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in paragraphs 163 to 172 of the report of the Committee 75 and
draws the attention of the Security Council to the fact that
action on the Committee's recommendations, as repeatedly endorsed by the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session and subsequently, is still awaited;
3. Requests the Committee to continue to keep under
review the situation relating to the question of Palestine as
well as the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Achievement of Palestinian Rights 76 and to report
and make suggestions to the General Assembly or the
Security Council, as appropriate;
4. Authorizes the Committee to continue to exert all
efforts to pro mote the implementation of its recommendations, including representation at conferences and meetings and the sending of delegations where such activities
would be considered by it to be appropriate, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session
and thereafter;
5. Requests the Committee to continue to extend its
co-operation to non-governmental organizations in their
contribution towards heightening international awareness
of the facts relating to the question of Palestine and in creating a more favourable atmosphere for the full implementation of the Committee's recommendations, and to take
the necessary steps to expand its contacts with those
organizations;
ó. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, as well as other
lJnited Nations bodies associated with the question of
Palestine, to co-operate fully with the Committee and to
make available to it, at its request, the relevant information and documentation which they have at their disposal;

7. Decides to circula te the report of the Committee to
ali the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges
them to take the necessary action, as appropriate, in
accordance with the Committee·s programme of implementation;
76 R,•port oj the lnternatwnal Con/erer,ce ,m the Questwn vf l'aleslint',
<ieneva, 29 August-7 Septem/w 198} \Un,ted Nations pubhcation, Sales No.
E. 8 3 1.21 ), cha p. l. sect. B
