S/2019/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 January 2019
Original: English

Status of implementation of Security Council
resolution 2451 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present note is submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council
resolution 2451 (2018), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
report on progress regarding the implementation of the resolution, including any
breaches of commitments by the parties, on a weekly basis, as called for by the parties,
until further notice. The present report covers the period from 29 December 2018 to
4 January 2019.

II. Redeployment Coordination Committee
2.
Further to my previous report to the Security Council (S/2018/1173), the first
joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination Committee, held from 26 to
28 December 2018, was a historic occasion at which representatives of the Government
of Yemen and the Houthis were brought together at a location on the frontlines of the
conflict. The meeting was held within four days of the arrival of the United N ationsappointed Chair of the Committee, Patrick Cammaert, in the city of Hudaydah. Both
parties made concerted efforts to ensure the safety and security of the participants
during the three-day meeting, including through the demining of access routes and the
restraint shown by the various forces operating in the city and its environs.
3.
At the first meeting of the Redeployment Coordination Committee, the parties
considered the terms of reference of the Committee and the modalities for the
implementation of its mandate. The parties agreed that the Committee provided a forum
in which to share relevant information, to build mutual trust and to de -escalate and
prevent the recurrence of conflict in order to create a space in Hudaydah for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. The parties agreed on the following
structures: a secretariat to support the Committee Chair; a Joint Coordination and
Communication Centre to serve as an information repository; and a Liaison and
Coordination Mechanism, with liaison and coordination teams to supervise and monitor
the ceasefire and redeployment compliance of the parties to the Agreement.
4.
Given the stark humanitarian conditions that compelled the reaching of an
agreement on Hudaydah, the Committee Chair worked to persuade the parties to
consider humanitarian confidence-building measures as the first order of priority,

19-00140 (E)

080119

*1900140*

S/2019/11

alongside steps to uphold the ceasefire and the redeployment of forces. Discussions on
a confidence-building measure to ease humanitarian access proved contentious and
revealed the current lack of trust between the parties. Nevertheless, by 28 December
2018, the parties had agreed to a proposal by the Chair to open the Hudaydah -Sana’a
road (from the port and through Kilo 16), as a matter of priority, as well as on modalities
for the movement of a humanitarian convoy along the route on 29 December 2018. It
was also decided that the Committee would reconvene on 1 January 2019.
5.
The confidence-building measure to open the Hudaydah-Sana’a road as a
humanitarian corridor did not proceed as planned on 29 December 2018. While the
Government of Yemen was purportedly ready to support the movement of a
humanitarian convoy that day, the Houthis were not. In a meeting with Houthi
representatives at the Hudaydah port, the Committee Chair expressed his
disappointment about the missed opportunity to build confidence between the parties
and to facilitate much-needed aid for the Yemeni people. Meanwhile, in lieu of
preparations for the confidence-building measures, the Houthi representatives to the
Committee informed the Chair of unilateral redeployment measures taken at the
Hudaydah port and invited the United Nations to inspect the redeployment. While
the Chair welcomed that effort, he emphasized that any redeployment would only be
credible if it were conducted in consonance with mutually agreed modalities and if
both parties and the United Nations were able to monitor the process and ascertain
that it was in accordance with the Stockholm Agreement.
6.
To ensure transparency and the transmission of accurate information about the
events of 29 December, the Committee Chair held a telephone conversation with the
representatives of the Government of Yemen to the Committee, in which he explained
the events of the day. Given the extensive media coverage of the unilateral
redeployment of Houthi forces from the Hudaydah port and the subsequent loss of
trust among the parties, the Chair also communicated the facts about the events of
29 December through an official letter dated 30 December 2018 addressed to both
parties.
7.
On 1 January 2019, the Redeployment Coordination Committee reconvened in
the city of Hudaydah. Between 1 and 3 January 2019, the Committee discussed and
agreed on the operationalization of the Liaison and Coord ination Mechanism. Both
parties also appointed liaison officers. On 2 January 2019, a workshop was held for
the six liaison officers (three from each party), to provide a broad overview of the
concept of the Mechanism and its modalities for operation and to help to build trust
and relationships between the liaison officers. The Chair and advance team are
identifying capacities to mount an ad hoc liaison and coordination team, within
existing limited resources, in the eventuality of any urgent requirement.
8.
The parties also used that meeting to discuss their initial views on redeployment.
The Chair presented a series of questions to the parties to assist them in the
preparation of their respective proposals. Those proposals were to be presented to the
Chair at the next Committee meeting, scheduled for 8 January 2019.

III. The situation in the city of Hudaydah and the ports of
Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa
A.

Monitoring of the ceasefire in Hudaydah
9.
During the reporting period, mutual allegations of ceasefire violations
continued. Alleged incidents were most commonly reported in frontline areas of the
southern part of Hudaydah Governorate, along key routes running from Houthi -held
territory in the east to territory held by the Government of Yemen on the western

2/5

19-00140

S/2019/11

coastal strip, and in contested areas of Hudaydah city. Most alleged incident reports
involved direct and indirect fire engagements. There have been no reports suggesting
that either party has attempted to make new territorial gains.
10. Of concern during the reporting period are the allegations relating to the town
of Durayhimi, situated approximately 15 km south of Hudaydah city and the location
of most of the alleged incidents. It is worth noting that Durayhimi is contested, with
both parties controlling sections of the town and its environs. The Houthis have also
alleged that Government of Yemen forces were reinforcing their positions to the
south-east of the airport and in the general area of the 22 May Hospital, while the
Government of Yemen has alleged that the Houthis continued to fortify their positions
in the city, by constructing new defences along key routes on the periphery of the city.
11. At the present time, none of the alleged incidents of ceasefire violations have
been independently assessed by the Redeployment Coordination Committee. As at
3 January 2019, the Committee was discussing the parameters of what constituted a
ceasefire violation and what the most appropriate liaison and coordination mechanism
to ascertain violations would be.

B.

Redeployment of forces
12. Under the Stockholm Agreement, a two-phased redeployment of forces is
envisioned, from the city of Hudaydah and the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra ’s Isa
to agreed-upon locations outside the city and the ports, the details of which are to be
determined by the Redeployment Coordination Committee. The timelines stipulated
in the Agreement involve a first phase of redeployment of forces from the three ports
and from critical parts of the city associated with humanitarian facilities, within two
weeks of the ceasefire entering into force. A second phase, which would see the full
mutual redeployment of all forces from the city of Hudaydah and the ports, is to be
completed within a maximum of three weeks of the ceasefire entering into force .
13. As reported in paragraph 8 above, the Committee is discussing the modalities
for a credible redeployment of forces, including the identification of agreed -upon
locations and units for redeployment, modalities for verification and monitoring
activities and realistic timeframes. Agreement on those modalities is critical to the
integrity of the process, in order to avert a recurrence of the disputed Houthi
redeployment from the port of Hudaydah on 29 December 2018.

C.

Strengthened United Nations presence
14. As part of the plan by the World Food Programme (WFP) to support the
management of the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa, WFP has appointed a
project lead to oversee the preparation phase of its facilitation and support efforts.
WFP is on standby to undertake the assessment of the ports. To date, however, none
of the appointed staff members have received visas.
15. Of the overall staffing requirements by United Nations ent ities supporting the
agreement on Hudaydah, 39 personnel members are currently in-country or have
secured visas, and 28 visas are currently under process and pending approval by the
authorities in Sana’a. No visas or equipment, including armoured vehicles,
communications equipment and personal protective equipment, were cleared for
United Nations entities during the reporting period. Adding to those challenges are
the constraints on accommodations in Hudaydah. Overall, existing United Nations
accommodations and office space have reached full capacity, and discussions are
underway to identify additional space. Some United Nations sites currently remain

19-00140

3/5

S/2019/11

off-limits owing to security concerns. The Department of Safety and Security is
awaiting permission from the authorities in Sana’a to deploy international staff to
Hudaydah to assess accommodation options and reassess the post -ceasefire security
situation in the city.

IV. Humanitarian situation and access
16. Bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian access remain since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2451 (2018). Two weeks prior to the reporting period, the
authorities in Sana’a requested a 72-hour advance notice period for United Nations
movement requests (increased from 48 hours), including for Hudaydah. On
31 December 2018, United Nations entities in Hudaydah met with the National
Authority for the Management and Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster
Recovery (affiliated with the authorities in Sana’a) to discuss priority routes to reopen
in order to facilitate humanitarian access. The Authority agreed to support the opening
of priority roads, as outlined in the Stockholm Agreement, and to prioritize routes
needed for humanitarian access, starting with the Hudaydah-Sana’a road (from the
port and through Kilo 16), which had been slated to reopen on 29 December 2018
(see paragraphs 4 and 5 above).

V. Prisoner exchange
17. Both parties submitted comments on the responses to the lists of prisoners
proposed for release and exchange, in accordance with the prisoner exchange
agreement. The parties continue to work with the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
finalize the logistics and procedures involved in the release and exchange process.

VI. Situation in Ta‘izz
18. Staff of the Office of the Special Envoy are currently in Aden to prepare
meetings with the joint committee referred to in the statemen t of understanding on
Ta‘izz. The Office plans to undertake bilateral discussions locally with each party in
early January before convening a meeting of the joint committee.

VII. Observations
19. I am encouraged that the parties remain committed to the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. I am especially heartened by the goodwill of the parties and
their cooperation with the United Nations-appointed Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee in preparing and convening the first meetings of the
Committee in the city of Hudaydah, within a relatively short period of time. Those
efforts are reassuring and underscore our collective recognition of the urgency of
finding a sustainable solution for Hudaydah and securing the vital humanitarian
response, which the Stockholm Agreement is intended to enable.
20. The reports of the Redeployment Coordination Committee for the current
period, however, demonstrate the complexity of the implementation task at hand.
Despite the fact that both parties consented to the Stockholm Agreement, there is still
a lack of common interpretation with regard to the implementation and sequencing of
the agreement on Hudaydah, driven by the lack of trust among the parties and their
apprehension with respect to making operational concessions outside of a
4/5

19-00140

S/2019/11

comprehensive political solution to the conflict in Yemen. Against that background,
it is critical that the parties, through the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
immediately formulate an effective monitoring mechanism to s upervise the ceasefire
and the redeployment of forces along agreed specifications. In particular, for
redeployment to be successful and credible, it must be a fully verifiable exercise
conducted by both parties and the United Nations. Anything short of tha t goal could
derail the fragile progress being made to address the situation in Hudaydah. I
therefore urge the parties to continue to work together to define the modalities of the
process, in good faith and in a timely manner, and to provide the Committee with
unhindered access throughout Hudaydah Governorate so that it can implement its
mandate.
21. The United Nations continues to move forward with its support to the parties in
their implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. United Nations operations dep end
on the full cooperation of both parties. As I have said before, the timely issuance of
visas and other administrative approvals for required equipment are critical to the
additional deployment of United Nations personnel needed to support the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. Such cooperation will, in turn, create a
positive atmosphere conducive to the next steps facilitated by the United Nations
aimed at ending the conflict.
22. I again urge the parties to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and assets at all times. Since the Redeployment Coordination Committee
Chair and the advance team arrived in Hudaydah, they have been informed by the
Department of Safety and Security of the increased number of threats against t he
Committee and against United Nations personnel. That increased threat is of growing
concern and will impede the work of the Committee and the ability of the United
Nations to operate safely and effectively.
23. Lastly, I wish to urge continued unity of purpose within the Security Council
and the broader international community to sustain pressure on both parties as they
work together to implement the Stockholm Agreement. Although the specified
deadlines may not be met in the coming days, as long as the parties demonstrate
goodwill, no effort should be spared to support the easing of restrictions on
humanitarian operations and progress on security arrangements. The people of Yemen
deserve that much. Achieving the immediate objective of avoiding an unspeakable
human tragedy in Hudaydah and further afield in Yemen requires nothing less.

19-00140

5/5
