United Nations

A/RES/57/21

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 156

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/57/563)]

57/21.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its fifty-fourth session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-fourth session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the codification and progressive
development of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the
Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Wishing to enhance further the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a
body of governmental representatives and the International Law Commission as a
body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between
the two organs,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which,
given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be suitable for
the progressive development and codification of international law and therefore may be
included in the future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with
appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Law Seminar,

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum
(A/57/10 and Corr.1).
2
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

02 53916

A/RES/57/21

Stressing the usefulness of structuring the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifty-fourth session; 1
2.
Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to
proceed with its work on the topic “International liability for injurious consequences
arising out of acts not prohibited by international law”, as requested by the General
Assembly in its resolution 56/82 of 12 December 2001, and also takes note of its
decision to include in its programme of work the topics “Responsibility of
international organizations”, “Shared natural resources” and “Fragmentation of
international law: difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of
international law”; 3
3.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views on the various aspects
involved in the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the
specific issues identified in chapter III of its report;
4.
Reiterates its invitation to Governments, within the context of
paragraph 3 above, to provide information to the International Law Commission
regarding State practice on the topic “Unilateral acts of States”;
5.
Also reiterates its invitation to Governments to submit the most relevant
national legislation, decisions of domestic courts and State practice relevant to
diplomatic protection in order to assist the International Law Commission in its
work on the topic “Diplomatic protection”;
6.
Recommends that the International Law Commission, taking into account
the comments and observations of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, continue its work on the topics in its
current programme;
7.
Invites the International Law Commission to continue taking measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity;
8.
Takes note of paragraph 524 of the report of the International Law
Commission with regard to cost-saving measures, and encourages the Commission
to continue taking such measures at its future sessions;
9.
Takes note also of paragraph 532 of the report, and decides that the next
session of the International Law Commission shall be held at the United Nations
Office at Geneva from 5 May to 6 June and from 7 July to 8 August 2003;
10. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
International Law Commission and the Sixth Committee, and in this context
encourages, inter alia, the holding of informal discussions between the members of
the Sixth Committee and those members of the Commission attending the fiftyeighth session of the General Assembly;

_______________
3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum
(A/57/10 and Corr.1), paras. 517 and 518.

2

A/RES/57/21

11. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on
which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in
written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
12. Also requests the International Law Commission to continue the
implementation of article 16, paragraph (e), and article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its
statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and other
bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such
cooperation;
13. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
14. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the critical role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission;
15. Reaffirms also its previous decisions concerning the summary records
and other documentation of the International Law Commission; 4
16. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to
be held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
that an increasing number of participants, in particular from developing countries,
will be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, and appeals to States to
continue to make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar
with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to
continue considering ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly, together with
such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following
established practice;
19. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after
the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its
report containing a summary of the work of that session and the draft articles
adopted on either first or second reading by the Commission;
20. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly commence on
27 October 2003.
52nd plenary meeting
19 November 2002
_______________
4

See resolution 32/151, para. 10, resolution 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual
reports of the International Law Commission to the Assembly.

3
