A/RES/71/90

United Nations

Distr.: General
22 December 2016

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 48

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2016
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/71/492)]

71/90.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010,
65/271 of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012,
68/50 of 5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013, 69/85 of
5 December 2014, 70/82 of 9 December 2015 and 70/230 of 23 December 2015,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and
technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe,
and the extraordinary achievements made in space exploration efforts, including
deepening the understanding of the planetary system and the Sun and the Earth
itself, in the use of space science and technology for the benefit of all h umankind
and in the development of the international legal regime governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for
international cooperation in space activities represented by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and
Legal Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the
Secretariat,
Emphasizing the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE+50), to be
commemorated in 2018, which will be an opportunity to consider the current status
and chart the future of the contribution of the Committee to global governance of
outer space activities, and for which the Committee and its subsidiary bodies have
made progress in the preparatory work for their thematic sessions in 2018,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the p rovince of all humankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,

16-21248 (E)

*1621248*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/90

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of international law, including the relevant norms of international space law and
their important role in international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer
space for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international
treaties that promote the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new
challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer space with a
view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the
challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the
impact of space debris which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration
and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space projects, and
the importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international
cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, including
satellite communications, Earth observation systems and satellite navigation
technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long -term solutions for
sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote
the development of all countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that
regard the need to harness the benefits of space technology towards implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3 and desirous of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of spacebased services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacity building and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in
developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as tele-health, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean and climate
monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of th e
United Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural
development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, including
Ebola virus disease, to the detriment of human life, society and development, and
urging the international community to enhance the role of space-based solutions, in
particular tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 70/1.
3
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
2

2/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/71/90

Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized
the important role that space science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-ninth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-ninth session, 5 with the exception of the annex
thereto, which, together with a preambular text and a second set of guidelines, will
form a full compendium of guidelines, to be adopted by the Committee and referred
to the General Assembly in 2018; 6
2.
Agrees that the Committee, at its sixtieth session, should consider the
substantive items recommended at its fifty-ninth session, 7 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
3.
Notes that, at its fifty-fifth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee continued its work, 8 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 70/82;
4.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-sixth session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
the Committee, 9 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those
of developing countries;
5.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 10 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well as incorporating them
into their national legislation;
6.
Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the
Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat and p ublished in all official
languages of the United Nations could encourage further studies within States in
cooperation with relevant entities in support of capacity-building efforts in space
law and policy;
_______________
4

Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20).
6
The annex to the report of the Committee, entitled “Guidelines for the long-term sustainability of outer
space activities: first set”, is not submitted to the General Assembly for action. The preambular text and the
second set of guidelines are still to be completed to form a full compendium of guidelines, which is to be
referred to the Assembly at its seventy-third session, in 2018 (see paras. 133–137 of the report).
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20), para. 318.
8
Ibid., chap. II.C; and A/AC.105/1113.
9
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20),
paras. 212–214.
10
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843);
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on
Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020);
and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
5

3/7

A/RES/71/90

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

7.
Notes that, at its fifty-third session, the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee of the Committee continued its work, 11 as mandated by the General
Assembly in its resolution 70/82;
8.
Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-fourth
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 12 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
9.
Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering,
monitoring and physically characterizing potentially hazardous near -Earth objects to
ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries with limited capacity in
predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats,
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and
disaster management in the event of a near-Earth object impact, and notes with
satisfaction the establishment of and work carried out by the Internatio nal Asteroid
Warning Network and the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group to implement the
recommendations for an international response to the near -Earth object impact
threat, with the support of the Office for Outer Space Affairs, serving as the
permanent secretariat of the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group; 13
10. Declares 30 June International Asteroid Day to observe each year at the
international level the anniversary of the Tunguska impact over Siberia, Russian
Federation, on 30 June 1908 and to raise public awareness about the asteroid impact
hazard;
11. Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space
debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and
consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Inter-Agency Space
Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 14 endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and invites other States to implement, through
relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
12. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the
problem of collisions of space objects, especially those with nuclear power sources,
with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the continuation of
national research on this question, for the development of improved technology for
the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on
space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible, information thereon should
be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that international
cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize
the impact of space debris on future space missions;
13. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
_______________
11

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20),
chap. II.B; and A/AC.105/1109.
12
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20),
paras. 145–147.
13
Ibid., para. 119; ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), para. 153; ibid., Sixty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), para. 144; and A/AC.105/1038, para. 198, and annex III.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), annex.

4/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/71/90

essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
14. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session, and agrees that the
Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of s pace security
and associated matters that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and
responsible conduct of space activities, including ways to promote international,
regional and interregional cooperation to that end;
15. Decides to convene, within existing resources, a joint half-day panel
discussion of the Disarmament and International Security Committee (First Committee)
and the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), to
constitute a joint contribution by the First and Fo urth Committees to the fiftieth
anniversary of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, and to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy -second session, under
the item entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space”, a
sub-item entitled “Joint panel discussion of the First and Fourth Committees on
possible challenges to space security and sustainability”; 15
16. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee, at its fifty-ninth session,
agreed on seven thematic priorities of UNISPACE+50, including their objectives
and mechanisms; 16
17. Emphasizes the central role of the Office for Outer Space Affairs in
fostering capacity-building in the use of space science and technology and their
applications and in providing assistance to developing countries, at their request, in
the development of national space policy and legislation in conformity with
international space law, as well as in the strengthening of institutional capacity in
space activities, and urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund in
Support of the United Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in order to enhance the capacity of the Office to provide technical and legal advisory
services in its priority thematic areas;
18. Notes with satisfaction the workshops and symposiums held by the
Office for Outer Space Affairs in 2016, and requests the Office to continue to
apprise the Committee and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and Legal
Subcommittee, at their respective sessions in 2017, of the status of its capacitybuilding activities; 17
19. Recognizes the capacity-building activities under the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications, which provide unique benefits for Member
States, in particular developing countries, participating in those activities;
20. Notes with satisfaction the tenth anniversary of the United Nations
Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN-SPIDER), and recognizes the significant achievements made and the
advisory support provided to 38 Member States within the framework of
_______________
15

Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20), para. 273; and A/AC.105/1113, annex I,
para. 19 (c).
16
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20), para. 296.
17
Ibid., para. 60. See also A/AC.105/1107, annex II, and resolution 70/230.

5/7

A/RES/71/90

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

UN-SPIDER since its establishment in 2006 18 with the valuable contributions of its
network of regional support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary
basis, to provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address
the increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
21. Reiterates the importance of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 19 in which the value of space-based technology and Earth
observation for disaster management and emergency response is recognized, and
notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office for Outer Space Affairs and its
UN-SPIDER programme towards promoting international cooperation as a way to
enhance the use of space-based technologies and related services at the national and
local levels;
22. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International
Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office
for Outer Space Affairs, in its capacity as executive secretariat of the International
Committee, towards achieving compatibility and interoperabili ty among global and
regional space-based positioning, navigation and timing systems and in the
promotion of the use of global navigation satellite systems and their integration into
national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries, and notes w ith
appreciation that the International Committee will hold its eleventh meeting in
Sochi, Russian Federation, from 6 to 11 November 2016;
23. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and
technology education, affiliated to the United Nations, namely, the African regional
centres for space science and technology education in the French and English
languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China,
the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific,
located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science an d Technology Education
for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico,
and the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Western Asia,
located in Jordan, have continued their education programmes in 2016, encour ages
the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women in their
education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue to
report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
24. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2 to that end
requests relevant regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the
assistance necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of regional
conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
25. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by organizati ons
such as the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the European Space
Agency and by conferences and other mechanisms such as the African Leadership
Conference on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the
_______________
18
19

6/7

Resolution 61/110.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/71/90

Asia-Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the
Americas in strengthening regional and international cooperation among States;
26. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national
levels and building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular
in developing countries;
27. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its
applications in the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic, social
and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes that the fundamental
significance of space science and technology and their applications for global, regional,
national and local sustainable development processes should be promoted in the
formulation of policies and programmes of action and their implementation,
including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those conferences and
summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
28. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those
conferences, summits and processes of the relevance of space science and
technology applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data, with the
involvement of the Office for Outer Space Affairs;
29. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to take active part in those
conferences, summits and processes, and other activities in support of the objectives
of UNISPACE+50, as appropriate, and to conduct capacity-building activities, hold
lectures and participate in academic and research activities to foster international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space;
30. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space),
under the leadership of the Office for Outer Space Affairs, to continue to examine
how space science and technology and their applications could contribute to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and encourages entities of the United
Nations system to participate, as appropriate, in UN -Space coordination efforts;
31. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to continue to conduct
capacity-building and outreach activities associated with space security and
transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities, as appropriate,
and within the context of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
32.

Decides that New Zealand shall become a member of the Committee;

33. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the International Air Transport Association; 20
34. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the
work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies by the States members of the
Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
53rd plenary meeting
6 December 2016

_______________
20

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/71/20), para. 315.

7/7
