S/PV.6971

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6971st meeting

Wednesday, 29 May 2013, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Millicay
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2013/297)

13-34865 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1334865*

S/PV.6971

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2013/297)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/297, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on the
Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moussa.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): It is my honour and
privilege to present the fourth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/297) on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
As I take the floor this morning, the general
situation in Central Africa, politically and in terms of
security, is characterized by relative peace and stability
in most of the countries of the subregion, with the
notable exception of the Central African Republic and
some parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As the Security Council knows, developments
under way in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are promising, in particular with the signing of
the Framework Agreement for Peace, Security and
Cooperation in February 2013, under the auspices of
the Secretary-General. The situation in Central African
Republic, however, continues to have an adverse
impact on its neighbouring countries, in particular in
terms of refugee flows and transborder crossings of
ex-combatants.

2

Over the past six months, UNOCA has continued to
work closely with regional organizations, in particular
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and its member States, as well as with other
partners, in order to seek sustainable solutions to the
numerous challenges to peace and security in the
subregion. To that end, UNOCA, with the support of the
Mediation Support Unit, is planning a second capacitybuilding workshop in the area of mediation in June for
ECCAS in order to better use that subregional tool and
better carry out its prevention, management, peaceful
settlement of conflict mandate.
(spoke in English)
During our meeting in December (see S/PV.6891),
the Security Council requested UNOCA to work with the
African Union (AU) and other stakeholders and partners
to develop a prioritized and sequenced implementation
plan for the operationalization of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of the
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). Now
that that has been done, the next immediate priority is
to organize a resource mobilization forum in support of
the implementation of the strategy, in partnership with
the African Union.
In that regard, I salute the African Union for
the recent convening of a forum in support of the
operationalization of the African Union Regional Task
Force (AU-RTF). The forum was an important step
in the right direction for the preparation of a broader
and more inclusive process to mobilize the requisite
resources for the implementation of our joint regional
strategy.
With regard to the operationalization of the AURTF, which is a key component of our joint regional
strategy, it is important to highlight some of the
challenges encountered that were amply articulated
by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security at
the opening of the AU Support Forum on 24 April in
Addis Ababa. According to Ambassador Lamamra, the
contingents handed over to the RTF face real logistical
challenges that constitute major obstacles, in that, with
the exception of the Ugandan contingents, the troops
are being confined to their respective bases and far
from being able to initiate expected military operations.
Those challenges are compounded by the current
political and security crisis in the Central African
Republic. The situation has a direct impact on the
operationalization of the RTF in that country. However,

13-34865

S/PV.6971

reassuring signals have been received from Bangui
following a fact-finding mission to the Central African
Republic in April by Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Lord’s Resistance
Army Issues, Ambassador Francisco Caetano José
Madeira. As confirmed by Prime Minister Nicolas
Tiangaye, the Central African Republic authorities are
ready to continue to cooperate with the international
community, in particular the AU and United Nations,
in pursuing the fight against the LRA.
The Security Council approved the LRA strategy
last June (see S/PV.6796). We have finalized the
implementation plan, which identifies present needs
and the areas in which additional resources are
required. We therefore count on the continued political
goodwill and financial commitment of all stakeholders,
particularly the LRA-affected countries and the major
partners, to translate those plans into reality.
Another major source of security concern for the
subregion is the ongoing military operations by the
Nigerian armed forces against Boko Haram insurgents
in the states of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa. Following
a week of military operations in the three states, which
were placed under a state of emergency, Nigeria’s
military announced on 20 May that it had reasserted
control in five remote areas of the north-east, close
to the borders with Cameroon and Chad, where the
Islamist insurgents had seized territory.
The potential humanitarian consequences and
cross-border impact of Nigeria’s military offensive
for the countries of the subregion have yet to be
fully assessed. However, thousands of refugees have
reportedly fled the military offensive into neighbouring
Cameroon and Chad, with the military claiming that
some Boko Haram insurgents had been prevented from
fleeing into neighbouring Chad and the Niger.
The current political and security situation in
northern Mali continues to have a negative impact on
the countries that have sent troops there. Following
the twin attacks on a military base in Agades and a
French-run uranium mine, the President of the Niger,
Mahamadou Issoufou, claimed that those involved in the
attacks, which left more than two dozen dead, entered
his country from southern Libya. He also warned that
further attacks were being planned against Chad.
The issue of poaching is another emerging and rapidly
growing phenomenon that has the potential to have a
negative impact on the already challenging peace and

security situation in some parts of the subregion. Over
the past five months or so, there have been increasing
and at times alarming reports underscoring the gravity
of that threat. We gather that at least 26 elephants were
recently massacred by poachers at the World Heritage
Site of Dzanga Bai, in south-eastern Central African
Republic. The same reports further claim that Central
Africa has been regularly hit by poaching operations
and that in February 2012 at least 300 elephants were
killed for their ivory in northern Cameroon. The efforts
made by the countries of the subregion to address that
challenge need to be encouraged.
Another major challenge for the advent of sustainable
peace and development in the Central African
subregion is the thorny issue of youth unemployment.
Cognizant of the destabilizing effects of growing
youth unemployment on the subregion, UNOCA has
engaged in efforts to facilitate the organization of
a subregional conference to discuss the impact of
youth unemployment on the consolidation of peace.
Those efforts will continue to be pursued vigorously
in partnership with ECCAS, the African Development
Bank, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and some key
regional and international partners and stakeholders.
In my statement to the Council on 18 December 2012
(see S/PV.6891), I pledged that UNOCA would continue
to place a premium on building on and consolidating the
achievements registered during that year. That included
redoubling efforts to accelerate the operationalization
of the regional strategy to address the threat posed by
the LRA through the early finalization of the relevant
programmatic document; the pursuit of ongoing efforts
towards the organization of a the regional summit on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as recommended by the
Council in its resolution 2039 (2012), of 29 February
2012; and enhancing our capacity-building and
institution-strengthening support to subregional
organizations, particularly ECCAS.
Looking back, I can humbly state that we have
fulfilled that pledge, at times under very challenging
circumstances,
including
dwindling
resources.
Therefore, as we enter the second half of 2013, I would
like to renew my pledge to pursue those efforts and build
on the progress made thus far in the implementation of
our mandate under the overall guidance and orientation
of the Council.

13-348653

S/PV.6971

I thank the members of the Security Council for
their strong and continued support for UNOCA.
The President (spoke
Mr. Moussa for his briefing.

in

French):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Special Representative, Mr. Moussa, for his
briefing.
At present the countries of Central Africa are
actively committed to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the promotion of economic and
social development, and the strengthening of regional
integration. They have achieved positive results in that
regard.
At the same time, Central Africa continues to face
many challenges in the area of peace and security.
The situation in the Central African Republic and the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains turbulent. The threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) has not been eradicated;
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea also remains a challenge.
The cooperation of the countries of the region and of
the international community is therefore required.
China would like to make the following four points.
First, the international community should actively
assist the countries of Central Africa in efforts to achieve
peace and stability. China is deeply concerned about
the tensions in the Central African Republic and the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that the parties concerned will abandon all
forms of violence and resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiation.
We support the countries in the region and
regional and subregional organizations in their efforts
to resolve those problems. We urge the international
community to provide support to the relevant countries
and organizations on the basis of full respect for the
sovereignty of the countries of the region. China
welcomes the recent visit by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other countries of the region. We thank him
for the important role he has played in helping to resolve
the issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an
appropriate manner.

4

Secondly, the international community must
continue to support the countries of the region in the
fight against the LRA, which continues to operate in
many countries of the region. The deterioration of the
security situation in the Central African Republic is
having a negative impact on the efforts of the countries
of the region to combat the LRA. China strongly
condemns the attacks carried out by the LRA against
civilians and demands its immediate disarmament.
We appreciate the efforts made by the countries of
the region in the fight against the LRA, and we support
the efforts of the African Union (AU) to implement
regional cooperation initiatives. We welcome the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in that regard. We expect that there will be effective
implementation of the relevant United Nations regional
strategy and plans of action.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to be concerned about the ongoing threats
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, arms trafficking and
transnational organized crime. We support the efforts of
the countries in the region to formulate and improve the
relevant country strategies, with a view to strengthening
governance and law enforcement. We appreciate the
leadership of and coordinating role played by the
relevant regional organizations. The international
community should provide the necessary support to
the countries concerned through information-sharing,
the exchange of experiences, technical assistance and
capacity-building, as well as the adoption of integrated
policies aimed at tackling the relevant issues and
their root causes, with a focus on economic and social
development as well as other key aspects.
Fourthly, the United Nations should play a greater
role in achieving lasting peace in Central Africa. China
is grateful to the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) for its continuing efforts to
fulfil the Security Council’s mandate and maintain
regional peace and stability. We hope that it will continue
its synergistic role in communicating between, and
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations system,
regional organizations and the relevant countries in
the region. China will continue to support the work of
UNOCA and Special Representative Moussa.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou

13-34865

S/PV.6971

Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing. I will first
discuss the efforts to combat the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) before commenting on the Central African
Republic and UNOCA’s activity.
For 25 years now the LRA has been striking at the
heart of Africa. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, its
systematic violations of international law, human rights
and international humanitarian law have resulted in
more than 100,000 deaths, between 60,000 and 100,000
children abducted and 2.5 million people displaced.
Two hundred and twelve attacks were reported last year
alone, resulting in at least 45 deaths and 220 abductions,
25 per cent of which involved children. More than
60 attacks and 30 deaths were reported during the first
quarter of 2013, and March saw a disturbing jump in
attacks, particularly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While the LRA’s forces have definitely lessened
over the years, they continue to pose a serious threat to
the region and its civilian population. We must therefore
remain on our guard. In that regard, we commend
today’s draft presidential statement, which signals the
Security Council’s determination to fight the scourge
that is the LRA.

Regional Task Force. It is vital that the United Nations
and the African Union continue to work closely in this
area. The joint awareness and mobilization mission
conducted from 27 March to 4 April in South Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy of the African Union, Mr. Francisco
Madeira, is a good example of the synergy that can
result in this way.
The efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union are not enough. The primary responsibility for
protecting their civilian populations from the threat of
the LRA rests with the authorities of the countries that
are directly affected by its violent actions. Generally
speaking, we encourage all States to cooperate in
executing the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court almost eight years ago for Joseph Kony,
Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen. Those leaders
of the LRA, accused of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including murder, rape and child recruitment,
must be brought to justice.

In order to eliminate this threat, the multidimensional
regional strategy that the United Nations adopted last
year must be vigorously implemented. In that context,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s announcement,
on 19 April, of the gradual implementation plan for
the regional strategy. We hope that the plan’s more
systematic approach, coordinated by UNOCA, as well
as the implementation of the regional strategy’s various
priority projects, will help strengthen the fight against
the LRA. The implementation plan’s communication
strategy, as well as meetings such as this one, will help
ensure that combating the LRA remains a priority on
the international community’s agenda.

Sadly, it cannot be repeated too often that women
and children are the LRA’s main victims. In that
context, we would like to recall the conclusions reached
on 19 April by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict on the situation of child victims of the
LRA. I will highlight three of their recommendations:
first, the need for the United Nations to keep sufficient
means for protecting children at the heart of its
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in the region — and, if such means are lacking, to
increase them; secondly, advising the African Union
to integrate child protection activities into the work of
the Regional Task Force; and, finally, recommending
that the World Bank and donors mobilize the resources
necessary for liberating, repatriating and reintegrating
children formerly associated with the LRA.

We welcome the progress made in implementing
the African Union’s Regional Cooperation Initiative to
combat the LRA, the first of the five steps that make
up the regional strategy of the United Nations. We
especially welcome the finalization of the strategic
documents needed to activate the African Union
Regional Task Force against the Lord’s Resistance
Army. We encourage States affected by the LRA to
provide the contingents required in order to reach
the authorized strength of 5,000 troops. For its part,
Luxembourg undertakes to make a voluntary financial
contribution to support the strengthening of the

The progress that has been made in recent years
in the fight against the LRA risks being nullified if
security and stability are not restored in the Central
African Republic. Operations against the LRA there
must be resumed without delay if the country is not to
become a sanctuary for this armed group. In general, we
share the Secretary-General’s extreme concern about
the situation in the Central African Republic and its
effect on peace and security in the subregion. The total
absence of public order, the disastrous humanitarian
situation, the continued looting and serious violations
of human rights demand a determined response on the

13-348655

S/PV.6971

part of the international community and the Security
Council in particular in support of the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). All these elements — the ongoing tensions
in the central African region, the constant threat of the
LRA, the impact of transnational organized crime in
every form, including ivory poaching and trafficking,
which most likely form a significant source of financing
for armed groups, including the LRA — make the work
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa all the more essential. Luxembourg welcomes
UNOCA’s efforts to facilitate and encourage closer
regional cooperation in central Africa. Its work,
particularly in collaboration with ECCAS, has helped
improve cooperation in the areas of mediation and good
offices.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the work
done by UNOCA and the United Nations Office for
West Africa in combating piracy off the coasts of States
on the Gulf of Guinea, which is an increasing threat
to the economies of the States concerned as well as to
trade and international relations in the region. Thanks
to the good groundwork facilitated by the United
Nations, we hope the regional summit of Heads of
State and Government on piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea to be held in Cameroon on 24 and
25 June will produce concrete results.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We agree with the alarming assessment of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, of the negative impact of the
armed conflict in the Central African Republic on
neighbouring States, which is reflected, in particular,
in the increase over the past six months of the number of
refugees to 50,000 and the uncontrolled proliferation of
weapons. It is clear that a settlement of the military and
political crisis and a normalization of the humanitarian
and human rights situation in the country are extremely
important for the prospects for peace, security and
stability in the subregion.
We share the concern about the increasing scale
of cross-border crime, including poaching, in which
weapons from Libya have been used. We are particularly
concerned that the product of those crimes could be a
source of financing for the terrorist and criminal groups
operating in the subregion.
We welcome the mobilization of cooperation
among interested countries and organizations in the

6

fight against piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. An important step in that direction could
be the summit of Central and West African States to
be held in June. We see the need to take necessary
measures to address potential factors for instability
in the subregion, including poverty and the growing
gap in income distribution, as well as widespread
unemployment, especially among young people.
We note a decline in the activity of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, whose fighters have recently kept a
low profile and withdrawn to hard-to-reach border areas
of the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We note particular difficulties
in the practical implementation of the United Nations
strategy to combat the Lord’s Resistance Army. The
deployment of the African Union Regional Task Force
has been delayed, due in large part to problems with
funding. As a result of criminal activities, the number
of refugees and internally displaced persons totals
440,000 people, which, among other things, reflects
the ineffectiveness of measures to protect civilians.
In addition, there is a lack of funding in general for
the humanitarian needs of those suffering from the
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
We have taken note of the adoption in April of the
implementation plan for the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threat and impact of the activities
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (S/2013/240, annex).
The plan is ambitious and costly. We must note that,
in addition to its timely and needed measures, it also
stipulates the implementation of a number of projects
that would be difficult to call relevant at this time, in
particular with regard to the Central African Republic.
In conclusion, I note the contribution of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to collective
efforts to ensure peace and security in the subregion.
We welcome the growing cooperation between the
Office and regional partners in such areas as preventive
diplomacy, peacebuilding, combating terrorism, piracy
and armed robbery at sea, the proliferation of weapons,
support for electoral processes and the training of
national staff.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Abou Moussa for his
briefing this morning.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has blighted
the heart of Africa for over 20 years. It remains what it
always was — a thuggish band of criminals who prey

13-34865

S/PV.6971

on civilians, target women and children, and terrorize
communities. It is incumbent upon all of us to ensure
that the LRA can no longer inflict its odious brand of
suffering.
An end to the scourge of the LRA is within sight.
The concerted efforts of the affected countries, the
African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners have substantially weakened the LRA, but
we must not lose focus. The permanent eradication
of the LRA requires our continued attention and the
creation and consolidation of security and stability in
the affected countries. Events in the Central African
Republic, as others have already noted, threaten to
undermine progress. The United Kingdom calls upon
all regional countries to participate fully in the fight
against the LRA. We must not allow the LRA to regroup,
as it has done previously when close to extinction.
The United Kingdom welcomes the development of
an implementation plan for the United Nations strategy
on the LRA. It is essential that the priority tasks
identified in the plan be swiftly carried out, that the
timelines be met, and that the United Nations articulate
effectively to donors which elements of the strategy are
currently underfunded.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the advocacy
undertaken by Special Representative Moussa and AU
Special Envoy Madeira with LRA-affected countries
and the finalization of the strategic documents for the
operationalization of the African Union Regional Task
Force against the LRA. That will significantly improve
tactical coordination, information-sharing and joint
planning between the relevant armed forces.
I would now like to comment on the broader role
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA). The United Kingdom welcomes the
efforts of UNOCA to facilitate and encourage closer
regional collaboration in Central Africa. Helping the
subregional organizations and their Member States to
develop strategies and capabilities for addressing the
problems they face is a crucial task. The evidently
close working relationship that Special Representative
Moussa and UNOCA have developed with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) can
valuably help improve regional cooperation.
Events in the Central African Republic require
a regional solution. The United Kingdom expects
UNOCA to remain engaged with ECCAS on this and to
play a key role in achieving a unified regional position.

It is important that UNOCA support the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Vogt and her
team.
The United Kingdom remains concerned by the
threats to maritime security on Africa’s western
seaboard, and welcomes the leadership shown by the
United Nations on that issue. UNOCA has an important
role to play in ensuring that the international community
works together to build maritime security capability. A
regional response is essential to minimizing the impact
on economic development and stability. Timetables
must not be allowed to slip.
UNOCA should be playing a strong role in all the
challenges for which regional coordination is essential.
At a time when resources are tight and demands on
the United Nations are high, UNOCA must add real
value to regional and subregional efforts. The United
Kingdom would therefore welcome greater clarity in
the Secretary-General’s next report on what specifically
UNOCA is doing to add such value and what outcomes
it has helped to achieve.
Lastly, I thank Council colleagues for their support
for the presidential statement, which the United
Kingdom delegation prepared and which the Council
will shortly adopt.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, for his briefing on
the situation in Central African Republic, the activities
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), and the efforts to combat the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA).
The many political and security challenges
in Central Africa require additional cooperation
from all national, regional, subregional and United
Nations stakeholders. In that regard, we welcome the
connections made between UNOCA and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
In addition to the workshops and conferences
that are organized on a regular basis at the initiative
of UNOCA, it is crucial for the Office, as a matter of
priority, to concentrate its activities on prevention and
support for efforts to resolve the conflicts within the
subregion. The crisis in the Central African Republic,
the crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of the

13-348657

S/PV.6971

Congo and the fight against the LRA are matters for
follow-up by subregional organizations, the African
Union and the relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations and offices. In that context, UNOCA’s
know-how should be drawn upon to directly support
those efforts.
The situation in Bangui and throughout the Central
African Republic following the takeover by Séléka
continues to be most worrisome. In spite of announced
measures to enforce the cantonment of Séléka troops,
public order remains tenuous. Human rights violations
and looting continue. Civilians are the primary targets
of the violence, which further complicates the delivery
of humanitarian aid.
Stabilizing the security situation must therefore
be the priority. We welcome the ECCAS decision
to strengthen the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX).
Cooperation between the ECCAS, the African Union
and the United Nations must continue to assess how the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
could support the strengthening of MICOPAX, which
is necessary to ensure the re-establishment of order and
protect the people in the Central African Republic.
The crisis in the Central African Republic is taking
on an ever-broader regional dimension. Humanitarian
needs are growing every day. At the moment, there are
approximately 206,000 displaced persons and 50,000
refugees, primarily in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Chad, Cameroon and the Republic of the Congo.
One million three-hundred thousand people are in a
situation of food insecurity. Against that backdrop, the
international humanitarian response remains, for the
time being, much too weak. The urgent appeal launched
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has only been covered up to 27 per cent of the
total requested.
On the political front, the efforts of ECCAS and
the N’Djamena summits of 3 and 18 April allowed for
the development of a transition framework with a view
to the holding of elections in 18 months. The contact
group meeting in Brazzaville on 3 May confirmed that
positive momentum and encouraged the partners of
the Central African Republic to support the transition.
With the support of the international community, the
Prime Minister and the transitional authorities must
together make every effort to ensure that the agreed

8

objectives are met, especially that of strengthening the
representative character of the transitional authorities.
While the efforts to stabilize the Central African
Republic continue, the fight against the threat posed
by the LRA must also continue tirelessly. The rebels
led by Joseph Kony, who is himself sought by the
International Criminal Court (ICC), continue their
atrocities, primarily in the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also in
the Sudan, South Sudan and Uganda. Over 25 years, the
group has killed more than 100,000 people in Central
Africa. And it has kidnapped or forcibly recruited
between 60,000 and 100,000 children and displaced
2.5 million people.
We welcome the concrete progress made by the
African Union to strengthen the tools for fighting
the LRA. The African Union Regional Task Force
against the Lord’s Resistance Army now comprises
3,500 troops. Its concept of operations and rules of
engagement have been finalized. We encourage close
cooperation between the Regional Task Force and the
United Nations peacekeeping operations on the ground
to achieve the disarmament and demobilization of the
LRA rebels, the arrest and transfer to the ICC of its
leaders, and better protection of civilian populations.
In terms of the role of the United Nations, UNOCA
has developed an implementation plan for the United
Nations regional strategy to address the threat and
impact of the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army
(S/2013/240, annex). Presented last April, that plan
details the funding needed for projects to combat
the LRA conducted by United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations. The plan will
allow for a better structuring of international efforts.
However, it must be further developed and updated to
ensure the effectiveness of the efforts undertaken.
Moreover, peacekeeping operations involved
in the fight against the LRA, such as the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have their own
monitoring and coordination mechanisms regarding
attacks and locations of members of the LRA. They
must actively employ those tools to encourage fighters
to defect and to welcome deserters, especially children.
I would like to conclude by addressing a worrisome
trend that the Special Representative of the Secretary-

13-34865

S/PV.6971

General also touched upon, that is, the growing scope of
poaching in Central Africa to fund criminal activities,
including terrorism. This phenomenon, which threatens
both the security of the region and endangered species,
is now well established. In that regard, cooperation
between States in the region, ECCAS, the African
Union and United Nations must be stepped up.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing regarding the latest
developments. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2013/297).
We support the efforts of UNOCA to support
initiatives aimed at resolving the numerous and varied
challenges facing the countries of the Central African
region. We would like to address our particular concerns
with regard to the developments in the Central African
Republic, which have undoubtedly affected the entire
subregion. We therefore hope that UNOCA can continue
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations system
with those of subregional bodies, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the African Union, seeking to re-establish order in
the country. Naturally, in this case as in others, we
commend the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional African bodies.
We commend the efforts made by UNOCA to tackle
the insecurity created by piracy and criminal activities
in the Gulf of Guinea. We believe it is vitally important
that there be cooperation as promoted by UNOCA to
support the preparations for the holding in June of a
summit of Heads of State and Government on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. We hope that the summit will
be successful in tackling this threat to security in the
subregion.
UNOCA must also work for the various States of
Central Africa to respond the problem of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, especially the illegal
poaching of elephants, which has been reported in
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad and
Gabon — a topic mentioned by Mr. Moussa in his
briefing and taken up by the representative of France.
Our delegation believes it is important for UNOCA
to continue coordinating specific peacebuilding
efforts in the subregion, especially in the areas of
institution-building, electoral processes, mediation

and good offices for conflict prevention. There are
conflict situations that must be tackled, such as those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region, which I will not address now since the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is on the agenda for
this afternoon. However, it is worth mentioning that
efforts must be made in other States that need to be
brought out of conflict by peacebuilding processes. We
do not want to see a recurrence of the situation that
affected the Central African Republic. We hope that
the next ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa will succeed in producing proposals for
improving security in the Central African subregion.
With regard to the threat that the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) continues to pose, we reiterate our
concern at the severe impact that that armed group and
its criminal activities continue to have in the region, in
particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Uganda.
We condemn the atrocities which that group continues
to commit. While we take note of the fact that reports
show a decrease in its activities, we believe that efforts
must be redoubled to eliminate once and for all the
threat posed by its very existence.
We reiterate our support to the United Nations
regional strategy for the LRA (S/2012/481, annex).
We commend the progress that has been made in its
implementation, including the finalization of operational
documents to launch the African Union Regional Task
Force against the LRA. We hope that countries will
enable the contributions and troop deployment that are
still needed to complete the Force. We welcome the
finalization of the priority implementation plan for the
regional strategy, and we hope that it will serve as a
guide for concrete actions to be taken to alleviate the
suffering of the population in LRA-affected areas.
We call for efforts to be redoubled in executing the
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court for Joseph Kony and LRA commanders for
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
assassinations, rapes and the recruitment of children
through kidnapping. We encourage all States to
cooperate with the Court to execute those warrants and
bring those responsible for these atrocities to justice.
In closing, we express our support for the
presidential statement to be adopted today.

13-348659

S/PV.6971

Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa for his briefing.
For almost three decades, the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) has wreaked havoc and perpetrated
mass atrocities on the people of Central Africa and the
Great Lakes region. The LRA has killed, maimed and
displaced thousands. It has abducted children and forced
them to commit unspeakable horrors. It has destroyed
families and communities. Its acts are unconscionable
and must be stopped once and for all.
The Council has repeatedly condemned LRA
atrocities and supported decisive measures to end
them. Our goal of permanently ending the LRA threat
is within reach, but it will require sustained regional
leadership and international support. The United States
commends the African Union (AU) and Governments
of the region, in particular Uganda, for their concerted
and continuing efforts to neutralize the LRA threat.
The United States has provided significant assistance
to support those regional efforts, including by sending
United States military advisors to enhance the capacity
of regional forces to pursue top LRA commanders and
protect local populations.
Our common commitment has resulted in
notable progress. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs reports that, overall, there was a
significant drop in the number of LRA attacks in 2012
compared to 2011. Some of those displaced by the LRA
in South Sudan have begun to return home, and two of
the LRA’s most senior commanders, Caesar Achellam
and Vincent Binani Okumu, have been removed from
the battlefield, while scores of LRA members have
defected or been released. To help bring the LRA’s top
commanders to justice, the United States, through the
war crimes rewards programme, is offering rewards of
up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest,
transfer or conviction of LRA leaders Joseph Kony,
Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen.
Nevertheless, the LRA remains a regional threat with
an outsized impact because of its brutality and reach.
Joseph Kony is still at large, and the LRA continues
to conduct attacks and commit abductions. Hundreds
of thousands of people remain displaced throughout
Central Africa because of the LRA. Instability across
the region, particularly in the Central African Republic,
threatens to halt and potentially reverse progress in
the fight against the LRA. The United States believes

10

that counter-LRA operations under the AU Regional
Task Force should resume as soon as possible. We
welcome the Central African Republic’s transitional
Government’s assurances that counter-LRA operations
will continue through the AU Regional Task Force
(AU-RTF). Further suspension of military operations
in the Central African Republic could allow the LRA to
reorganize and further endanger civilians.
Meanwhile, the LRA continues to wreak havoc in
other countries of the region, especially the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo suffered 54 LRA attacks between
January and March 2013, the most among LRA-affected
countries in the region. Forces of the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo operating in northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo should renew
their efforts to combat the LRA through expanded, more
targeted patrols and increased information-sharing.
Furthermore, United Nations missions in the region
and the AU-RTF need to develop a common picture
of the LRA’s operating disposition and investigate the
LRA’s logistical networks and possible sources of illicit
financing.
The United Nations comprehensive regional
strategy (S/2012/481, annex) is critical to coordinating
United Nations and AU action to protect civilians
from the LRA and strengthen the resilience of local
communities. The United States fully supports the
strategy and welcomes the new implementation plan
produced by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Moussa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We hope that this
will translate swiftly into action in the region, and in
particular we urge rapid implementation of the standard
operating procedures for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration and greater
focus on roads and infrastructure projects to increase
humanitarian access in the region. We request the
Secretary-General to ensure that UNOCA has the
staffing, particularly the technical experts, it needs to
do so.
As we work to end the LRA’s campaign of terror,
we must also address the crisis in the Central African
Republic, where the breakdown of law and order,
ongoing human rights abuses and the dire humanitarian
situation pose a serious threat to regional stability. The

13-34865

S/PV.6971

United States applauds and appreciates the efforts
of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to ameliorate the humanitarian suffering
amid a challenging operating environment. Central
African Republic authorities, however, bear the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians and must
do much more in this regard, particularly for women
and children. They need to bring the Séléka fighters
under control immediately, facilitate humanitarian
access throughout the country, and enable a political
transition. Perpetrators of human rights violations
committeed by both sides during the recent fighting
must be held to account.
In addition to the LRA and instability in the Central
African Republic, piracy and maritime armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea remain serious security concerns
for the region. The United States values UNOCA’s
support for regional coordination and capacity-building
to combat those threats, and looks forward to the
regional summit of Heads of State and Government to
be held in June 2013, where countries can demonstrate
their leadership in addressing them. We also welcome
UNOCA’s important preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding efforts to promote regional stability, and
urge UNOCA’s continued attention to the challenges
faced by women and girls in the subregion, including
female genital mutilation, early forced marriage, denial
of access to education and low political participation.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, for his presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
UNOCA and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected
areas (S/2013/297). We appreciate the continued
commitment of Mr. Moussa to conflict prevention in
Central Africa.
The situation in Central Africa has worsened since
the last report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/923),
due mainly to the crisis in the Central African Republic
and the continued presence of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) in the region. Rwanda is cognizant of the
fact that insecurity and statelessness breed criminality
and terrorism. Terrorists groups like the LRA exploit
the vacuum to wreak more havoc in the community.
We once again express our deepest concern
about the situation in the Central African Republic,
particularly with regard to human rights violations and

the humanitarian crisis caused by the Séléka, which
have consequences not only for the Central African
Republic but also for all countries of the region. That
coalition will be held accountable, and the perpetrators
of those crimes will be brought to justice.
We are concerned that the LRA has continued to
carry out deadly attacks resulting in civilian casualties,
abductions and the displacement of populations.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continued
violations committed against children by the LRA
and its use of rape, sexual slavery and other acts of
sexual violence. In that regard, we welcome the tools
provided by the conclusions on the situation of children
and armed conflict affected by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (S/AC.51/2013/1), adopted by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict on 19 April. We join
the Working Group in expressing appreciation for the
efforts of the Governments of affected States to promote
the protection of children, including the progress made
with regard to the operational plan for cross-border
repatriation, care and the reunification of children
escaped or rescued from the LRA. We encourage armed
forces of the region to establish standard operating
procedures for the reception and handover of LRA
children to civilian child protection actors.
We appreciate the combined efforts by LRA-affected
countries, including through their contribution of troops
to the African Union Regional Task Force against
the LRA. We reiterate our support for the activities
of UNOCA and the new implementation plan of the
United Nations regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of activities of the LRA. We are concerned,
however, that these efforts could be undermined by
those in the region who wish to legitimize the criminal
activities of terrorist groups in Central Africa, such as
the LRA and the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda. We remain gravely concerned by the
humanitarian situation of internally displaced persons
and refugees in LRA-affected countries and we urge
the international community to maintain its support in
favour of displaced populations and refugees.
Before concluding, let me say a word on the scourge
of poaching in Central Africa, mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General. The consequences are well
known: a dramatic decrease in elephants in Africa,
impact on the environment, financial shortfalls for
tourism, as well as the financing of armed groups. In
that regard, we support the call of the Secretary-General
to consider the issue a major national and subregional

13-3486511

S/PV.6971

security concern requiring concerted and coordinated
action, but we also believe that, as the demand for
ivory is mainly outside Africa, countries of destination
should also play their part within the framework of
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
In conclusion, let me say that Rwanda is still
confident that, despite the crisis in the Central African
Republic, the LRA will eventually be uprooted from
the region through the combined efforts of UNOCA,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the African Union and countries of the region.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the draft
presidential statement submitted by the United
Kingdom.
Ms. King (Australia): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou
Moussa, for his briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
Allow me to focus first on the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA), which has been committing human rights
abuses that are appalling in both scale and brutality
since its formation in 1987. Others have already stated
the well-known figures of deaths, abductions and
displacements caused by the LRA, and we all know that
the LRA has continued its horrific crimes over the past
months. By some estimates, as many as 275 separate
attacks were reported in 2012.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) arrest
warrants issued in July 2005 against Joseph Kony and
other senior LRA leaders remain unexecuted eight
years later. We fully support the Security Council’s
draft presidential statement on the LRA and its call on
all States to cooperate with relevant national authorities
and the ICC in order to execute the ICC arrest warrants
and bring to justice those responsible.
Enhanced regional and international efforts to
combat the LRA have yielded positive results. We
know that the LRA has been weakened and that
defections have risen. We commend the African Union
(AU) Regional Cooperation Initiative against the
LRA and the progress made in operationalizing the
AU Regional Task Force (AU-RTF). But despite those
important efforts, the LRA continues to terrorize and
victimize populations across Central Africa, exerting
a disproportionate humanitarian impact on civilians,
particularly women and children, because of the extent

12

of its brutality. More must therefore be done to seize
the current opportunity to put an end once and for all to
that abhorrent group.
First and foremost, the crisis in the Central
African Republic must be addressed. We know all too
well that the LRA thrives in security vacuums and in
environments of weak or, in the case of the Central
African Republic, absent State authority. It is therefore
all the more concerning that the Ugandan contingent of
the AU Regional Task Force was forced to temporarily
suspend its operations in that country. As AU Peace and
Security Commissioner Lamamra told an AU support
forum meeting in Addis Ababa recently, the LRA
has been able to go out on a picnic since the Séléka
coalition seized power by force in the Central African
Republic. It is vital that the AU-RTF be able to resume
its activities as soon as possible.
We welcome the efforts of AU Special Envoy
Francisco Madeira and Prime Minister Tiangaye of
the Central African Republic to reach agreement in
that regard. We hope that that will lead to an early
resumption of operations. The United Nations, the
AU and the Economic Community of Central African
States should also strengthen their coordination to
help resolve the current crisis in the Central African
Republic. Australia stands ready to consider ways in
which the Security Council can support those efforts.
Secondly, we must enhance the implementation
of the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA. The
release of the United Nations regional strategy almost
a year ago helped to focus attention on the threats
posed by the LRA. We welcome the submission by the
Secretary-General of the implementation plan for the
strategy, which provides a useful overview of the action
undertaken to date and the way forward. UNOCA has an
important coordinating role to play in helping translate
the United Nations strategy into tangible results on the
ground. The successful implementation of the strategy
also requires the full commitment of all stakeholders,
the LRA-affected countries, which have primary
responsibility, regional organizations, the entire United
Nations system and international partners. Additional
efforts are clearly still needed.
Coordinated and enhanced action by United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions in the region — the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo, the

13-34865

S/PV.6971

United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
the African Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in
Darfur and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic — is a further
integral element to the efforts under way to address
the LRA threat. These include protecting civilians,
sharing information on LRA activities, developing
standard operating procedures, and implementing
effective disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
resettlement or repatriation programmes.
As the LRA’s tactics evolve, cross-border
coordination and information-sharing are all the more
important. As the report of the Secretary-General notes,
for example, the possible use of funds from the illegal
ivory trade as an important source of financing for LRA
activities needs to be addressed. More must be done
to develop a common operating picture of the LRA’s
capabilities, its areas of operation and the sources of
funding and support it uses to carry out attacks.
Now more than ever, UNOCA has an important
role to play in conflict prevention, early warning and
mediation efforts in Central Africa. As the report of
the Secretary-General notes, economic growth, while
sustained, is not yet inclusive. Youth unemployment
is high, women’s participation in key political
decision-making is low in all but a few countries, and
piracy and cross-border criminal activity, including
elephant poaching, have increased.
We therefore welcome the regional efforts to
address those issues and the assistance that UNOCA
is providing to support them. We look forward, for
example, to the upcoming regional regional Summit
of Heads of State and Government later this month
on maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea, and to the regional forum on youth
employment, political stability and peacebuilding to be
held in the last quarter of the year.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our full
support to Special Representative Moussa and UNOCA
for their important contribution to conflict prevention
in Central Africa.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing. I also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/297).
Argentina is closely following the situation
resulting from the threat posed by and the activities of

the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). I wish to affirm
Argentina’s support for the regional efforts led by the
African Union, which, without any doubt, have led to
the recent decrease in the number of LRA attacks.
However, the LRA remains a serious threat. Joseph
Kony has been able to avoid justice and lead his band of
murderers and thugs for more than 20 years, continuing
to commit egregious human rights violations,
especially against children. I would recall here that
the second report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the abuses
committed in the region affected by the LRA finds Kony
and his accomplices responsible for more than 100,000
deaths and for the abduction of 60,000 to 100,000
children. Those crimes must not go unpunished, and
their perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Joseph Kony and his accomplices have since
2005 had arrest warrants issued against them by the
International Criminal Court for numerous war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Efforts must be redoubled
to ensure that they are arrested.
Argentina supports the United Nations regional
strategy proposed by the Secretary-General and calls
on the States of the region to implement it in order to
put an end, once and for all, to the threat posed by the
LRA and ensure that a long-term is found. We therefore
encourage the countries of the region to continue to
cooperate and to provide troops and equipment for the
African Union’s Regional Cooperation Initiative.
As concerns the situation in the Central African
Republic, focusing on today’s topic, we are pleased to
hear that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces will soon
resume their efforts to fight the LRA in their country.
The Ugandan contingent must continue its efforts
as part of the African Union Regional Task Force,
complementing the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic to fight the LRA.
Argentina also supports the strengthening and
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programmes
being carried out in the LRA-affected regions.
My delegation wishes to highlight the efforts of and
the work carried out by the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in support of
the regional efforts aimed at preventing conflict and
building peace and security in the countries members
of the Economic Community of Central African States

13-3486513

S/PV.6971

(ECCAS), including the fight against the LRA. In that
framework, we commend UNOCA’s efforts to promote
justice and the rule of law, which are indispensable
conditions for the achievement of lasting peace in
the region. We wish also to highlight the review, with
ECCAS, of the framework of cooperation signed in
May 2012, with a view to facilitating its implementation
in areas including security, governance, electoral
processes, illicit arms trafficking and piracy and armed
robbery at sea.
In that connection, we must also stress the
coordination efforts carried out with the United
Nations Office in West Africa aimed at strengthening
the regional fight against piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Finally, Argentina supports the draft presidential
statement proposed by the United Kingdom, and we
ask the Secretariat to duly inform the Security Council
about the situation in the region and in particular the
activities of the LRA.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I should
like to join other speakers in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Abou Moussa,
for his informative briefing.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) remains a major
threat to peace and security in Central Africa. More than
440,000 people have been displaced across the region.
Unless collectively and systematically addressed, the
atrocities committed by the LRA, including murder,
torture, maiming and sexual slavery, as well as the
recruitment of child soldiers, will continue.
It is of particular concern that children continue to
come under attack by the LRA. In 2012, about 25 per
cent of the LRA’s victims were underage boys and
girls. Last month, the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict concluded that the LRA-affected
countries must make further efforts to bring LRA
perpetrators to justice. The role of the Governments of
the region is also critical in executing the International
Criminal Court’s arrest warrants for Joseph Kony and
his accomplices, who are still at large.
The LRA is known for funding its activities through
poaching and the illegal ivory trade. It is also regarded
as a serious perpetrator of transboundary trafficking
in illegal materials. Its activities pose a fundamental
threat to the rule of law in the entire region, and the

14

international community must therefore deal with them
as such.
Last month, the United Nations prepared an
implementation plan for the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threat and impact of the activities
of the LRA. That document (S/2013/240) provides
a holistic action plan to eradicate the LRA through
a division of labour as well as thematic and countryspecific coordination among the relevant United
Nations agencies working in the region. That represents
a meaningful step forward towards strengthening the
system-wide efforts of the United Nations for regional
coordination. All players under this scheme should
promptly share any information regarding the LRA’s
movements so as to provide early warning and enhance
the leaflet-dropping campaign and radio-broadcast
capability, with a view to encouraging LRA defections.
With regard to the African Union’s counter-LRA
operation, however, the African Union Regional Task
Force’s activities have been suspended following the
Séléka’s seizure of Bangui. We hope that the Task
Force’s operation will be fully resumed as soon as
possible.
In another worrisome development, an LRA base
is reportedly located in the border area between the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan.
We urge the transitional authorities of the Central
African Republic to actively participate in the region’s
joint efforts in order not to provide a breeding ground
for the LRA.
Let me briefly touch upon the issue of maritime
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, which
is another security concern in the Central African
region. Since 2011, the multinational military exercises
held have greatly contributed to enhancing maritime
safety in the Gulf of Guinea. We expect that the regional
summit scheduled to be held in Cameroon next month
will bring about substantial progress in addressing the
issue of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
Lastly, we commend the continued efforts of
Special Representative Moussa and his staff, who are
working in a challenging environment. We also support
today’s presidential statement drafted by the United
Kingdom.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his very comprehensive

13-34865

S/PV.6971

briefing on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/297)
and the progress being made on efforts to combat the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). I would also like to
express our support for the draft presidential statement
circulated by the delegation of the United Kingdom.
Morocco, which is connected to the countries of
Central Africa by traditional ties of friendship and
cooperation, welcomes the progress they have made in
strengthening their cross-border cooperation, regional
integration and economic growth. That progress,
however, should not mask the growing security, political
and humanitarian challenges they face and that require
an urgent response. Insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea
and the Sahel region, acts of terrorism, cross-border
trafficking and poaching are having an increasingly
large impact on the Central African region’s stability
and development. We remain concerned about the
growing threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, which
is unfortunately spreading farther and farther along
Africa’s Atlantic coast. It is a matter of vital urgency to
fight this dangerous threat.
The need to strengthen interregional cooperation
among the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, as well as the countries along the Gulf,
is becoming increasingly apparent. In that context,
we welcome regional initiatives, including the recent
ministerial meeting held in N’Djamena on maritime
security and the upcoming regional summit to be held
in Cameroon on 24 and 25 June, bringing together
ECCAS, ECOWAS, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the countries of the region. We hope that the summit
will be a decisive step towards the global and effective
implementation of the transregional and interregional
strategy. We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in the region, as well
as the action and leadership Mr. Moussa has displayed
in facilitating that important meeting.
Regarding the region of the Sahel, we are worried
about the security repercussions that are unfortunately
being increasingly felt in neighbouring regions,
particularly Central Africa and the Maghreb. We
commend the decision of the Community of SaheloSaharan States (CEN-SAD) at its recent N’Djamena
summit to create a permanent body concerned with
sustainable development and combating poverty, and a
permanent security council designed to help members
fight terrorism and other ills that threaten peace.

Morocco is pleased to be hosting the next CEN-SAD
summit as its contribution to helping improve collective
management of the challenges in the Sahelo-Saharan
region.
In that context, we welcome the participation of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
the various subregional and interregional conferences
on subjects related to cross-border and transregional
threats — including the CEN-SAD summit and the
meeting organized in Rabat by the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force on strengthening border
surveillance between the States of the Maghreb and the
Sahel — and we hope that it will continue to participate
actively in these kinds of meetings.
In the face of these growing transregional threats,
we encourage the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Regional Office
for West Africa to continue to improve their cooperation
in support of regional efforts to fight transnational
organized crime, trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, and terrorism.
In the political arena, the recent crisis in the Central
African Republic has revealed the fragility of the
peacebuilding process. We are alarmed by the gravity
of the current situation there and remain concerned
about its effect on subregional stability, both as a
humanitarian issue and as concerns the fight against
the Lord’s Resistance Army. We commend the decisive
role played by the Economic Community of Central
African States in managing the crisis and restoring
constitutional order. In that connection, we encourage
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
to continue to support subregional organizations, such
as the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, particularly in the area of capacity-building,
including mediation, which we consider a priority,
especially in the light of recent events in the Central
African Republic and the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Turning to the Lord’s Resistance Army, which
continues to threaten the stability and lives of thousands
of men, women and children in Central Africa and to
undermine peacebuilding efforts, Morocco reiterates its
firm condemnation of the crimes, atrocities and humanrights violations that criminal group has committed,
particularly against women and children. We must

13-3486515

S/PV.6971

now ramp up our collective efforts to strengthen crossborder cooperation and build on progress made to date,
thanks to the work done by States in the region and
the various political and peacekeeping missions, in
order to put an end to the LRA’s presence in Central
Africa. In that regard, we commend the decision of the
Government of the Central African Republic to resume
and rejoin regional efforts against the LRA.
We welcome the significant role played by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in combating
the LRA, and the release of the implementation plan
for the United Nations regional strategy to combat
the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord’s
Resistance Army. We encourage the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, in its coordinating
role, as well as the political and peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations entities in the region, to
intensify their efforts to implement the strategy.
For its part, Morocco, which is affected by the
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army through
the contingents it contributes to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), will continue
to work to protect civilians and provide humanitarian
and medical aid, in accordance with the MONUSCO
mandate. Bilaterally, my country also continues to
provide humanitarian aid and support for capacitybuilding and human development to countries affected
by the LRA’s criminal activities.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
and appreciation for the work of Special Representative
Moussa and his team in helping to prevent conflict in
Central Africa and strengthening the coordination of
the activities of the United Nations and the subregional
organizations of the region, where stability and
security have always been a priority for the Kingdom
of Morocco.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We too would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing and his valuable
work and leadership as Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The subregion of Central Africa continues to face
numerous interlinked and crosscutting challenges.
As evident in the recent crisis in the Central African
Republic, instability in any part of the region has
ramifications beyond the borders of the State directly
affected. The overall fragile security situation in

16

the Sahel, the lack of economic opportunities, the
proliferation of weapons, the threats posed by terrorism,
the increasing incidents of piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea, cross-border criminality, including
poaching, and the continued threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) to civilians impact all countries
of the region. Those challenges can be addressed only
through a unified, well-coordinated regional and
international approach that factors in the cross-border
nature of those problems, as well as national ownership.
The overall focus should remain on building the
capacities of the national authorities to address those
threats in line with their national priorities, as well
as to increase regional cooperation and collaboration.
In that regard, we support the important role of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
in coordinating regional efforts and addressing those
issues in line with its mandate. The technical support
and capacity-building initiatives of UNOCA in the
areas of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
mediation, especially for the regional and subregional
organizations, remain crucial in addressing the regional
challenges and need to be strengthened further.
The presence and continued activities of the Lord’s
Resistance Army remain a major threat to the safety
and security of civilians in the entire subregion. Despite
several advances towards countering the scourge of the
Lord’s Resistance Army in the recent past, the danger
posed by the group still looms large and thousands
remain displaced due to LRA attacks. Furthermore, the
ongoing crisis in the Central African Republic has the
potential to undermine the fragile gains made against
the LRA.
The LRA scourge can best be addressed through
a comprehensive approach consisting of anti-LRA
measures, as well as strengthening the capacity of
relevant States. The political stability and strong
national security institutions in the region will prevent
the group from taking advantage of the security vacuum
and lack of border controls. At the same time, dealing
with the plight of persons displaced by LRA attacks, as
well as addressing the long-term development needs of
the LRA-affected areas, should remain an integral part
of that comprehensive approach.
The full implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the LRA, with the help of UNOCA
and regional peacekeeping missions, is crucial

13-34865

S/PV.6971

for countering the LRA threat. The successful
implementation of the strategy against the LRA hinges
on a timely and adequate availability of resources, as
well as on building the requisite capacities of judicial
and Government systems and the military capabilities
of the countries affected by the LRA. The international
community should provide the necessary political,
technical and financial support for the successful
implementation of that initiative, in line with the
priorities identified by the African Union, as well as
the principle of national ownership.
We welcome the finalization of the concept of
operations and other strategic documents for the
operationalization of the African Union Regional Task
Force against the LRA, and encourage the LRA-affected
countries to follow up on their commitments, especially
by increasing their troop contributions to the Task Force.
There is also an urgent need to resolve the funding gaps
in order to address the humanitarian situation in the
LRA-affected areas.
We welcome the important role that UNOCA,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic and United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the region continue to play in
the fight against the LRA. We commend in particular
the important role of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in that regard. The Mission’s role, through
training and capacity-building of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, as well as the local
authorities, support for the justice and police sectors,
the implementation of early warning mechanisms
and of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes remain
integral to the international response against the LRA.
The Mission should remain focused on its core mandate
to protect of civilians in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including in the LRA-affected
regions of that country.
Pakistan remains strongly committed to peace,
prosperity and long-term stability in the Central African
subregion. We hope that the region will continue to
receive the due attention and full political support of the
international community, as well as that of the Security
Council, to help address numerous challenges it faces.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to
express our gratitude to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his

comprehensive briefing. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to contribute to peace and security in Central
Africa and its increased cooperation with regional and
subregional institutions.
The current political, security and humanitarian
crisis in the Central African Republic adversely
impacts the stability and security of the entire
Central African subregion. The rapidly deteriorating
humanitarian situation — due to the rising number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, an increase
in the availability and illegal circulation of weapons,
the potential of spillover of the conflict within the
subregion and its negatives effects on the various
subregional processes, including on the efforts to
address the threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) — highlights the urgency of restoring the rule of
law and reinstating constitutional order in the country.
We appreciate the mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
resolve the crisis through dialogue and negotiations.
At the same time, we fully concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Council consider
sanctions and other measures against those who have
committed gross violations of humanitarian and human
rights law during the conflict.
Complex political, security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges in the Sahel region require a
comprehensive, integrated and radical response from
international and regional actors. In that regard, we
welcome the decision of the Community of SaheloSaharan States to create a permanent council for
sustainable development in the fight against poverty
and a permanent security council to help rid the region
of terrorists and other threats to peace.
Maritime piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea present another serious threat to the security
and economic development of the Central African
subregion. We commend the efforts of the regional
stakeholders to implement resolution 2018 (2011),
and stress the importance of the upcoming regional
summit of Heads of State and Government, to be held
in Cameroon in late June.
We note with concern a growing menace posed
by the spread of cross-border criminal activities, such
as poaching and the illegal ivory trade, to sustainable
peace and stability in Central Africa. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/297) also places a particular

13-3486517

S/PV.6971

focus on the high rates of youth unemployment as
a potential risk to the security of the subregion.
UNOCA’s close interaction and coordination of efforts
with ECCAS and other relevant partner organizations
are requisite to the success of a proposed regional
forum on youth unemployment, political stability and
peacebuilding in Central Africa.
We welcome the strong macroeconomic development
registered in Central Africa for another consecutive
period, including significant growth rates in the non-oilproducing countries. It is essential that economic
revenues be channeled into concrete strategies and
programmes, with the support and assistance of the
international community, in order to address the root
causes of chronic instability in the subregion, such as
poverty and unemployment.
Despite the progress achieved in combating
the Lord’s Resistance Army and a decrease in the
direct threat of its attacks, the group continues to be
a source of insecurity in Central Africa. Given the
potential for the group’s re-emergence, it is of utmost
necessity to ensure the uninterrupted implementation
of LRA-related initiatives and activities.
The LRA-affected countries should accelerate
their efforts to attain the goals set out in the United
Nations regional strategy and the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA. We
welcome the finalization of the implementation plan
for the United Nations regional strategy, as well as the
concept of operations and other strategic documents
required for the operationalization of the African Union
Regional Task Force. We underline the importance of
the full implementation of those documents, as well as
the provision of the necessary funds for that purpose.
The attention of the Governments concerned and
international donor support should continue to be
focused on strengthening the response capacities of
the LRA-affected countries, addressing long-term
development needs, providing humanitarian assistance
and promoting return and recovery programmes in the
affected areas.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Togo.
I would like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his very
detailed briefing and to commend once again the work
he carries out as Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

18

The report presented to us today (S/2013/297)
makes it clear that progress has been made in recent
months in strengthening democracy, the rule of law
and political and economic governance. Elections have
been organized in one country in particular and efforts
are being made to strengthen economic growth.
The same goes for the upcoming summit in
Cameroon on the subject of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, pursuant to resolution 2039 (2012). We believe
that all efforts must be made to ensure the success of
that summit.
Unfortunately, every time we hear of some
encouraging progress, especially in countries emerging
from armed conflicts, new cycles of violence emerge
elsewhere, as if to remind us that the path to lasting
peace is long and rife with ambushes. The recent crisis
in the Central African Republic and the tragedy taking
place there are a perfect illustration of this, so much so
that many agree that that country became a failed State
in only a few days following the attack by Séléka.
Against that backdrop, it is urgent for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to consider the appropriate measures to take,
in particular on the security and humanitarian fronts,
with a view to helping the country to recover. In that
regard, one such measure would be to adopt individual
sanctions against the rebels responsible, who must
answer for their actions before judicial institutions.
We welcome the decision just announced by the
African Union to establish a rapid intervention force,
which should be operational in the immediate future
thanks to the contributions of troops, material support
and financing from South Africa, Uganda and Ethiopia.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the international community has exhibited an
unprecedented level of mobilization over recent months
to come to the aid of that country. The recent mission
carried out by the Secretary-General to the country and
other States of the region is the most tangible proof of
that.
Togo wishes to repeat its thanks to all of the actors
involved in seeking a lasting solution to the recurrent
conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The tireless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern

13-34865

S/PV.6971

African Development Community in that regard are
praiseworthy.
My country remains convinced that with the
political process that is being supported by all of the
countries of the region, and, most recently, by the
military component deployment of the Intervention
Brigade, peace and security could be reestablished in the
region as long as all parties respect their commitments
and effective and coordinated follow-up on the new
strategy is ensured.
That is why we regret and condemn the resumption
of hostilities, on 20 May, between the Congolese army
and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). We encourage
the Congolese Government to remain engaged in the
Kampala talks and we appeal to the M-23 to return to
the negotiating table without delay to swiftly conclude
a peace agreement.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continues to
pose a genuine threat to the civilian population, and to
women and children in particular, in the areas where
this armed group operates. The report of the SecretaryGeneral confirms that, although weakened, this armed
group retains enough force to pose a threat, especially
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic.
Despite all that, the fight against the LRA continues
on all fronts, as reflected by the fact that no attacks by
this criminal group have been recorded in South Sudan
since the latter half of 2011, thanks in particular to the
efforts made by the Government of that country, its
various partners and the civilian population.
Moreover, the international community has become
aware that the struggle against the LRA cannot be only
a military one, but must also be fought on the judicial
front. That is why my delegation believes that the
success of this fight will require, among other things,
the capture of the leader of the LRA, Joseph Kony, and
his principal lieutenants, and their delivery to trial. In
that regard, it is important for all States of the region
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court to
apply as swiftly as possible the international arrest
warrants issued against these criminals, whose arrest
would allow, without a doubt, the swift surrender of
fighters, who would then have to be incorporated into
an effective disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration process.

In the context of continuing efforts, we also welcome
the Secretary-General’s submission to the Council, on
19 April, of the implementation plan to support the
United Nations regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army (S/2013/240,
annex). It is important that the various actions taken in
the context of the fight against the LRA be accompanied
on the socioeconomic front with appropriate measures,
in particular by the Governments of the countries
concerned and their partners, to sustainably address
critical problems created by extreme poverty and youth
unemployment, which are both potential threats to
peace and security.
The role of key actors in the fight against the LRA,
in particular of the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, Germany and the European Union, remains
crucial for containing the threat posed by this criminal
group, especially in terms of financing and logistics.
Beyond the criminal acts of the LRA, we also
express our concern about the poaching and massacring
of elephants, which are taking place in some countries
in the region, and the subsequent sale of ivory that
constitutes a source of funding for criminal and rebel
groups. We therefore encourage the States concerned
to strengthen, with the support of their partners, the
security measures around parks and other protected
areas where these animals live.
The causes of recurrent conflicts in Africa, in
particular in Central Africa, are well known. The
numerous meetings of the Security Council devoted to
this subject have taken decisions to bring them to an
end. What remains is for the international community,
including the Council, to take further conflictprevention measures, which have the advantage of
being less costly in human, material and financial
resources than peacekeeping operations and the fight
against criminal groups.
To respond in general to the recurrent crises in the
region, we believe that the international community
should above all maintain a high-level of vigilance
and react swiftly to early-warning signs of renewed
instability in these countries.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
staff of UNOCA and to all United Nations, African
Union and subregional organization missions that
are working tirelessly to ensure the maintenance and
consolidation of peace and security in Central Africa.

13-3486519

S/PV.6971

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council reiterates its strong
condemnation of the attacks and atrocities carried
out by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and its
violations of international humanitarian law and
abuses of human rights. The Council condemns
further the LRA’s recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
slavery and other sexual violence, and abductions.
The Council demands an immediate end to all
attacks by the LRA and urges the LRA to release
all those abducted, disarm and demobilize.
“The Security Council welcomes the
conclusions of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict adopted on 19 April 2013,
concerning the situation of children and armed
conflict affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army.
The Council calls for their full implementation.
“The Security Council welcomes the
development of the implementation plan for the
United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA as
well as other strategic documents. The Council
urges the United Nations Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), in its coordination role, as well as the
United Nations political and peacekeeping missions
in the region and other relevant United Nations
presences, to enhance their efforts in support of the
implementation of the strategy, as appropriate and
within the limits of their mandates and capacities.
The Security Council also calls on the international
community to provide assistance where possible.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for
the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative
against the LRA, welcomes the finalization of the
concept of operations and other strategic documents
required for the operationalization of the African
Union Regional Task Force, and encourages the
deployment of child-protection advisers. The
Council urges all regional Governments to fulfil
their commitments under the Initiative, and
encourages neighbouring States to cooperate with
it, in order to end the LRA threat. The Council
further encourages all States in the region to

20

take measures to ensure that the LRA is not able
to operate with impunity in their territory. The
Council underlines the need for all military action
against the LRA to be conducted in compliance with
applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law, and to minimize the risk of harm to civilians in
those areas. The Council welcomes the steps taken
to deliver an enhanced, comprehensive and more
regional approach to the humanitarian situation,
including assistance to victims of sexual violence
and other attacks, and urges further progress in this
regard.
“The Security Council underlines the primary
responsibility of States in the LRA-affected region
to protect civilians. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Republic of South Sudan and Uganda to
end the threat posed by the LRA, and urges further
efforts from these countries, as well as from other
countries in the region. In this regard, the Security
Council encourages those countries affected by
the LRA that have not yet done so to establish
standard operating procedures for the reception
and handover of LRA children to civilian childprotection actors.
“The Council expresses concern at the recent
pause of counter-LRA operations in the Central
African Republic in the context of the current
crisis in the country due to the seizure of power by
force, on 24 March 2013, by the Séléka coalition
as well as the ensuing violence and looting,
which worsened the humanitarian and security
situation and weakened the institutions of the
Central African Republic. Recognizing the need
in the short term for the transitional authorities
of the Central African Republic, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations to
strengthen their coordination to solve the current
crisis in the Central African Republic as soon as
possible, and emphasizing that those responsible
for any abuses or violations of human rights or
violations of international humanitarian law must
be held accountable, the Council encourages
continued coordination to allow regional counterLRA operations to resume in the Central African
Republic as soon as possible. In this regard, the

13-34865

S/PV.6971

Council calls on the transitional authorities in
the Central African Republic to uphold their
commitment to the AU Regional Task Force and
allow regional counter-LRA operations to resume
without hindrance. The Security Council underlines
its appreciation for Uganda’s steadfast commitment
and leadership to counter the LRA.
“The Council welcomes the efforts of the
United
Nations
Organization
Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in tackling the LRA. In this context,
the Council encourages further and reinforced
efforts by MONUSCO to tackle the LRA, including
through training and capacity-building of the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo, support to the Joint Information Operations
Centre, and implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration (DDRRR) programme to encourage
and facilitate further LRA defections.
“The Council notes the mandate of
MONUSCO and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to help protect civilians
in LRA-affected areas in their respective countries,
and urges their continued efforts to implement this
mandate, as well as the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA)
to cooperate and share swiftly information related
to the regional threat of the LRA. The Council
stresses the need for enhanced cross-border
coordination, including through the adoption of
common standard operating procedures and swift
information-sharing between these missions, as
well as among all other actors in the region, to
better anticipate LRA movements and imminent
threats of attack. The Council expresses concern
about the continued reports of LRA attacks in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the first
quarter of 2013, and calls on those MONUSCO
forces operating in LRA-affected areas to reinforce
their efforts to target and promote defections from
the LRA through active patrols and increased
information-sharing.
“The Security Council takes note of reports
suggesting the existence of an LRA base in the
disputed enclave of Kafia Kinga, on the border of

the Central African Republic and between South
Sudan and the Sudan.
“The Council encourages the United Nations,
the AU and ECCAS to work together, including
through joint field assessments, to develop a common
operating picture of the LRA’s current capabilities
and areas of operation, as well as to investigate the
LRA’s logistical networks and possible sources of
military support and illicit financing, including
alleged involvement in elephant poaching and
related illicit smuggling. The Council calls on the
Secretary-General to report on possible findings
in his reports on the implementation of the United
Nations counter-LRA strategy.
“The Council urges MONUSCO, BINUCA,
UNMISS and other United Nations actors in
the LRA-affected region to continue to work
with regional forces and non-governmental
organizations to promote a common approach to
defections and support the DDRRR efforts across
the LRA-affected area. The Council highlights
the importance of programmes in support of the
release, return and successful reintegration of
children abducted by the LRA, in particular those
targeting community acceptance of such children.
“The Security Council commends efforts
by international donors to provide humanitarian
assistance to LRA-affected populations in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Republic of South Sudan. The
Council reaffirms the requirement for all parties to
allow safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
organizations to the civilian population, in
accordance with international law, including
applicable international humanitarian law, and the
United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance. The Council expresses concern about
the lack of regular humanitarian access to many
LRA-affected communities in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including because of poor infrastructure,
and encourages increased United Nations efforts
and international donor support for humanitarian
access.
“The Security Council recalls that the
International Criminal Court’s arrest warrants
for Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and Dominic
Ongwen on charges of, inter alia, war crimes and

13-3486521

S/PV.6971

crimes against humanity, including murder, rape
and forced enlistment of children, have yet to be
enforced, and calls upon all States to cooperate with
relevant national authorities and the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with their respective
obligations, in order to implement those warrants
and to bring to justice those responsible.
“The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General keep it informed on the activities
of UNOCA, the progress of implementation of the
regional strategy and the efforts being undertaken
respectively by missions in the region and other

22

relevant United Nations agencies to that end,
including through a single report on UNOCA and
the LRA to be submitted before 15 November
2013.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/6.
There are no further speakers inscribed on the list
of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

13-34865
