United Nations

S/PV.6574

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6574th meeting
Wednesday, 6 July 2011, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Ms. Ziade
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Crowley
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2011/381)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-40242 (E)

*1140242*

S/PV.6574

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2011/381)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Japan,
Pakistan and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/381, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: The last time I briefed the
Security Council (see S/PV.6497), as the Council is
aware, I insisted, against the rules, on allowing
Ambassador Tanin to speak first, as a sign of attention
and respect to the growing need for the Afghan people
to be recognized as a sovereign country. But this time,
Ambassador Tanin has insisted, with me, to go back to
the rules, to show that Afghanistan intends to stick to
international rules. Therefore, with his permission, I
will apply the old approach and take the floor as he
kindly requested me to do.
We meet today at the moment when we are at a
special crossroads. July is a significant month in 2011,
as decisions have been taken that relate to the

2

beginning of transition. Transition has been announced,
but it is also going to be based on the decisions taken
at upcoming meetings of the international community
with the Afghan authorities, starting approximately in
mid-July. This is also the month when we are starting
to see the gradual implementation of the decision
announced in the speech by President Obama with
regard to a gradual redeployment of international
forces, in particular those of the United States. In other
words, we are at a crossroads between national
sovereignty and what comes with it, namely,
responsibility and accountability, and between
continuing conflict and a politically inclusive dialogue.
First of all, on the transition, it is like a train that
is moving forward. According to every indicator I
have — and as we heard at the meeting we had on the
transition conference in Kabul — it is also on track.
The transition will also of course address seven areas,
provinces and cities. As usual, we will see that the
devil in the details. But the transition is on track.
An issue on which we are working — and on
which we should be working more, as was recognized
in the meeting to which I referred — has to do with the
fact that transition cannot be, and should not be, only
about security. It has to be about something more. It
needs to be a transition to something that the Afghan
people recognize and identify with. That is why we are
working together in order to ensure that the results in
the social, economic and human rights aspects are
linked to the transition. In that sense, while the
transition is irreversible like a Swiss train, we need at
the same time to make sure that it becomes solidly
irreversible with regard to the socio-economic aspect.
In that context, one element that has been
discussed in the past few days, and which may come up
again, is the idea of seeing whether we could have
some of the projects that may emerge that are related to
transition linked to some type of transition dividend. In
other words, there will undoubtedly be some savings
on the military side. Some of it may be utilized to
ensure that local Afghan authorities and the people in
the areas that are being transitioned feel that there is
continuing interest and substantive support for their
development. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will do its part in that
regard, based on its very clear mandate, in particular to
facilitate that aspect of the transition.

11-40242

S/PV.6574

That leads me to my second point, which is
normally the first one in Afghanistan, that is, security.
As the Council knows — and there have been many
reminders of this — the security situation has been an
issue of concern recently. But we have to look at it in
context. God knows I do so with care and caution,
having just experienced tragedy on 1 April. There have
been attacks on the Intercontinental Hotel. Many of us
have been there and we know its iconic value. It was
shocking. There have been attacks inside the city and
in military hospitals, and even in the Ministry of
Defence. There were attacks in Kandahar for two days,
as well as attacks in Herat on the Italian provincial
reconstruction team.
But let us put it into context. All the attacks were
taken care of in an effective way by the Afghan
military and police — albeit perhaps sometimes in a
rather confusing way, as we are all in the process of
training. Even at the Intercontinental Hotel, in a way,
the end of the attack was supported by International
Security Assistance Force helicopters. Again, however,
the Afghan forces were up front.
I think that is an important point, because there is
a perception of improvement in terms of the security
situation, which is true. There has been a surge and
there has been an improvement in the perception of the
momentum being reversed. It is also true, however, that
there is a constant attempt by anti-government
forces — during the spring offensive, as they call it,
and in the summer — to try to reverse that perception
by giving signals of dramatic surgical attacks. But I
must say that, so far, the first impression still prevails.
The Afghans have been able to handle it. That does not
mean that in the next few weeks or perhaps months, as
the summer is not over, there may not be moments of
great difficulty in the security situation.
That is why it is so important, first, to address the
issue of civilian casualties, which is affecting the
Afghan people, and, secondly, to actually go into the
other phase, namely, a political search — as Secretary
of State Hillary Clinton and, recently, President Obama
have indicated, and as has President Karzai several
times. Everybody recognizes that no military solution
is conceivable in Afghanistan. We now need to move
more effectively into a political search.
That means reconciliation. Where are we on that?
Well, as is clear for all to see, there have been a lot of
contacts. Unfortunately, there have also been leaks to

11-40242

the media, which have not helped those contacts. But
there is clearly a need for dialogue, and we are getting
indications that this will be resumed in a more concrete
way very soon.
Meanwhile, the United Nations is doing its part,
in close coordination with Afghan authorities and
international stakeholders. We are focusing specifically
only on what we are mandated to do, and where we
perhaps have added value, that is, on confidencebuilding measures. These are important, because they
are the measures that prepare for substantive
discussion, which can only be carried out by the
Afghans with the Afghans. They will actually have to
do what we have always said, namely, ensure that this
is Afghan-led.
But confidence-building measures do matter,
especially at this stage. They include issues such as
looking at civilian casualties and giving the Taliban a
chance, if they want to be involved, to actually qualify
by doing so with facts and not with words and by
reducing the tremendous negative impact that they are
having on the civilian population, especially in the
most recent period.
Secondly, and I know this is personal judgment,
but it is one based on the perception held by many in
Kabul, the decision that the Council courageously took
to split the list of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban is certainly an indicator in the right direction,
if we want to continue to push for reconciliation. To
give one example, some of the members of the High
Peace Council, which is the ultimate authority and to
which we will refer when there is a substantive
discussion, happen to still be on the list. That is very
difficult to manage when we, as the United Nations and
UNAMA, assist them logistically and substantively and
try to travel with them and bring them around in order
to make sure that we have meetings.
One area for confidence-building measures is
certainly the possibility of establishing a venue — let
us not call it an office — where meetings could
eventually take place between the Taliban and
stakeholders, in particular Afghan partners, without a
feeling of insecurity and with an atmosphere of
sufficient discretion. That is not yet there, but it is one
of the areas.
Let me mention an additional area, which has
come up in the past few weeks. It has to do with

3

S/PV.6574

education. If there is one area that the international
community and the Afghan authorities should be proud
of, in terms of improvement after the departure of the
Taliban, it is education. Seven million children are
currently enrolled and going to school, many of them
girls. We continuously witnessed the tragic decisions
taken during the Taliban’s rule regarding schools in
general and girls in particular. There are some
indicators that they appear for the first time to be
sending messages — even publicly through the
Internet — that they might have learned from that
mistake. We hope that this is not just a tactical decision
and that they are in fact indicating their interest in not
attacking schools.

My next point is that, regardless of whether or
not reconciliation takes place, without a regional
context it will never be totally sustainable. That is why,
over the past few months, we have been looking with
great satisfaction and interest at the substantial increase
in bilateral, trilateral and multilateral meetings, from
the Shanghai process to the several meetings that have
taken place between the Afghan, Pakistani and United
States authorities. The same applies to the meetings
taking place in Istanbul, in which Iran was included in
addition to Pakistan and Afghanistan. We therefore
hope and believe that the Istanbul meeting to take place
on 2 November will be quite an opportunity for this to
be addressed.

There have been some contraindications. Some
teachers have been affected recently, but on the whole
our own research indicates that some 400 schools,
newly established in certain areas that could clearly be
influenced by a Taliban presence, have seen a
substantial reduction of attacks. Minister Wardak has
drawn my attention to this. We, together with UNICEF,
will continue studying the situation; if this is a trend,
we will recognize it as a confidence-building measure.
But it needs to be verified.

As members of the Council know, there is an
international contact group. It is informal, but is
growing in its impact and influence. We had a very
good and constructive meeting in Kabul, where, apart
from other major issues related to transition, Deputy
Foreign Minister Ludin came up with an initiative that
we are planning to support. The initiative will seek to
determine whether we may come to some
understanding in Istanbul on stability, along the lines
of what was done in the Balkans some time ago or
during the Helsinki process. In other words, it will seek
something in writing that reassures all sides about
mutually reinforced stability.

There is one area that I think we need to refer to
when we talk about reconciliation. That is
reintegration. The institutional architecture is there,
and all members of the Council have contributed
substantially — some very substantially — to actually
making sure that this is a real and well-prepared
eventuality. So far, there has been some traction and
momentum. More than 1,800 people are currently in
the programme. But challenges exist.
First of all, it is clear that until real reconciliation
takes place, it will be very difficult to see major
momentum. But having it ready in order to attract and
respond to possible changes is very important, and the
proof is that figure of 1,800. We have some concerns
and are working on how to ensure that there is
sufficient vetting. I must share with the Council the
fact that one of the preliminary indicators of the attack
in Mazar-e-Sharif was that three out of the five people
who violently and brutally killed my colleagues were
actually reintegrated ex-Taliban. That shows, first of
all, that we need to be very careful about vetting and
that none of this is waterproof until there is a final
reconciliation.

4

That would make more sense, of course, if there
were also a mechanism to support it and a financial
trust fund for regional incentives. All that may be on
the table by the time of the Istanbul meeting, but we
are certainly working seriously with the Afghan and
Turkish authorities and all participants, regional and
beyond, to get something moving in that regard.
There is no question that, at the moment, there
are some clouds related to regional understandings,
such as that currently prevailing on the border between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. This should not be overly
dramatized and should, frankly, be left to the Afghans
and Pakistanis to discuss. They have recently held very
constructive and useful meetings, both in Islamabad
and in Afghanistan, and they will be neighbours
forever. We will be there for a while, but they will
always be there. So while we are looking at these
events with concern, we are also hopeful that this type
of bilateral discussion will be a move in the right
direction.

11-40242

S/PV.6574

There is another issue that is important in the
context of the regional environment, and that is the
concern of some regional neighbours over the ongoing
ambiguity about the nature of the strategic pact or
understanding that may be discussed between the
Afghan authorities and, in particular, the United States.
Some countries have been very concerned about the
possibility of permanent, large foreign bases in
Afghanistan. We have been trying to reassure everyone
that this does not actually seem to be the case and that
it is actually up to the Afghan authorities to reassure
the neighbours about the real nature of whatever
strategic agreement may be reached. Having travelled
in the region, I recognize that it is still an issue that we
believe would be better resolved with clarity before
Istanbul. We hope it will. There have been statements
issued by the United States authorities — even from
the highest levels in the Pentagon — trying very rightly
to offer reassurance in that regard, but some additional
homework would probably help to dissipate that cloud.
That leads me to another issue —
counternarcotics. At a time of possible gradual changes
of focus on the part of the international community in
Afghanistan, there is a concern that the so-called
economic environment will be changing. That is
proven by facts. The military drawdown will also
reduce the impact of everything that is financially
linked to a substantial military presence. The particular
fear of my colleagues in the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, to which I draw the Council’s
attention, is that the narco-economy may then become
more appealing to some Afghans. There is therefore an
important need for us not to forget that aspect, which
as Council members know is substantively affecting
not only Afghanistan but also, again, its neighbours.
That leads me to the issue of human rights. If
there is one area where I believe the United Nations
will be remembered in Afghanistan, it is probably the
way it has held the fort and raised high the flag about
the need to respect human rights. That is why the
civilian casualties report is so important and has been a
major irritant, frankly, particularly to the Taliban, who
have told us many times that it is hurting them. We
have been telling them that there is a way to avoid
that — by not hurting civilians.
This has also had an impact on the interventions
of the International Security Assistance Force and
NATO, particularly air raids. I know that the errors that
have been made are increasingly drawing the attention

11-40242

of the United States and NATO authorities, whereas the
horrors that the Taliban have been perpetrating in many
places — such as the recent attacks on the bank and a
hospital — have also drawn attention, and they are
annoyed by that. We hope that this will help everyone,
and the Taliban in particular, to understand that there is
a moment when the popular support that they believe
they enjoy is being affected by the level of civilian
casualties they have been causing.
The issue of women is still very important. We
have 69 women in Parliament. We count on them to be
able to defend what has been achieved by women in
Afghanistan, but we remain worried about the reports
we are getting about the many cases of concern, such
as the judiciary sometimes punishing women when
they move out of their homes or decide not to marry.
The same thing obviously applies to the issue of
children. There have been cases of children used as
suicide bombers. There have been cases of children
being attacked in a way that has drawn the attention of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
On the humanitarian side, there is one area to
which I need to draw the Council’s attention. At the
moment, the welfare programme is having a difficulty
with resources. It is one of our own stars, trying to
show the Afghan people that we will not abandon them
at any time, as well as actually providing food to more
than 6 million children. At the moment, it has had to
substantially reduce the number of beneficiaries due to
a lack of resources. I draw attention to that because it
is an important issue for all.
Aid coherence is crucial, and it is also important
to recognize that there is a body for aid coherence. It is
called the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB). The JCMB is the best body; there is no need
to invent a new one. The United Nations specializes in
creating new bodies, so I would be reluctant to suggest
one. Rather, the JCMB should be reinforced. The
JCMB has the possibility and potential to deal with aid
coherence. But there is a cloud — it is the Kabul Bank.
I do not need to remind the Council of that, but it is an
important issue that is, in a way, an obstacle to
progress at the moment on the JCMB and even to the
follow-up to the Kabul Conference.
That issue is not the Council’s responsibility, but
that of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The
IMF is engaged and, to be fair to Minister Zakhilwal,

5

S/PV.6574

eight out of the 10 indicators that were requested to be
deployed in order to reassure the international
community and the IMF have been addressed, but two
remain. We hope and have been contributing to
drawing the attention of the IMF to the possible
consequences of an Afghan default, so to speak, which
is not imminent if that is not approved but is certainly
of concern. At the same time, Kabul Bank is a serious
issue to the Afghan authorities — $800 million is not
something to gloss over. Therefore, serious attention is
being focused at the moment.
The same applies to the issue with which the
Council is very familiar — the parliamentary crisis. We
were hoping that would not take place 10 months after
the elections and six months after the President had
solemnly inaugurated the Parliament. We would then
have been going through an election that, while
imperfect, would be handled by the Afghan institutions
during a continued political process.
Unfortunately, this has not been the case. A
special court has indicated that 61 members of
Parliament should perhaps leave their positions. There
is a current tension, as the Council is aware. Our
position is the position of the Security Council —
22 December. We will not change it. The second
position is that, indeed, the judiciary has the right to
prosecute anyone who has committed a crime, but not
to change the outcome of elections, and that the
solution must be an Afghan solution and a political
solution, but not a judicial solution.
We are hopeful and will continue to work on
behalf of the Council, together with the Afghan
authorities, to avoid prolongation of that institutional
crisis. Afghanistan needs checks and balances; it needs
a Parliament, an executive and a judiciary that all work
together. At the moment there is a cloud, but since I am
an optimist, I am not expecting much rain, yet, on that
issue.
The last point I will make, with the Council’s
permission, is a message. This is a transition period in
every sense. But there is also a message, which we
must be certain the Afghans hear, that 2014 will not be
1989. They are worried, and rightly so, that for the
third time during their recent history they will be
graciously abandoned by the international community.
I know that is not our intention and certainly not that of
the United Nations or UNAMA. We are going to
review our footprint. We will review the way that we

6

must work, because transition is taking place
everywhere. But we will be there — if everything is
there and if the Afghans want us — for a long time.
And I think that, from the international point of view,
we need to constantly reassure the Afghans of that.
That will help them to pass through the transition in
this difficult period.
The President: I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. I would like also to express appreciation
for your personal role and Germany’s prime role in
dealing with Afghanistan in the Council.
I would like to extend my warmest welcome to
my good friend, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura, back to the
Council. I thank him for his kind remarks and
compliments, for his comprehensive briefing and for
his introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/381).
As the world enters a post-bin Laden era,
Afghanistan, the greatest victim of terrorism, is today
at a critical juncture in its quest for peace and stability.
Consistent with the outcome of the NATO Lisbon
Summit, we have begun the transition process. In the
coming days, we will implement the first stage of this
process in seven Afghan provinces: Kabul, Panjshir,
Bamiyan, the municipalities of Herat in Herat
province, Mazar-e-Sharif in Balkh province, Mehtar
Lam in Laghman province and Lashkar Gah in
Helmand province.
Transition is a rousing call for Afghans to take
the lead in national ownership and leadership and for
the Government of Afghanistan to assume its sovereign
responsibilities. From our point of view, transition is a
carefully formulated comprehensive strategy that
presupposes not only a gradual transfer of security
responsibilities to Afghan authorities until the end of
2014, but also a conscientious drawdown of
international forces, the accelerated training of the
Afghan Army and Police, the strengthening of
governance, a new regional agenda for multifaceted

11-40242

S/PV.6574

cooperation, and the prospect of securing a renewed
strategic partnership with the United States and NATO.

and prepare the ruthless killers and agents of the
unending destruction of Afghanistan.

The Afghan Government continues its crucial
efforts to ensure that the transition process is smooth
and viable. However, there should be no doubt that, if
the transition process is to succeed and remain
sustainable, certain preconditions must be met. First
and foremost, we look to our international partners to
expedite the training and equipping of our security
forces and to provide them with the necessary enablers.

Acts of terror, however, will not shake our
determination to secure peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We are pleased to see that an environment
conducive to constructive outreach and dialogue with
members of the armed opposition is now in place. The
reconciliation process will be pursued as a priority,
consistent with the understanding that there is no
purely military solution and that the transition requires
an inclusive settlement. Reconciliation aims to bring
peace, prosperity and unity to the country. It is not
about ceding any territorial control or accommodating
any representation outside the authority of the Afghan
Government. The High Peace Council is engaged in
discussions with the Taliban and key actors in the
region to end the violence and achieve a lasting peace.
This is an effort in which all sectors of society,
including women, are involved.

Last month, United States President Obama
announced the gradual drawdown of United States
forces from Afghanistan. We welcome the decision and
consider it to be in accordance with the recent
emerging consensus between Afghanistan and the
international community to move from a primarily
military engagement to a more solid and enduring
partnership beyond 2014. President Obama’s
announcement is a testament, first, to the steady ability
of Afghan security forces and, secondly, to the changed
momentum of the war, despite the recent vicious
attacks by the Taliban.
Contrary to some interpretations, we do not see
the drawdown of international forces as an end game
or, as some have put it, the beginning of international
disengagement from Afghanistan. In the past 10 years,
much blood and sweat have been shed and many
sacrifices made in order to realize our common
objective of lasting peace and security in the country
and the region.
The recent display of a promotional psychodrama
of so-called sophisticated attacks, such as the one
carried out last week in the Kabul Intercontinental
Hotel or the slaughter of a dozen civilians in a hospital
in Logar province is a conspicuously well-orchestrated
attempt by the enemies of Afghanistan, designed to
incite fear among the people, to hinder international
support for Afghanistan, and to convince a war-weary
audience in some countries that the war is unwinnable.
Moreover, the recent campaign seeks to sabotage
the future of peace talks and undermine the prospect of
reconciliation. Those who provide terrorists and
extremists with money, arms and strategic guidance are
equally responsible for the continued killing and brutal
butchery of innocent civilians in Afghanistan. It is
therefore imperative to stress the necessity of
eliminating the sanctuaries that continue to produce

11-40242

In addition, we are beginning to focus on the
regional dimensions of the reconciliation process. We
again underscore Pakistan’s significant role in
achieving peace and reconciliation, and in this context
we emphasize the importance of constructive
collaboration between our two countries. We must take
the necessary confidence-building measures for that
collaboration to continue. The recent armed violations
of Afghanistan’s eastern border through hundreds of
instances of shelling and artillery fire in Kunar and
Nangarhar provinces, which killed dozens of people,
including women and children, have been the cause of
serious alarm and concern for the people and
Government of Afghanistan, and run the risk of
undermining the spirit of cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. We urge that such attacks
cease immediately.
The Security Council’s recent decision to
separate the Taliban sanctions regime from that of
Al-Qaida was an astute move in support of our peace
and reconciliation initiative. It gives new impetus to
our Afghan-led reconciliation process. We also
appreciate the Council’s decision to meet our de-listing
requests, and urge increased focus on acceding to our
additional requests, which remain unmet.
The recent eleventh meeting of the International
Contact Group on Afghanistan, held in Kabul with
broad participation from more than 50 countries and
international and regional organizations, focused on

7

S/PV.6574

reconciliation, regional cooperation, the transition to
Afghan leadership and ownership, and international
support beyond 2014. The meeting was held as part of
the lead-up to the forthcoming Istanbul Conference on
Afghanistan, aimed at creating a stability compact, and
to the international conference to be held in Bonn later
this year, which will review progress on the transition
goals and seek the long-term support of the
international community in advancing the political
process, including reconciliation and regional
partnership.
A decade of international and regional interaction
in Afghanistan is now leading to the emergence of a
new silk road, defining the shared benefits of regional
cooperation. This year we have engaged in increasingly
concrete cooperation with our neighbours in the region,
expanding the horizons of understanding and the scope
of joint efforts. During President Karzai’s visit to
Islamabad last month, a promising future of close
cooperation and the realization of a common vision
with Pakistan was envisaged for peace as well as for
development. That visit was followed by an extensive
discussion with the trilateral framework of the Core
Group of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United States,
which recently held its third meeting in Kabul.
During the most recent visit of Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh, India offered its support for Afghanled reconciliation efforts and announced a significant
increase in its assistance to Afghanistan. We also
continue to conduct numerous exchanges with Iran,
Russia, China, countries of Central and South Asia and
the Arab world. The opportunities that a peaceful and
stable Afghanistan can offer for prosperity and security
in the region are ever more evident. We will continue
our constructive engagement with regional partners to
realize our common goals.
Securing Afghanistan and its future is about
empowering the country, enabling it to stand on its own
feet and take charge of its own destiny. In this regard,
we look forward to the upcoming review of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan as essential to aligning the role of the
United Nations with the evolving needs of transition.
We are convinced that a more harmonized, streamlined
and coordinated United Nations, based on the
Delivering as One approach, is vital to furthering the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Organization in
Afghanistan. We look forward to a lasting partnership
with the United Nations during transition and beyond.

8

The Government of Afghanistan will continue to
improve governance, enhance its fight against
corruption
and
strengthen
transparency
and
accountability in our national institutions. To that end,
we will build on existing measures in order to ensure
that anyone involved in illegal activities will be held
accountable. The Afghan Government’s recent
apprehension of two senior executives of Kabul Bank
implicated in financial mismanagement is testimony to
our firm commitment to accountability and the rule of
law. We have presented the Attorney-General’s office
with a list of all the accused individuals. A
comprehensive investigation of the Kabul Bank fiasco
is under way and should lead to reparation of debts and
the bringing to justice of all the culprits in the case. We
are convinced that the final outcome of the
investigation will respond to the concerns both of the
Afghan people and our international partners.
Ongoing consultations are under way to resolve
the dispute that arose from irregularities occurring
during our parliamentary elections. We are not facing a
constitutional crisis. The Government of Afghanistan is
fully committed to resolving the issue within the
framework of a legal and political solution.
Far too many innocent Afghans have lost their
lives as a result of prolonged violence, insecurity and
fighting. The civilian casualties are not just about
figures and numbers; they are about the loss of the
innocent lives of men, women, children, village elders,
health workers, teachers and aid workers. The Taliban
has been primarily responsible for such killings and
has displayed a total lack of conscience in pulling the
trigger on innocent civilians or those who protect local
people. However, the number of casualties caused by
NATO forces, despite their own repeated calls for a
commitment
to
protecting
civilians,
remains
significant. We reiterate our call for an immediate end
to civilian casualties.
As we move forward, we must think beyond
ending the war and towards ensuring sustainable
progress across all sectors: security, governance and
development. Our goal remains a vision of a peaceful,
stable, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. For
that to be achieved, we must build on the gains of the
past and forge a feasible framework of cooperation
with the region and a long-term partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community. The
coming years will be crucial to our joint success.

11-40242

S/PV.6574

Together, we will be able to accomplish the task we
began 10 years ago.
The President: I now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing and his outstanding work in
very difficult conditions. I also thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.
Although the situation in Afghanistan has shown
progress, the recent rise in security incidents is a
painful reminder of the many challenges still ahead.
Brazil is both saddened and alarmed by the recent signs
of hostility against the presence of the United Nations
in Afghanistan. We condemn in the strongest terms the
brutal attack on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I take this opportunity to
reiterate Brazil’s confidence in the work of the United
Nations in helping to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan and
our support for the Afghan Government in the spirit of
transition. We welcome the security enhancement
project being implemented by UNAMA throughout the
country.
Brazil is also concerned at the rising civil unrest
in Afghanistan. After several years of war and
violence, Afghan society should no longer have to
endure the burden of war. The increase in conflictrelated casualties should not be treated as a mere
unintended consequence of the conflict. All concerned
must continue to do their utmost to protect civilians
and comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. There can be no military solution to
this conflict, and I think that we all agree on that. The
Kabul process must be closely followed until the
transition to full Afghan leadership and responsibility
has been achieved.
Despite the current difficulties, the transition
towards Afghan security responsibility must continue
to advance. In the same vein, the implementation of the
national priority programmes outlined by the Afghan
Government is essential to building the capacity and
infrastructure that Afghanistan requires in order to
promote its social and economic development as the
international military presence draws down.
In any scenario, reconciliation efforts remain
central to a political solution to the conflict in

11-40242

Afghanistan. Dialogue is the path to a solid foundation
for the country’s future. Brazil supports the
implementation of the measures agreed to at the
Review Conference of the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. Through an enhanced
presence in Kabul, Brazil stands ready to work together
with the Afghan people and their Government towards
a future of peace and development.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
We welcome the fact that the Government of
Afghanistan has continued to implement the Kabul
process, including the successful elaboration of 11
national priority programmes, out of 22. We express
the hope that the financing issues related to those
programmes will be successfully resolved in
coordination with donors. The Afghan authorities must
now show tangible results in other important national
priority programmes, including those in the areas of
justice and subnational governance, which are crucial
for the better functioning of the State. We would like to
commend the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its important support for
the implementation of the Kabul process.
With respect to the taking over of the
responsibility of the Afghan authorities for security in
the country, Bosnia and Herzegovina hopes that the
recent incidents in Kabul and other areas will not have
a negative impact on the transition which was
announced in March by President Karzai and is
supposed to start this month. We also took note of the
recent announcement by the United States President,
Mr. Barack Obama, followed by the United Kingdom
and Germany, of a partial withdrawal of troops from
Afghanistan. That means that the coming period will be
crucial to Afghanistan’s future and to assessing the
work which has been done by the international
community over these many years. In this regard, we
particularly welcome UNAMA’s role in facilitating
dialogue among development partners and the
International Security Assistance Force to ensure that
the development perspective is taken into account in
the transition planning.
Another important element for Afghanistan’s
future is the Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration process. It is encouraging to see that

9

S/PV.6574

efforts to strengthen this process have continued to
receive strong support from the international
community, including the valuable work of the Special
Representative and of UNAMA. Furthermore, the
adoption of resolution 1988 (2011) and the
establishment of the Taliban sanction regime also
represent positive steps in support of reconciliation
efforts.
We reiterate our position that reconciliation and
integration are crucial elements of the peace process.
We fully understand that such a process can be very
sensitive in terms of the human and political aspects
and that, consequently, it has the potential to encounter
diverse obstacles. Nonetheless, we continue to believe
that there is no alternative to an Afghan-led
reconciliation and reintegration process and that such a
process must be a priority in future. The progress that
has been reported on the reintegration of insurgents is
an encouraging sign, particularly because it includes
Kandahar, which until now had not experienced
significant progress in this field.
Although political developments in Afghanistan
continue to advance in the right direction, the security
situation in Afghanistan remains for us a cause of great
concern. In particular, United Nations statistics show
that last May was the deadliest month for civilians,
with the number of persons killed representing a
significant increase compared with 2010. Bosnia and
Herzegovina condemns in the strongest possible terms
the deadly attack carried out against Logar hospital on
25 June. It is simply not possible to justify such a
crime against innocent civilians. We also condemn the
recent attack against a hotel in Kabul and reiterate our
condemnation of the deadly attack against the UNAMA
compound in Mazar-e-Sharif, where three UNAMA
staff members were among the casualties. It is
important to continue to call upon all parties to the
conflict to strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and protect civilians
while strongly stressing that killing civilians and
innocent people is a crime.
We have also witnessed, as a direct result of the
ongoing conflict, a considerable increase in the number
of displaced persons. We share the Secretary-General’s
view that conflict-related displacements and the failure
to provide reintegration support are not only
humanitarian issues but important security concerns
given their potential for destabilization. United Nations
agencies have played a crucial role in supporting the

10

return of Afghan refugees and displaced persons, as
well as in the sustainable reintegration of those
persons. In that context, we must not forget about the
issue of the removal of unexploded explosive devices,
since only 27 per cent of the areas contaminated with
mines has been cleared.
We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in addressing the
problem of illicit drug production, which remains a
lifeline for anti-Government forces and terrorists. We
are actively participating in the Paris Pact process as
part of joint international efforts to suppress, if not
eliminate, drug trafficking, which has a major impact
on the security of both the countries of supply and the
countries of demand.
Finally, we consider that all of the important
issues relating to sustainable peace and stability in
Afghanistan can only benefit from regional
cooperation, including that of its neighbouring
countries: Iran, Pakistan and India. We welcome the
reinforcement of dialogue and cooperation. We also
commend the efforts of Turkey aimed at supporting
Afghan stability and economic development and the
forthcoming Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, to be
held on 2 November 2011, as well as the commitments
made by Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries during
the Fourth Conference of the Least Developed
Countries, held in Istanbul, to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, our thanks go to the Special
Representative, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the staff of
UNAMA and all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan for their tireless and dedicated work.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and wish you every success as you and
your country assume the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank the
representative of Gabon, our good friend Ambassador
Nelson Messone, who conducted our work last month
with great equanimity and seriousness.
I would like to welcome and thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and to thank him
for his very comprehensive and serious presentation,
which very clearly illustrated the various aspects of the
current situation in Afghanistan, the reality factors that

11-40242

S/PV.6574

should be closely borne in mind in the future and the
outlook on the process of transition and future
consolidation. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Zahir Tanin.

Government in delisting requests, was a decision that
undoubtedly will contribute to the reconciliation
process in Afghanistan and will help to build
confidence between the parties.

I would like to highlight the very important
contribution of UNAMA in improving the stabilization
and democratization process, as well as its
determination to work in coordination with the
Government in order to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan. We
consider it appropriate that, in accordance with its
mandate, UNAMA continues to focus on supporting
the Government in critical areas such as facilitating the
political process for peace and reconciliation, security,
governance, economic development and regional
cooperation.

Afghanistan faces many problems that could
threaten the sustainability of the progress made so far.
Violence remains one of the main factors, affecting
progress and resulting in increased humanitarian needs
and a number of civilian casualties and internally
displaced persons. We reiterate our call on all parties to
the conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
take all necessary measures in order to ensure the
protection of civilians.

My delegation deeply regrets the increase in the
number of security incidents, most especially the
attacks on United Nations personnel and facilities that
took place on 1 April. We welcome and support the
activities conducted by the Special Representative to
improve the safety of staff and the Government’s
commitment to continuing to support UNAMA.
Nevertheless, of major concern is the increased
frequency of public demonstrations against the
international civilian and military presence. The
greatest of attention should be paid to this situation.
Along the same lines, we commend the efforts
geared to a transition towards greater Afghan
responsibility and leadership and to continue to work
in accordance with the timetable for Afghan forces to
take the lead in security matters by the year 2014. That
goal should be guided by progress on the ground. In
that regard, the efforts of the International Security
Assistance Force and of the NATO Training MissionAfghanistan are an important contribution to the
creation of conditions that will enable national
authorities to gradually assume responsibility for
security and governance. We endorse continuing to
build relationships with local authorities and
community leaders that allow, as indicated by Special
Representative De Mistura, the establishment of
inclusive dialogue processes to facilitate reconciliation
with all segments of the population.
The adoption of resolution 1988 (2011), by which
the Security Council established an independent
sanctions regime for individuals and entities associated
with the Taliban and recognized a central role for the

11-40242

We emphasize the importance of the joint
regional initiatives taken to combat the various aspects
of the world drug problem that affect Afghanistan and
the region. Constructive and ongoing participation by
various actors, within and outside the region, involved
in the implementation of common strategies in the
fight against the world drug problem in all its aspects
under the principle of shared responsibility and in a
balanced manner contributes to stabilization and the
promotion of mutual trust between neighbouring
countries and beyond the region. My country,
Colombia, reiterates its readiness to strengthen
bilateral cooperation with Afghanistan in order to
address this and other manifestations of organized
crime.
Security is an essential condition for
strengthening the rule of law, the exercise of
fundamental freedoms and the establishment of
foundations for economic development. Accordingly,
the strengthening of the integrated strategic framework
in order to achieve greater coherence in the
Organization’s efforts and in the implementation of
programmes in support of the Kabul Process is a
positive step forward to ensure unity in the United
Nations and in the international community’s actions in
order to contribute to the exercise of Afghan
sovereignty in all aspects of the future of its people.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his very comprehensive briefing as usual,
as well as Ambassador Tanin for his very useful
intervention.
I must begin my statement by recalling the
attacks in Mazar-e-Sharif. The United Nations

11

S/PV.6574

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
indeed the entire international effort in support of the
Government and people of Afghanistan were brutally
attacked in Mazar-e-Sharif last April. I hereby convey
to the Special Representative Portugal’s highest
appreciation for the courage shown in the face of
adversity and for the constant commitment that
UNAMA’s personnel showed to their mission. We
commend their dedication. That is the guarantee that
the losses suffered will not have been in vain.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/381),
the Special Representative’s briefing and Ambassador
Tanin’s statement have, I believe, covered the essential
aspects of the situation in Afghanistan and shown us
what it takes to make the transition a success.
Last spring was a hard time indeed. The security
assessment indicates that insecurity persists and that
the rising number of casualties, especially those
involving civilians, is a clear sign that the battle for the
future of Afghanistan continues. The recent attack on
the Intercontinental Hotel underlines this situation in a
very symbolic way. But this is a battle that must be
won, not only on the ground against the enemy but also
in terms of public opinion — Afghan public opinion,
first and foremost, but also international public
opinion.
Civilian casualties are evidently the cruellest face
of war. Limiting civilian casualties must therefore rank
at the highest level in the military command’s priorities
as a fundamental element in the war in Afghanistan, as
in any other war. We are aware that significant efforts
had been and are being made to decrease civilian
casualties caused by military operations. We call upon
military commanders to pursue these efforts with
steadfast commitment.
It is clear, nevertheless, that it is the insurgents
who are responsible for the vast majority of civilian
casualties and for the growing numbers of innocent
victims. I recall the Special Representative’s
mentioning last March the offer made to insurgents to
bring forward their own numbers of civilian casualties,
which went unheeded. I also recall the multiple steps
already being taken to try to address damage to
civilians caused by national and international forces. It
would be extremely useful to build upon what is
already on the ground and integrate the valuable
advice, expertise and goodwill we are able to

12

contribute in order to adequately compensate civilians
for their justified grievances.
The Special Representative reports that a draft
regulation on the women’s protection centres is now
under consideration by the Technical Legislative
Review Committee of the Council of Ministers.
Portugal is encouraged by the fact that this process has
been allowed to proceed with the required
inclusiveness so that the amendments that fully protect
women’s human rights were incorporated in the final
version of the draft law. We are also pleased to see that
UNAMA continues to raise awareness and monitor the
implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women. We commend UNAMA’s
continued efforts in terms of the protection and
promotion of human rights as well as the role played
by UN-Women. Portugal reiterates the importance it
attaches to the participation of women in Afghan
Government institutions, including the civil service.
Concerning the protection of children, which was
mentioned by the Special Representative, I would also
like to highly commend the initiative of UNAMA and
UNICEF, in partnership with the Office of the Special
Representative, on violence against children. The broad
range of partners assembled by the United Nations
agency and the Special Representative is an
encouraging sign of public commitment to the rights of
children.
Finally, we take note of the multiple efforts being
made by the Afghan Government, both internally and
externally. Abroad, recent regional steps towards
increased cooperation, at both the bilateral and
multilateral levels, are to be welcomed as Afghanistan
reassumes its role as a fundamental crossroads of Asia.
This shows how Afghanistan’s neighbours can and
should play a crucial role in the process of stabilization
of that country, and indeed of the region, as underlined
by Mr. De Mistura and Ambassador Tanin.
On the home front, significant challenges remain.
We entirely second the affirmation in the report that
“[i]t is vital that the transition be managed so as
to lead to an improvement in security, as well as
better access to essential services for the
population” (S/2011/381, para. 69).
Transition is not only security, as Staffan de
Mistura underlined. Military success on the ground
must translate into an effective governance framework

11-40242

S/PV.6574

and into strengthening the rule of law, institutions and
public services in order to protect those gains from
erosion caused by lack of accountability and
disconnection from the population’s needs. In this
regard, the inauguration of the joint independent anticorruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee can
only be applauded and its work strongly encouraged.
Recent developments at the institutional level,
namely in the Parliament, have highlighted the need for
renewed capacity for political compromise and
adherence to the Constitution. The historical moment
Afghanistan is living requires undivided focus and
commitment. I am sure that decision-makers in
Afghanistan are working hard so that this phase
remains contained within the bounds of a growing
constitutional democracy.
I conclude by saying that the transition is set to
begin this month, and this is something to
commemorate. Vast amounts of resources and political
will are concurring to make July 2011 a point of
departure rather than a point of arrival for Afghanistan
and its people. It is up to us to continue to support, as
allies and friends, the Government of Afghanistan and
its people so as to achieve the success they deserve.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and by
thanking the Ambassador of Gabon for his very able
leadership last month.
I thank both Special Representative De Mistura
and Ambassador Tanin. I want to thank Special
Representative De Mistura for his briefing this
morning and for his continued exceptional service in
Afghanistan. I ask him to convey to the staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) the deep and abiding gratitude of the United
States for the critical work they do in the face of
considerable hardship. That hardship was again made
tragically clear on 1 April, when a mob attacked the
UNAMA compound in Mazar-e-Sharif, resulting in the
deaths of seven United Nations staff members. We
reiterate to their families and loved ones our deepest
condolences. As always, we stand with the United
Nations in the face of such a brutal assault, and again
we urge fellow Member States to provide the United
Nations with the resources it needs to reinforce its
facilities and protect its staff.

11-40242

Let me briefly highlight three top priorities for
my Government in Afghanistan. First, as President
Obama recently said, July marks the beginning of a
responsible transition that will see Afghan forces
gradually taking the lead in securing their own country.
By 2014, this process of transition will be complete
and the Afghan people will be responsible for their
own security. As Afghan security forces move into the
lead, the United States will continue to reduce its
military footprint, and our mission will change from
combat to support. As President Obama announced last
month, the United States will withdraw 10,000 troops
from Afghanistan by the end of this year. The
remaining 23,000 surge troops he announced in
December 2009 will leave Afghanistan by the end of
summer 2012.
President Obama made this decision from a
position of strength. We have made significant progress
towards our goals. The United States military surge,
together with additional troops committed by our allies
and partners, has helped stabilize more of the country
and shifted the momentum away from the insurgency.
Afghan security forces have improved in quality and
grown by more than 100,000 troops. In some areas,
these improvements have already allowed for the
transition of responsibility for security to the Afghan
National Security Forces.
In the face of violence, terror and intimidation, as
Ambassador Tanin noted, Afghans are defending their
country, establishing local police forces, reopening
markets and schools, and creating new opportunities
for women and girls. We will continue to support them
as they reclaim their country after decades of strife,
long after our military mission has ended.
Secondly, even as we pursue this transition to
Afghan security responsibility, we are redoubling our
efforts to pursue a peaceful end to this conflict. We
support Afghan-led initiatives to reconcile the Afghan
people, including the Taliban. We have taken tangible
steps to advance Afghan reconciliation and
reintegration initiatives, including support to the
Afghan High Peace Council and provincial police and
reintegration councils.
As Secretary of State Clinton said in February
and as President Obama reiterated in June, the
necessary outcomes of any negotiation would have to
include a commitment by reconciling insurgents to
renounce violence, abandon any alliance with Al-Qaida

13

S/PV.6574

and abide by the Afghan Constitution, including its
protections for women. As evidence of our seriousness,
we champion the Council’s decision to split the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
and to establish distinct sanctions for Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. Resolution 1988 (2011) is an important tool
for promoting reconciliation while isolating extremists,
and it sends a clear message to the Taliban: There is a
future for those willing to rejoin the fold of peaceful
Afghan society.
Finally, let me touch briefly on an important part
of Afghanistan’s democratic development — its
electoral system. Last year’s parliamentary elections,
the first run by Afghans since the fall of the Taliban in
2001, represented a historic step for the Afghan people.
Afghan electoral institutions — the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission
—
demonstrated
professionalism
throughout the process. They performed admirably,
despite a difficult security environment and allegations
of fraud.
We are consulting closely with Afghan officials
and our international partners, including UNAMA, on
the recent announcement by the special elections
tribunal, which called for the electoral results of 62
seats in the Wolesi Jerga to be overturned. We urge
Afghanistan’s political leaders and all Afghan
institutions to act within their clearly defined areas of
competence, in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution and electoral law, preserving the
necessary system of checks and balances between the
judicial, executive and legislative branches. The United
States has been clear and consistent about the need for
Afghanistan to detect and deal with fraud related to the
election process, in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution and democratic principles, as provided for
by the mechanisms of the Independent Election
Commission. It is important that Afghanistan’s
Parliament fulfil its constitutional role on behalf of the
Afghan people.
Meanwhile, we must continue to strengthen the
capacity of Afghanistan’s electoral institutions. Longterm electoral reform remains key to the country’s
democratic future. As we look to the 2014 presidential
elections and beyond, we must ensure that we learn the
lessons of the past several years, for the benefit of
Afghanistan’s democratic future.

14

The year 2011 will be a pivotal one, capped by an
international gathering in Bonn that will mark 10 years
since the international community joined with the
Afghan people to help chart a new path together. The
past decade has seen great hardship and sacrifice, but it
has also produced real progress. With common purpose
and sustained commitment, we will continue to help
the Afghan people build a more peaceful and
prosperous future.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral De Mistura for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
his statement.
One year ago, the Kabul International Conference
on Afghanistan was successfully convened. Over the
past year, through the efforts of the Afghan
Government and people and with the help of the
international community, positive progress has been
achieved in the Afghan peace and reconstruction
process. Meanwhile, Afghanistan is undergoing a
critical period of transition whereby continued efforts
are needed to achieve comprehensive and balanced
development in all sectors — security, political,
economic and social. In that connection, I would like to
underscore the following five points.
First, China supports Afghanistan in its continued
efforts to push through the Kabul process with the help
of the international community. In order to achieve
Afghan peace, stability and development, there is a
need to fully respect its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to support its ownership and
leadership, so as to genuinely achieve an Afghanistan
run by Afghans.
Secondly, China is seriously concerned about the
recent worsening in the security situation and the rising
number of civilian casualties. We have noted that a
certain country has announced that it plans to withdraw
its troops from Afghanistan. We hope that in the
transfer of security responsibilities to the Afghan
Government, the parties concerned will earnestly
assume responsibilities to help Afghanistan to
strengthen its security capacity-building to ensure a
peaceful and stable transition.
Thirdly, China supports Afghanistan in its
national reconciliation efforts, fully respects the
Afghan Government and people in their choice of their

11-40242

S/PV.6574

own accord and hopes to see progress in its peace and
reintegration programme.

tribute to all other international personnel for the
sacrifices they have made in this campaign.

Fourthly, with regard to peace and reconstruction,
Afghanistan still needs the sustained attention and
support of the international community. The
international community must deliver on and fulfil its
commitment to help Afghanistan and to continue to
provide the country with assistance. The parties need to
respect and implement the priorities identified by
Afghans themselves in the context of the Afghan
National Development Strategy.

The British Prime Minister, David Cameron, has
just returned from a visit to Afghanistan, where he saw
at first hand the progress that the Afghan Government
and the international community have made in
preparing for the transition to Afghan-led security
responsibility across the country. It is encouraging that
the first areas are on track to begin the transition
process on 20 July. The Afghan National Security
Forces will continue to grow in size and capability as
they prepare to take the security lead in all provinces
by the end of 2014. The United States surge has helped
to prepare for transition and, as Ambassador Rice has
confirmed, will be drawn down as originally planned.
Other international forces will also begin to withdraw
as conditions allow. My Prime Minister announced
earlier today that United Kingdom force levels will be
reduced by a further 500, from 9,500 to 9,000, by the
end of 2012. These are signs of progress, improved
security and the growing strength of Afghan forces.
But it does not signal the end of international support
for Afghanistan.

Fifthly, China appreciates the active efforts of the
United Nations to push through the Afghan peace and
reconstruction process. We support the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in its
continued efforts to play a central and leading role in
coordinating aid to Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA
will strengthen its communication, coordination and
cooperation with the Afghan Government.
As a friendly neighbour, China has consistently
committed itself to friendly and good-neighbourly
relations with Afghanistan. We attach great importance
to our participation in reconstruction efforts in
Afghanistan. China will continue to provide assistance
to Afghanistan within its capabilities and will work
with the international community to contribute to
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also congratulate
Ambassador Messone and the Gabonese delegation on
their stewardship of the Council during the month of
June.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2011/381), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan De Mistura for his
informative briefing this morning and Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.
As other speakers have done, I extend the United
Kingdom’s condolences over the shocking deaths, in
Mazar-e-Sharif in April, of staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It is
vital that dedicated United Nations staff can carry out
their work in a safe and secure environment, with the
full support of the Afghan Government and the
international community. I would also like to pay

11-40242

The United Kingdom deeply regrets all civilian
casualties that result from the actions of international
and Afghan Government forces. When such casualties
occur, it is despite the strong preventive measures that
have been put in place. As the Secretary-General notes
in his report, the vast majority of casualties are caused
by the insurgents, who deliberately use violent tactics
designed to intimidate the population. In the past
quarter, the insurgency has continued to assassinate
Government employees and to deliberately attack
civilian targets, including hospitals, markets and the
Intercontinental Hotel. Insurgent-related civilian
casualties outnumber Afghan and international forces
casualties by a ratio of approximately eight to one. We
condemn such attacks in the strongest possible terms.
An Afghan-led political process is needed to
underpin the military progress. To be durable, any
political settlement must be inclusive and must respect
the interests and rights of all Afghan citizens. The
death of Osama bin Laden gives the Taliban an
opportunity to make a decisive break with Al-Qaida.
The British Foreign Secretary has called for the Taliban
to make that break and participate in a political
process. We urge the international community to call
for the same outcome.

15

S/PV.6574

Fundamental to any political settlement and
crucial to the future stability of Afghanistan is the
safeguarding of democratic principles, including free
and credible elections. The United Kingdom remains
fully committed to working with the Afghan
Government, Parliament and people to strengthen
Afghan democracy and representative institutions. We
are therefore deeply concerned that the dispute
between the Special Court and Parliament remains
unresolved. We call upon all parties involved to work
together to find a solution in line with Afghan law and
to respect the separation of powers that is guaranteed
by the Constitution.
The current situation illustrates the need for
further progress on electoral reform. We continue to
support the role of the United Nations in assisting the
Afghan Government, institutions and people as they
take forward commitments made at the London and
Kabul Conferences last year. This continues to form a
vital part of the mandate of UNAMA.
Irreversible transition and progress on the
political track must be supported by governance and
development progress. Putting in place the necessary
measures to allow an International Monetary Fund
(IMF) programme will be crucial if we are to make
progress on these issues. Following the incident of the
Kabul Bank, we call for a rapid resolution to
negotiations on a new IMF programme, and for those
who have broken the law to be brought to justice. The
Afghan people deserve no less.
Since the Secretary-General issued his quarterly
report, important progress has been made preparing for
the Afghan-led Bonn conference. Members of the
International Contact Group had a constructive
dialogue in Kabul. We now need to focus on translating
these discussions into tangible outcomes, particularly
on regional cooperation. We welcome the work led by
Turkey in this area and look forward to the Istanbul
Conference in November.
Finally, despite the challenges, significant
progress has been made on the road to a secure and
viable Afghanistan. As Afghanistan moves from being
a post-conflict country to one with more traditional
development needs, UNAMA and the wider United
Nations family will play an increasingly important
role. We therefore welcome the forthcoming review of
United Nations activities. We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will include an assessment of the delivery of

16

UNAMA against its current mandate, its role in the
post-transition landscape, and how the United Nations
can support the Afghan Government in bringing about
the emergence of a strong, durable and self-sustainable
Afghan State.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. I take this opportunity to thank all of the
Permanent Representatives and their delegations for
the cooperation and support they offered me during
Gabon’s presidency of the Council in June.
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura and
Ambassador Tanin for the briefings they have just
provided on the situation in Afghanistan on the basis of
the report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2011/381).
First and foremost, I would like to express our
strong condemnation of the recent acts of violence,
which undermine the progress and achievements made
since March. In fact, since our most recent debate on
17 March (see S/PV.6497), the situation in Afghanistan
has seen major progress, particularly in the political
transition process.
We are pleased to note the progress achieved in
national reconciliation. In this regard, we welcome the
fact that the Afghan Government has, at the request of
the Security Council, committed itself to facilitating
the reintegration of moderate insurgents, pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). We also welcome the
establishment by the Government of a joint
independent committee to promote transparency and
accountability within the Administration. We believe
that this is an important element in the process of
transferring responsibility, which was referred to by
Ambassador Tanin a moment ago.
Despite these efforts, a number of obstacles
remain, particularly in the areas of security and good
governance. My delegation takes this opportunity to
call once again on the new Afghan Government to do
its utmost to strengthen its capacity to fight terrorism
and corruption, which remain the major obstacles to
peace and stability in the country.
As we stressed at the most recent debate, the
security and protection of civilians must be priorities
of the Government in its efforts to establish a sovereign

11-40242

S/PV.6574

State based on solid and stable constitutional
institutions. The Afghan authorities should assume
their full responsibilities in this area.
The withdrawal announced this month of a large
number of troops from some international forces,
particularly those of the United States and NATO,
confirm the major challenge that the Government has
to meet in its attempts to fully assume it sovereign
prerogatives. Here, we reaffirm our full support to the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations for
their assistance to the Afghan Government to that end.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his unceasing efforts to support peace and
stability in that country. With respect to the impending
transition, we share his view that security must remain
a priority, but that improved security must yield
transition dividends based on improved coherence of
international assistance and on inclusive and
participatory dialogue. In closing, we reaffirm our
support to UNAMA and United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan.
Mr. Crowley (South Africa): Allow me to add the
voice of my delegation to those of others who have
congratulated you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July, and to thank Ambassador Nelson Messone for his
excellent stewardship of the Security Council during
the month of June.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Afghanistan (S/2011/381). We also
appreciate the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, in this debate.
My delegation welcomes the relatively positive
developments that have taken place over the past few
months in Afghanistan, particularly with regard to the
progress towards greater Afghan leadership and
ownership.
These
include
progress
in
the
implementation of the Kabul process, momentum on
reintegration
and
reconciliation
efforts,
and
cooperation between Afghans and their neighbours.
Despite these positive developments, Afghanistan
continues to face critical challenges in its endeavour to
achieve stability and development. Key among them

11-40242

are the security situation, the worsening humanitarian
situation, human rights deficiencies and continuing
civilian casualties. South Africa stresses that, given the
magnitude of these challenges, a comprehensive
strategy incorporating security, humanitarian issues,
good governance and socio-economic development is
required. In this regard, we would like to underscore
the central role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the
Government of Afghanistan and in coordinating
international assistance to the country. Crucially, the
continued role played by bilateral partners remains
indispensable.
We are particularly concerned over the attacks
directed against the United Nations and its personnel.
South Africa condemns in the strongest terms the
violent attacks against the United Nations operations
centre in Mazar-e-Sharif on 1 April, which resulted in
the death and injury of United Nations staff.
South Africa continues to welcome efforts to
strengthen political outreach activities. Political
dialogue and reconciliation among people and leaders
remain critical to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. We are pleased that the High Peace
Council has intensified its efforts to lead reconciliation
efforts. This, together with efforts to reintegrate
insurgents, including the Taliban, should be
encouraged.
My delegation remains concerned by the plight of
children caught up in conflict in Afghanistan, and in
this connection we strongly condemn the attack on a
school on Sunday by a suspected militant on a
motorcycle, who threw a hand grenade at the gates of
the school.
With regard to the role of women, my delegation
is of the view that Afghan women have a significant
role to play in securing the peace and stability of the
country. Their role in building a new Afghan society
should be welcomed.
National ownership and leadership remain crucial
to political security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. On its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country’s
transition from conflict to stability and prosperity.
South Africa therefore continues to support the
presence and role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

17

S/PV.6574

In
conclusion,
we
commend
Special
Representative De Mistura for completing the
integrated strategic framework for a comprehensive
review of UNAMA’s mandated activities and the
United Nations support to Afghanistan, and thank
UNAMA and its personnel for their efforts in executing
the mandate of the Security Council for a more
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank Special
Representative De Mistura for his very inspiring and
lucid briefing. I also want to thank Ambassador Tanin
not only for his comprehensive briefing, but also for
the tremendous courage that he has demonstrated even
in trying times.
Nigeria welcomes the steady progress being made
in Afghanistan. The quest for honourable peace and
stability has been steadfast. A new Constitution is in
place; several elections have been held; economic
growth seems promising; the new counter-insurgency
strategy bolsters recent military gains; and donor
commitment to funding civilian reconstruction remains
very strong. We believe that these political
developments should be consolidated through a
rigorous reconciliation and reintegration process
involving Taliban and non-Taliban insurgents,
especially in the Kandahar area.
As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/381) cautions, we must be vigilant in ensuring
that the reconciling parties are indeed genuinely
committed not only to the new code of conduct
delineated by the Government, but also to upholding
the Constitution. The political process must be led and
driven by Afghans and in accordance with the
Constitution. It must promote not only lasting peace
and stability, but also the protection of the interests of
women. A successful political process will serve to
underpin the ongoing efforts of the Government to
improve governance and accountability, including the
unimpeded participation of women in the peace
process.
The Government should remain committed to its
anti-corruption agenda and its obligations arising from
the London and Kabul conferences. A greater
commitment of the Government to its anti-corruption
agenda and its obligations arising from the London and
Kabul Conferences will strengthen these efforts.
On the security sector, the recent attacks on the
United Nations operations centre in Mazar-e-Sharif and

18

on the capital’s premier hotel are tragic reminders of
the tense and fragile security situation in the country.
We
condemn
such
cowardly
acts,
which
indiscriminately target innocent civilians, security
forces and the personnel of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). The perpetrators of those
attacks must be brought to justice. Indeed, such attacks
undermine the capacity of the Afghan security forces
and raise questions about the readiness of the Afghan
authorities and security forces to meet the security
challenges ahead. We support the urgent strengthening
of the implementation phase of the security transition
process through enhanced training and capacitybuilding and greater cooperation between the United
Nations and ISAF forces.
The participation of the Afghan Government in
the listing and de-listing process will provide a more
secure platform for the fight against terrorism,
especially against the background of the Kabul
communiqué. That is why Nigeria supported the
decision to split the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regimes. In this regard, we wish to reiterate that such
de-listing requests should be addressed by the
Committee on a case-by-case basis, and especially on
their own merits.
In the economic sphere, Nigeria commends the
Government’s continued commitment to implementing
the national priority programme in accordance with the
Kabul process. Implementing the programme and
meeting the Government’s set benchmarks will require
greater coordination and timely international assistance
on the part of the donor community. We support the
channelling of donor funds and other assistance to the
country through the Afghan budget system in order to
ensure greater coherence and efficiency.
The current socio-economic growth and the
Government’s prioritized programme, including
education and health care, will suffer reversals if a
viable solution to the continued impasse on the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme is not
urgently found. We therefore support the setting-up of
an appropriate mechanism that the Government and
donors alike can utilize to advance and implement the
IMF programme.
On regional cooperation, we welcome the
growing cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, especially in overcoming counter-terrorism
challenges and combating drugs, arms, human

11-40242

S/PV.6574

trafficking and organized crime. We welcome the
revival of the tripartite meeting between Afghanistan,
Pakistan and the United States. Both developments
reaffirm the commitment of regional partners to
Afghanistan’s stability, economic development,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. It is our hope that
the tripartite initiative will be sustained as we all look
forward to the Istanbul Conference scheduled for
2 November and the international conference of
foreign ministers scheduled to take place in Bonn at the
end of this year. Through these conferences, the
international community can renew its commitment to
and support the Afghan-led peace process.
The future and destiny of Afghanistan may defy
imagination, but the international community must be
eternally vigilant to make certain that it is a future of
peace, security and, indeed, genuine reconciliation and
development. In this formidable endeavour, we
commend Special Representative Staffan de Mistura
for his inspiring and exceptional leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The
distinctive accomplishments of the staff of the Mission
and their invaluable contributions to the concerted
global effort to restore democracy, peace and security
to Afghanistan will endure eternally.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for July. I wish you every success. I also wish to thank
the Gabonese delegation for its June presidency and
work.
We are grateful to Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
substantive and frank analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan and for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/381). We welcome the
statement made by Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan.
We agree with their assessment of the measures
being taken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), pursuant to its mandate. We
share their evaluation of the ongoing difficult security
situation in Afghanistan, as reflected in a number of
serious incidents over the course of recent months. I
refer first and foremost to the tragic attack in April on
the United Nations office in Mazar-e-Sharif and the
deaths of United Nations staff. We were also shocked
by the killing of former Deputy Minister of the Interior
Daoud in Takhar province in May and by the attacks in

11-40242

June on the hospital in Logar province and the car of
the Governors of Badakhshan and Parwan provinces, as
well as by the recent Taliban attack on the
Intercontinental Hotel that led to the deaths of innocent
civilians. We strongly condemn all of these terrorist
acts.
These insurgent attacks show that the Taliban
movement is pursuing its attempts to destabilize the
situation in Afghanistan and to undermine the efforts of
the international community towards the post-conflict
reconstruction of the country. The leadership of the
Taliban is neither acting on behalf of the Afghan
people nor working towards lasting peace and a
prosperous, independent Afghanistan.
The Russian Federation is particularly concerned
about the situation in northern Afghanistan, where a
number of high-profile terrorist acts have taken place.
Those acts have had repercussions in Central Asian
States, including our partners in the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization
and
the
Shanghai
Cooperation
Organization. In the light of the continued efforts of
terrorists of the Taliban and Al-Qaida, a targeted and
measured approach is necessary to implement the plan
for national reconciliation.
We hope that the recent changes to the sanctions
regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) will boost
the efforts of the Afghan Government to implement its
national reconciliation strategy, give added impulse to
addressing the problem of an Afghan settlement and
enhance regional security — conditions that were all
agreed to by the international community.
In that context, we note the reaffirmation in
resolution 1988 (2011) of the important principles of
national reconciliation in Afghanistan, including the
renunciation of violence, respect for the Afghan
Constitution and the renunciation of ties to Al-Qaida
and other terrorist organizations. Under these criteria,
it is unacceptable to de-list Taliban leaders from the
United Nations sanctions regime list. A dialogue with
Taliban leaders can be carried out only under Afghan
leadership. Any contact with them, in particular outside
official channels, could send the wrong signal from the
international community in the context of an Afghan
settlement.
We are also particularly concerned about the
consequences of implementing a plan for the long-term
enhancement of the military presence in Afghanistan

19

S/PV.6574

after 2014. We believe that the establishment of a
neutral status for Afghanistan is necessary. The
Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United
States spoke in favour of this idea in their joint
statement of 24 June 2010, and members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization also supported it in
the Astana Declaration of 15 June. Of course, the
initiative on this issue lies with the Afghan people
themselves — not in the near future, but when the
stabilization of Afghanistan is complete. The
establishment of Afghanistan’s neutral status, if
accepted, could, we believe, facilitate dialogue on
reconciliation.
We are concerned about the drug trafficking
situation in Afghanistan. There is no doubt whatsoever
that drug trafficking in Afghanistan is a threat to
international peace and security, as reflected in
resolutions 1943 (2010) and 1974 (2011). Neutralizing
this threat requires joint efforts and the pooling of all
possible capacities. Unfortunately, the coalition forces
have not focused sufficient enough attention on this
issue. My country believes that the foreign military
presence in Afghanistan can and should play a more
proactive role in dealing with drug manufacture and
trafficking, particularly since they have assumed
responsibility for security in Afghanistan. Our
recommendations remain valid with respect to realtime interaction on that track among our partners in
NATO, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
We are deeply concerned over the death of
civilians through the indiscriminate or disproportionate
use of force by military forces. Under the norms of
international humanitarian law, the responsibility for
guaranteeing the security of the civilian population lies
with all parties, including the international forces. The
Russian Federation will continue to favour the central
coordinating role of the United Nations in international
efforts to ensure a solution to the situation in
Afghanistan. Effective and impartial United Nations
support for the implementation of the provisions of the
outcome document of the Kabul Conference on Afghan
ownership of the country’s administration will
guarantee long-term stability in Afghanistan.
Another important aspect of achieving long-term
stability is United Nations control of the manner in
which the international forces implement Security
Council mandates. Those forces are on Afghan territory
under the auspices of the Security Council and can

20

withdraw only pursuant to a decision of the Security
Council upon fulfilment of their mandate. They do not
have the right to leave Afghanistan without fulfilling
their anti-terrorism tasks or establishing an effective
Afghan army and police.
My country believes that the drawdown of United
States forces announced by United States President
Barack Obama will be offset by an increase in the
capacities of the Afghan National Security Forces,
which should be ready to control security and
effectively counter extremism and drug trafficking.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to express Lebanon’s gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing and to Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his statement. I also commend the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its efforts in Afghanistan, in particular
in view of the difficult circumstances on the ground.
Ten years after the international military
intervention in Afghanistan, we are now bearing
witness to the dawn of a new era with the transfer of
authority to the Afghan people. Yet, the security
situation
remains
alarming. Violence
against
international and Afghan forces and against the Afghan
people continues at an accelerated pace. This situation
has led to a greater need for vigilance at the security
level during the transitional phase in order to return
power to the hands of the Afghans and to ensure the
safety of civilians and their property. All parties are
called upon to respect international humanitarian law
and to make every effort to spare the lives of innocents.
In the context of the search for a political solution
to the crisis, Lebanon commends efforts to achieve
reconciliation and reintegration. Specifically, we
underscore the role played by the High Peace Council
and the Security Council’s support for the
reconciliation process through its unanimous adoption
of resolution 1988 (2011), which splits the sanctions
regimes for the Taliban and Al-Qaida and provides
members of the Taliban with the opportunity to
disassociate themselves from terrorist ideology and
respect the Constitution in order to participate in the
peace process.
No less important than the security and safety
situation is the issue of strengthening respect for
human rights in Afghanistan. Specifically, efforts
should continue to be made to enforce laws regarding

11-40242

S/PV.6574

acts of violence against women in every province.
Women should be protected against discrimination,
injustice and coercion, and should be integrated into
public life. These are things that the Organization has
repeatedly called for.
Moreover, we would like to underscore the
significance of the allegations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/381) concerning the ill
treatment and abuse of detainees, who are often
deprived of legitimate defence counsel as well as being
arbitrarily detained without charge or trial. It is
essential to good governance that such gaps in the
areas of the rule of law and institutions be dealt with.
We should also emphasize the importance of
continued commitment to the Kabul Process,
particularly in the context of social and economic
development. The reform of public institutions is also
crucial to transparency and accountability. We would
also like to add our voice to the call made by
Secretary-General in his report concerning the need for
the creation of an International Monetary Fund country
programme. The lack of such a programme is having a
generally negative effect on projects and programmes
around the country.
In addition, efforts within Afghanistan should be
accompanied by dialogue and regional cooperation.
Neighbouring countries can — indeed, it is in their
interest to do so — strengthen their ties with
Afghanistan and contribute to improving the safety and
security situation by monitoring borders and combating
drug-trafficking and transnational organized crime.
We would like to emphasize our appreciation for
the international community’s efforts in general and in
particular those of the United Nations, through all its
agencies. United Nations staff are working
courageously and determinedly under very difficult
circumstances to build an Afghan State that is capable
of protecting its own people and institutions, with a
view to safeguarding the lives and prosperity of all
Afghan men, women and children.
Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and to commend
the Permanent Representative of Gabon and his team
for having steered the work of the Council in June. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for scheduling
today’s debate on Afghanistan. And I thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of

11-40242

Afghanistan, for his statement. We are grateful for the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2011/381) and
appreciate the briefing by Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura.
Afghanistan is at the beginning of the
implementation stage of the transition whereby its
security forces will start to assume their
responsibilities in seven key areas, including Kabul.
This is a critical phase for both Afghanistan and the
international community. We are deeply concerned that
the challenges confronting Afghanistan, particularly on
the security front, do not appear to be receding. On the
contrary, the overall security environment continues to
deteriorate. The Secretary-General’s report notes that
there has been a 51 per cent increase in security
incidents compared with the same period in 2010,
characterized by a significant increase in suicide
attacks, abductions and assassinations. The terrorist
attacks on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) compound in Mazar-e-Sharif
and the Government buildings in Kandahar, and the
coordinated suicide attack at the highly secure
Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul and on a hospital in
Logar, confirm a change in tactics whereby the Taliban
and other opposition groups are opting for soft civilian
targets.
As was pointed out in our statement on this
subject on 17 March (see S/PV.6497), such attacks
point to a dangerous osmosis of ideologies, ambitions,
training and operations among the terrorism syndicate
in the region, with suicide terrorism as its main
technique and targets not limited to Afghanistan. The
international community, in its hurry to withdraw from
a combat role in Afghanistan, will ignore this at its
own peril. It therefore becomes crucial that the
transition be linked to the realities on the ground rather
than to a rigid timetable.
A constant assessment and review of the evolving
situation, in coordination with the Afghan Government,
is essential in that regard. We appreciate the enhanced
collaboration between the International Security
Assistance Force and the Afghan National Security
Forces in building the requisite strength and
capabilities of the Afghan forces, which, along with
adequate enablers, is essential to the transition of
security responsibilities. It is important that the
transition be Afghan-owned. It must also be planned
and implemented in a systematic manner and must

21

S/PV.6574

ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans.

UNAMA continues to align its priorities with those of
the Afghan Government.

For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the terrorism
syndicate that includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating within and outside
Afghanistan’s borders. These groups are ideologically
and operationally fused, and their bonds have
strengthened over the years. As the Secretary-General’s
report points out, the insurgency in Afghanistan
remains resilient, demonstrating a capability for
launching multiple complex attacks. The insurgents’
continued resilience, their changing tactics, their
numbers and their spread to areas previously
considered safe are a grim reminder that security gains
will remain transient unless the international
community is able to deal firmly with safe havens for
terrorist groups outside Afghanistan’s borders.

India and Afghanistan share a strategic
partnership based on a strong foundation of rich bonds
in history and civilization, and on the shared pursuit of
regional peace and prosperity. India remains committed
to partnering with the Government and people of
Afghanistan in the building of a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous nation. India’s assistance
programme is spread throughout Afghanistan and
covers almost the entire gamut of economic and social
development activities. Assisting Afghanistan with its
reconstruction efforts, with capacity-building and skills
for developing human resources, and with building its
public institutions is a special priority area for India.
As Ambassador Tanin mentioned in his statement,
during his last visit to Afghanistan, from 11 to 13 May,
our Prime Minister announced additional assistance of
$500 million over and above India’s existing
commitment of $1.5 billion.

India fully supports an Afghan-led, inclusive and
transparent process of reconciliation, adhering to the
guidelines enunciated by the Afghan Government in
the Kabul and London communiqués. This must be
accompanied by an inclusive political process and
intra-Afghan dialogue. It is important that the
antecedents of those willing to reintegrate be
ascertained, and that it be ensured that they are
genuinely reconciled.
We support the views and decisions of the
Government and people of Afghanistan as they seek to
build a more secure, stable and prosperous future and a
strong democracy in their country. The Afghan people
must be allowed to rebuild their land in conditions of
peace and security, free from interference by their
neighbours, and they must be the arbiters of their own
destiny. It is our expectation that the new sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
will enable the Afghan Government to have a greater
say in confronting the challenges posed by those who
constitute a threat to the country’s peace, security and
stability.
Afghan ownership and leadership are vital to
development and reconstruction in Afghanistan. This
also implies greater coherence, coordination and
further streamlining of the international community’s
development efforts, including aligning assistance with
Afghan national priorities and increasingly working
through Afghan institutions. We are happy to note that

22

Afghanistan’s
stability
and
economic
development depend greatly on its neighbours and the
region as a whole. Closer economic integration with
India and other countries in the region is the key to
Afghanistan’s future prosperity. The area of
Afghanistan south of the Hindu Kush all the way up to
the Ganges delta form a part of a single geographic and
economic basin, with the plains of India constituting
the centre of its economic gravity. It is by far
Afghanistan’s largest regional market — a potential
source of investment, skills, training, technology and
expertise and a model of democracy and national
institution-building in a culturally comfortable context.
Afghanistan has immense potential as a land
bridge linking Central, West and South Asia and
emerging as a trade, transport and energy hub. The
recent developments in regional cooperation, including
the signing of the agreement on the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline project, would
provide added impetus to regional cooperation.
Growing economic interdependence would catalyse
peace and prosperity in the region at large and in
Afghanistan in particular. Afghanistan, as a member of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) since 2005, is becoming an increasingly
active SAARC member. India, as a neighbour, will
continue its efforts towards the greater integration of
Afghanistan into the regional framework.

11-40242

S/PV.6574

In conclusion, we commend the good work done
by UNAMA and we think that at this critical juncture,
it is imperative that the international community
continue to remain steadfast in its support for the
Government of Afghanistan as per its priorities.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
of course like, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank the representative of Gabon for his skilful
conduct of the work of the Council during the month of
June. I wish also to thank Mr. De Mistura for his
presentation on the situation in Afghanistan and would
like to associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of the European Union. In
addition, I should like to thank Ambassador Tanin for
his statement.
I should like at the outset to start by paying
tribute to all United Nations staff working in
Afghanistan. The Security Council reacted in the
aftermath of the 1 April attack against United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
headquarters in Mazar-e-Sharif, an attack that was all
the more revolting given that the men and women who
were murdered there were working for the
stabilization, security and development of Afghanistan.
The attack should not make us deviate from our
main goal, which is to help the Afghan Government
move ahead on the path towards full sovereignty. In
that regard, the transition process has begun. This new
phase of our commitment is leading, as of this year, to
the gradual and orderly transfer of security
responsibilities to the Afghan authorities. France will
remain committed, along with its allies, alongside the
Afghan people so as to ensure that the transition
process is completed, as scheduled, at the end of 2014,
be it in our area of deployment or with respect to the
training of the Afghan security forces. Our
commitment in Afghanistan is long-term and will be
adapted so as to take account of the new context of
transition. The planned redeployment of French troops
will take place in close cooperation with our allies and
the Afghan authorities. However, we must be careful to
ensure that that the transition process also leads to the
assumption of responsibility by the Afghan
Government for both governance and development.
Much remains to be done, and time is of the
essence. We must ensure greater involvement of the
Afghan people in the planning and implementation of

11-40242

development projects. For its part, the Afghan
Government must wage a more resolute combat against
corruption and nepotism, as evidenced by the Kabul
Bank situation.
Progress has also been noted in the area of budget
performance through the decentralization of public
expenditures and the further strengthening of capacities
in the planning and implementation of development
projects in the provinces and districts.
Turning to the issue of security, we have resumed
the military initiative and thereby made it possible for
the Government of Afghanistan to regain a foothold in
several areas. The country’s army and police force are
growing stronger with our support — financially and in
terms of training, making it possible for the allies to
envision a gradual withdrawal of some of the combat
forces in Afghanistan.
Our military and training efforts are starting to
bear fruit, at the cost, however, of very arduous
combat. Military gains will be short-lived if they do
not take place in a context that reinforces the
legitimacy of the Afghan authorities and that makes it
possible to envisage a political solution to the conflict.
Unfortunately, the court-created uncertainty that affects
the legislative powers is detrimental to the proper
functioning of democratic institutions and is distracting
them from the real concerns of the Afghan voters. We
call on all Afghan institutions to work in the context of
their respective competencies, as set out in the
Constitution and on the basis of the principle of the
separation of powers. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General must continue to monitor the
situation and electoral reform, which the country
needs.
We have, however, also noted the progress made
on the path to inter-Afghan reconciliation. We continue
to support the efforts of President Karzai and the High
Peace Council to develop a peace process involving all
segments of Afghan society. Such a process must be
supported by regional efforts that take into account the
security interests of Afghanistan’s neighbours while
respecting its sovereignty. The United Nations can
from that point of view play a useful role.
By separating the sanctions regime of the United
Nations for Al-Qaida and the Taliban, the Security
Council took a very significant decision which, we
hope, will motivate the Afghan people to turn their

23

S/PV.6574

backs on international terrorism, undertake direct
dialogue and look to the future together.

international community will continue to serve us well,
and we intend to stay the course.

France would like to conclude by reaffirming its
full support for the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. The Security
Council, through its resolution 1974 (2011), renewed
the mandate of UNAMA and confirmed that the
priorities it outlined two years ago were the right ones.
The Council also requested that a full review of the
activities of UNAMA and of the United Nations in
Afghanistan be carried out by the end of 2011. This
will represent an opportunity to reflect on the evolution
of the commitment of the United Nations in that
country. The review must take place in a context of full
transparency, working with the Afghan authorities.
That process, the second Bonn Conference and the
renewal of UNAMA’s mandate in 2012 all represent
opportunities to reiterate our commitment to the
common goal of a democratic, independent and
prosperous Afghanistan that has definitively turned its
back on violence and instability.

Germany condemns the ongoing violence, and
particularly, in the strongest terms, the latest attack on
a hospital in Logar. We note with continued serious
concern a further increase in civilian casualties, up to
90 per cent of which are now caused by insurgents. We
commend the professional reaction by the Afghan
security forces during last week’s heinous attack on the
Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Germany.
Let me join others in warmly welcoming and
thanking the Special Representative for his briefing
today. We equally thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement.
My Government aligns itself with the statement
to be made later by the European Union (EU).
I will touch upon three issues today.
First, with respect to transition, Germany
welcomes the fact that the process of security transition
is progressing, in line with the improved quality and
quantity of the Afghan security forces. My delegation
welcomes in particular the beginning of a security
transition in the first tranche of seven districts and
municipalities to Afghan security responsibility this
month.
It is important to underline that, as per the
agreement between NATO and the Afghan
Government, the transition period will continue to be
gradual and condition-based. The number of security
incidents in recent months illustrates clearly the
magnitude of the challenges still ahead of us. We
believe, however, that the strategy and need for
timeliness agreed between Afghanistan and the

24

Here in the Council, I would like to stress in
particular the security of the United Nations. Like
everyone here today, Germany greatly appreciates the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and of other colleagues of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under
most challenging circumstances. But as we expect
UNAMA to continue with its indispensable work, we
have a shared responsibility to do everything we can to
protect United Nations staff and operations. Mazar-eSharif was another shocking experience for the United
Nations community, and we extend our condolences to
all the families of the victims. Germany calls for
maximum efforts, including by the Afghan
Government, to protect international support
operations in Afghanistan.
Secondly, with regard to the Kabul process, the
transition agenda described in the process will, over
time, also change the nature of international support.
However, it is the strong expectation of the
international community that United Nations resources
and expertise are made use of to preserve the progress
achieved and to build a sustainable partnership with a
viable State based on Afghan leadership, democratic
principles and respect for human rights and reliable
governmental and non-governmental institutions,
founded on a firm constitutional basis.
One of the determining factors for the success of
the Kabul process is a solution to the Kabul Bank
crisis. There is no substitute for credible financial
institutions. Germany concurs with the report’s
assertion that the absence of an International Monetary
Fund programme seriously endangers the Kabul
process and the ability to increasingly channel
development support through the Government budget.
Thirdly, let me briefly touch upon preparations
for the international conference on Afghanistan to be
held in Bonn in December, which some members have

11-40242

S/PV.6574

mentioned and which Germany looks forward to
hosting upon the request of the Afghan Government.
On the whole, the conference is about shifting more
weight onto the long-term and political components
within our common Afghanistan strategy. As was
decided by President Karzai, the three main aims of the
conference to be chaired by Afghanistan are to further
define the civilian aspects of the transition process
until 2014, to strongly confirm and define long-term
international support for Afghanistan beyond 2014, and
to contribute to the political process of reconciliation,
including its regional dimension. We expect that the
Bonn conference will be an important milestone on the
way to a stable Afghanistan at peace with itself and its
neighbours.
In that context, Germany considers the recent
split of the sanctions regime under resolution 1267
(1999) into separate Al-Qaida and Taliban regimes as
an important stepping stone.
Let me end by reiterating continued and longterm German support to our Afghan friends and by
underlining our appreciation for UNAMA’s role and
the wider support of the United Nations. Germany
considers UNAMA and the United Nations system as
co-partners in a successful transition in the interest of
all Afghans.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.

continue to cooperate with UNAMA during this very
important year and beyond.
As stated in the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/381), the security situation in
Afghanistan continues to be challenging. We are
concerned about the security risks that were
highlighted by the recent attack on the Intercontinental
Hotel in Kabul. I express my deep condolences for the
deceased. Security remains a priority that we must
tackle.
Japan supports President Obama’s announcement
regarding United States policy on Afghanistan. The
transition is scheduled to start in seven areas this
month. It is indispensable for peace and security in
Afghanistan to conduct a smooth transition during the
drawdown of United States and other international
forces.
The transition and sustainable security are
interlinked with the country’s political process and
development. In that context, Japan continues to play
its role in strengthening the Afghan National Security
Forces through assistance to the Afghan police, such as
through our continued funding of police salaries and
efforts undertaken to enhance administrative capacity
in both central and provincial Governments. Japan
recently decided to support the Literacy for
Empowering Afghan Police programme and will start
to train Afghan National Police in cooperation with
Turkey this month.

At the outset, I would like to express my deep
regret over the 1 April attack on UNAMA in Mazar-eSharif. I offer my deepest condolences to the families
of the United Nations personnel who died in that
attack.

There remain other concerns. The situation
regarding the Kabul Bank is a serious issue that affects
international donors that are providing funds and the
framework of international assistance as a whole. The
disqualification
by
the
Special
Court
of
parliamentarians elected last year, and previously
confirmed by the Independent Election Commission,
has resulted in tensions between Parliament and the
Court that may seriously affect the stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. This development
comes at a critical time for maintaining solidarity in
the country. We sincerely hope that the Afghan
Government, Parliament and courts will act within
their respective competences and address these issues
properly and expeditiously.

As Special Representative De Mistura stated at
the last Council debate on this topic in March (see
S/PV.6497), 2011 is a crucial year. It is a year of
transition, leading up to 2014. Japan is determined to

We welcomed the successful Review Conference
of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, held in Kabul on 10 and 11 May. Further
progress in the reintegration process constitutes an

Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative De Mistura for his very
comprehensive and informative briefing. I would also
like to express my gratitude to all the men and women
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) who have demonstrated a deep
commitment to fulfilling this very difficult mission. I
also thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

11-40242

25

S/PV.6574

important pillar of the political process. We highly
appreciate the significant roles played in this process
by UNAMA and the countries concerned. Japan is
determined to continue to contribute, as evidenced by
our $50 million contribution to the reintegration fund
for achieving irreversible progress in the Afghan-led
Reintegration Programme.
In that context, the recent adoption of Security
Council resolutions splitting the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions list was a positive step towards promoting
reconciliation in the country. Further progress in the
political process requires Afghan ownership with
continued support of the international community.
For long-term stability in Afghanistan, we have to
accelerate regional cooperation among the country’s
neighbours. Japan is ready to play an active role in the
economic development of the broader area, which can
enable surrounding neighbours to pave the way for
integrating Afghanistan into the regional and global
economy.
Despite having been affected by the March
earthquake, Japan is determined to implement our
assistance to Afghanistan which, in view of the
importance of Afghanistan, we committed to in
November 2009. While the drawdown of the military
presence will soon begin, long-term engagement with
Afghanistan is still very important. I would like to
stress once again that coordination between responsible
Afghan ownership and support from the international
community are now more necessary than ever in order
to realize a sustainable economy. This should be based
on a mid- to long-term perspective so that, after the full
transition to Afghan leadership beyond 2014,
Afghanistan can become self-reliant for its economic
development.
I believe that there is a solid commitment by the
international community for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. We expect further progress during the
Afghanistan conference in Bonn in December. On the
Afghan side, the country needs to strengthen its
capacity for achieving real Afghan ownership and
leadership. A comprehensive review of the UNAMA
mandate and of United Nations support in Afghanistan,
which is requested in resolution 1974 (2011), will be a
very important task for the United Nations in steering
the future course of Afghanistan. UNAMA continues to
play an important role and Japan continues to do its
utmost to contribute to its activities.

26

In conclusion, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation for the dedication of Special
Representative De Mistura and to reiterate our
commitment to support the efforts of UNAMA.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): Afghanistan is entering
into a pivotal period, and it is likely that its long-term
transformation into a secure and stable democracy will
be greatly influenced by events and decisions made in
the near term.
An improved security situation remains
paramount to our efforts in Afghanistan. While
counter-insurgency efforts have been successful in
reversing
insurgent
momentum
in
southern
Afghanistan, violence is increasing in areas that were
previously considered secure. Security will need to
improve significantly in order to provide the space
needed for Afghanistan to grow and develop.
All civilian deaths resulting from the violence are
tragic, and we take every step possible to avoid civilian
casualties due to the operations of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). However, the
overwhelming majority of those deaths are caused by
the insurgency. Indeed, civilians are often the primary
targets of insurgents. That was tragically illustrated in
the recent attack on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul
and the recent use by insurgents of an 8-year-old girl as
a suicide bomber. We condemn these tactics of
desperation, which contravene international law, and
we demand that they cease.
The Government of Afghanistan and ISAF have
recently begun the process of transitioning lead
security responsibility from the international
community to Afghan authorities. Canada, through the
NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan, is committed to
increasing the number and improving the quality of
personnel of the Afghan National Security Forces, who
will be crucial to maintaining peace in the country. To
that end, Canada will provide up to 950 Canadian
Forces personnel and up to 45 civilian police from
2011 to 2014 to help train the National Security Forces.
We may be drawing down in Kandahar, but we remain
committed to supporting Afghanistan.
(spoke in French)
Stability and security in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved by military means alone. There is a need for a

11-40242

S/PV.6574

process of political reconciliation between the
Government of Afghanistan and the insurgency. For
lasting reconciliation to be possible, it will be
necessary for insurgents to renounce violence, sever
ties with Al-Qaida and recognize the Afghan
Constitution. While we agree that the time for peace
talks is now, there are Afghans who are genuinely
afraid that the gains made over the past 10 years in
democratization, human rights and the delivery of
basic services could be lost. The ongoing discussions
must be cognizant of this concern and ensure that
peace will benefit all Afghan citizens.
Canada shares the view of many Afghans and
members of the international community that, over the
longer term, lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
will require an inclusive healing process. This must
involve all parts of Afghan society, including Afghan
women, in long-term efforts that seek to rebuild
relationships and resolve historical grievances that, if
left unaddressed, could undermine durable peace in
Afghanistan.
Canada, alongside our international partners, is
working closely with the Government of Afghanistan
to ensure that the civilian aspects of transition —
strengthening governance and development — are
coordinated in such a way as to support the success and
irreversibility of the overall transition. Successful
transition will depend on concerted effort and the
serious political commitment of Afghanistan’s
leadership to ensure effective, inclusive and
accountable governance.
Afghan Government capacity to provide services
and opportunities to ordinary Afghans must continue to
be built and nurtured. In that respect, the Afghan
Government-led Kabul process and the national
priority programmes continue to be important tools for
both the Afghan Government and the international
community. Now, we must facilitate implementation of
the national priority programmes, linking them to the
security transition and ensuring that they provide
tangible benefits in areas such as access to health care
and education for ordinary Afghans. It will now be
important for the programmes to be fiscally sustainable
and realistic. In that regard, the international
community will need to help Afghanistan increase its
capacity to generate revenue during this period. The
private sector will also have an important role to play
in the country’s development.

11-40242

It is also crucial that Afghans be able to trust their
elected officials to represent their interests at the
district, provincial and national levels. Corruption
erodes confidence in democratic institutions and
undermines efforts to stabilize the country. It remains a
serious issue and could be a major obstacle to
successful transition in the coming years. The Afghan
Government must therefore take concrete and visible
actions to combat corruption and prevent it from
derailing the transition agenda.
(spoke in English)
Countries of the region also have a significant
role in Afghanistan’s success or failure, as well as in
the overall stability of South and Central Asia. It is
crucial for Afghanistan and its neighbours to overcome
the deep-seated historical distrust and conflicting
interests that are often at odds with regional stability
and economic logic. Political differences continue to
block progress on what could be win-win initiatives on
the economic front, which could contribute enormously
to lasting stability and prosperity in the region.
We look forward to the Afghan-led Afghanistan
conference in Bonn in December, which will focus on
issues of importance to the transition process. There
are several such conferences on Afghanistan scheduled
for 2011 and, while it is of absolute importance that we
continue to have an open and candid dialogue, we need
to muster real political will to see tangible progress.
In the past 10 years, significant, quantifiable
progress has been made in Afghanistan in key areas.
We are all focused on the same goal — the transition of
responsibility
for
security,
governance
and
development to the Government of Afghanistan. The
Afghan Government and the international community
are united in their determination to meet this objective,
and Canada will continue to play its active role.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the Council’s presidency for the month of July, as well
as to thank you for convening today’s debate.
I would like to especially mention with
appreciation the briefing by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. Pakistan
always values the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which

27

S/PV.6574

is ably led by Special Representative De Mistura. I
hope that the rumours of his not continuing in his post
are not true.
The Secretary-General’s quarterly reports are an
important barometer of political and security
developments in Afghanistan. I would like to
emphasize that they provide useful indicators to gauge
the progress and setbacks in our collective efforts for
peace in Afghanistan.
First, the period under review marks the
beginning of implementation of the transition towards
greater Afghan leadership and ownership, as envisaged
in the Kabul Process. This is a point that Pakistan
drives home in every meeting held in the Security
Council. Secondly, it coincides with the start of the
comprehensive review of UNAMA’s mandate as set out
in resolution 1974 (2011). We believe that UNAMA’s
priorities in this period should continue to be defined
along the lines of facilitating national reconciliation,
supporting governance and promoting socio-economic
development in Afghanistan, which is perhaps the least
so far to show an upward incline in its graph.
With regard to the ongoing comprehensive review
of the UNAMA mandate, which is to be completed in
2011, I must emphasize that Afghan ownership and
respect for the sovereignty of Afghanistan in all areas
must be ensured. Greater harmonization of UNAMA’s
work with the goals of transition as well as
coordination within United Nations bodies have to be
essential ingredients of the new mandate.
Is Afghanistan heating up as we come closer to
hypothetical withdrawal dates? Well, I would like to
reiterate that the Secretary-General’s report has
documented a 51 per cent increase in security-related
incidents in Afghanistan during the reporting period.
The report rightly expresses concern at the human cost
of the conflict, characterized by a steady rise in civilian
casualties resulting not only from the insurgency but
also from military operations.
Allow me to concede that the security challenges
in Afghanistan are complicated by three decades of
war, the capacity of Afghan security forces, the
presence of foreign forces and the exploitation of
socio-political complexity by criminals and drug
traffickers. The problem of security in Afghanistan
does not lend itself to near-facile explanations
exemplified by externalization and a self-defeating
blame game.

28

Violence and instability in both Afghanistan and
Pakistan are a threat. We are therefore extending all
possible cooperation to Afghanistan in the areas of
security and intelligence. A viable mechanism for such
cooperation is the Tripartite Commission, which meets
regularly and includes the United States and the
International Security Assistance Force.
The number of our military and paramilitary
personnel deployed along the border with Afghanistan
is greater than that of all international troops present
inside the whole of Afghanistan. Pakistan’s
commitment to peace in Afghanistan is unwavering.
The cause of regional and international peace will not
be served if Afghanistan becomes a theatre of proxy
wars or if its land is used for extraterritorial subversive
activity.
A long-term solution to security challenges in
Afghanistan lies in workable reconciliation and
reintegration processes. An Afghanistan at peace with
itself can best ensure its own security. The SecretaryGeneral’s reports and the briefings by his Special
Representative have rightly pointed out the linkages
between reconciliation and security.
Pakistan supports an Afghan-led and inclusive
reconciliation process, with a view to bringing the
opposition groups into the political mainstream. We
believe that the engagement of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and UNAMA with the
reconciliation process is going to be helpful.
We emphasize the need to ensure that the newly
created Afghanistan-specific Sanctions Committee
contributes effectively to curbing the insurgency and
promoting reconciliation in Afghanistan. This must be
seen to happen. We hope that UNAMA’s cooperation
with the Security Council Sanctions Committee on
Afghanistan will go a long way towards adding
professional and political input for listing and
de-listing.
Pakistan will continue to assist the Afghan-led
reconciliation process, including through the
Afghanistan-Pakistan
Joint
Commission
for
Reconciliation and Peace in Afghanistan. The first
meeting of the Joint Commission was held in
Islamabad last month, on the eve of the visit of
President Hamid Karzai. Both our countries have
affirmed the resolve to work closely for lasting
reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan. As a followup to the Islamabad meeting, the first working-level

11-40242

S/PV.6574

meeting of the Joint Commission was held last week in
Kabul. It has been decided to set up specialized
working groups to move forward in a responsible and
sure-footed manner. Make no mistake, this process is
very active and shall produce beneficial results.
Our quest for peace and stability in Afghanistan
is dovetailing into a long-term cooperative partnership.
Today’s Washington Post headlines of hundreds of
militants crossing over from Afghanistan to attack a
Pakistani border village, with some killed, will not
deter us from this process. My advice to my friend is
that all peace processes normally come to the point
where this sort of activity takes place through militants
who would like to prove the peace process to be
otherwise. We will not succumb to it.
Despite the utmost efforts of those militants
crossing over to create havoc and derail the process, let
me reaffirm that we will not let that happen. The
Islamabad declaration signed during the visit of
President Karzai to Pakistan last month documents the
contours of this partnership in the areas of trade and
the economy, transport connectivity, and project
cooperation in infrastructure, energy and minerals, as
well as in enhancing parliamentary exchange and
people-to-people contact. International assistance in
these areas, especially corporate-sector engagement,
can catalyse rich dividends for peace and prosperity in
the region.
The Secretary-General’s report has noted that just
over 19,000 refugees returned to Afghanistan from
Pakistan in the past three months. This figure can
hardly be called encouraging. We need greater
attention on this issue. But of course, no matter what
happens, we are hosts to the largest refugee population
in the world.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our
support for the objectives and efforts of UNAMA,
especially those of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura. We are confident that
the redoubtable people of Afghanistan will overcome
all pressing challenges and seize new opportunities for
a brighter and prosperous future. Pakistan shall remain
their committed and steadfast partner.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano.

Mr. Serrano: I would like to thank you very
much, Mr. President, for giving me the floor to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Serbia and the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this declaration.
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing and the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/381) on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security. Our thanks also go to Ambassador Tanin
for his presentation.
This month of July marks the start of the
transition to an Afghan security lead. The European
Union welcomes the impending handover of security
responsibility from the International Security
Assistance Force to Afghan forces in seven areas of the
country. In that context, we are encouraged by the
Secretary-General’s assessment that the performance of
these forces has improved as a result of focused
training and capacity-building efforts. At the same
time, we can read that insecurity is on the rise, which is
an indication that the insurgency remains resilient,
making transition harder. The statistic of a 51 per cent
increase in security-related incidents over the same
period in 2010 underscores just how much harder. That
is why it is important to recall that the transition
process does not signify withdrawal, but a gradual shift
to a genuine supporting role, and is not calendar-driven
but conditions-based. By carefully managing the
transition, we are slowly but surely fulfilling the wish
of the Afghan people to take responsibility for their
own security.
Creating the conditions for a successful transition
throughout the country requires further progress
towards good governance and development and on the
political track. The stakes for better governance are
high, and measures such as improving transparency of
and oversight over public finances and fighting
corruption therefore deserve high priority.
On the one hand, the European Union welcomes
positive steps, such as the launch of the joint

11-40242

29

S/PV.6574

independent anti-corruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee. On the other, we notice that, out of all the
national priority programmes of the Kabul process, the
ones dealing with public administration and
subnational governance were among the least
advanced. This is especially unfortunate, since for
several reasons, these programmes are also among the
most important.
As the Secretary-General remarks, in a posttransition Afghanistan, with donors working more
through the central Government, less development
funding will flow directly to local authorities. Without
a stronger and more reliable connection to the centre
and without better subnational governance, there is a
risk that these provinces and districts will be starved
for aid.
A more immediate impediment in the area of
governance to the disbursement and distribution of
development funding is the continuing lack of an
agreement with the International Monetary Fund on the
consequences of the Kabul Bank collapse. If
Afghanistan is to take full responsibility for its own
development and if more development funds are to be
channelled through Afghan institutions — which
President Karzai has called an integral part of the
transition — then this bank crisis needs to be resolved.
This is an issue of great concern for the European
Union and its member States, which are jointly
spending more than €1 billion a year in Afghanistan.
Resolving the Kabul Bank crisis and, more
generally, implementing governance and other
commitments of the Kabul process, such as the
modernization of the justice sector and electoral
reform, require resolving the controversy between the
Afghan executive branch and Parliament. The
European Union calls for this to be done in a way that
is both quick and consistent with the separation of
powers.
Further steps towards more effective and
legitimate Government institutions are vital not only to
development cooperation, but also to progress on the
political track. Better governance would help convince
all Afghans that settling differences by force should no
longer be an option in the future and that the political
arena should be the only place to fight.
In this context, the European Union welcomes the
recent decision of the Security Council to split the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regimes — a decision

30

sure to boost reconciliation and reintegration efforts.
On the ground, these Afghan-led efforts benefit from
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which continues to promote
confidence-building measures through advocacy on
access to basic services, detainee release and the
protection of civilians. Civilians, as the report
confirms, still bear the brunt of the conflict, with 80 to
90 per cent of the civilian casualties linked to
anti-Government elements.
Reconciliation should not only be Afghan-led, but
should also never stray from its fundamental
principles: the rejection of Al-Qaida, renunciation of
violence and respect for the Constitution. Securing
peace at the cost of international law and inalienable
human rights, including women’s rights and the rights
of religious minorities, would lead to a pyrrhic victory.
This does not amount to some utopian ambition to
make Afghanistan a perfect place; it simply amounts to
upholding the values that this world body and the
European Union were founded on.
At our most recent debate on this item
(S/PV.6497), when its mandate was on the agenda, we
spoke extensively about UNAMA. That is why today I
will limit myself, in conclusion, to once again
expressing the European Union’s support for its crucial
role during the transition, including as co-chair of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, a body in
need of further strengthening.
We commend Staffan de Mistura and his staff for
their commitment and courage, and condemn in the
strongest terms attacks perpetrated against UNAMA.
The United Nations is doing important work in
Afghanistan for all Afghans, and we strongly support
its continued engagement there in the short and long
terms. We count on UNAMA in the new phase
ahead — a phase of great opportunity and also great
peril. Nevertheless, as they say in Afghanistan — and I
hope this is accurate — there is a path to the top of
even the highest mountain.
The President: I
representative of Turkey.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting Ambassador Tanin and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General De Mistura. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/381) and his Special Representative for his
insightful briefing.

11-40242

S/PV.6574

We are grateful for the dedicated and outstanding
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is carrying out in fulfilment of
its mandate, under the effective leadership of Special
Representative De Mistura, in the face of very real and
serious threats, as evidenced most recently by the attack
against the UNAMA compound in Mazar-e-Sharif on
1 April. We strongly condemn and deplore this heinous
attack, and extend once again our condolences to the
bereaved families of those who lost their lives, as well
as to the UNAMA personnel and the entire United
Nations family.
We also condemn the recent spate of attacks by
insurgents against Afghan targets, which have resulted
in an increased loss of innocent civilian lives. These
attacks cannot be tolerated, and they will not deter the
Afghans and the international community from the
pursuit of a peaceful, secure and democratic
Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is going through an historic period of
transformation. Afghanistan’s neighbours and other
relevant actors in the region and beyond should respect
Afghanistan’s sovereignty and continue making their
multidimensional contributions towards solidifying it.
The transition of security responsibilities, the peace
process and economic development are all at the core
of efforts towards realizing the ultimate goal of full
Afghan ownership. If one of these processes fails, the
overall body of work will also falter.
Afghan leadership of all processes related to
Afghanistan is a fundamental principle. Security is a
primary enabler that would facilitate development,
governance, the rule of law and institutional capacitybuilding. In the past six months, military operations
have reached unprecedented levels, yet lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan can be founded only on a
political solution. Therefore, the necessary time and
space must be given to the Afghan peace process when
windows of opportunity for reconciliation arise.
The prospects for peace in Afghanistan are
stronger than ever, and let me underscore that the
durability of peace in Afghanistan requires that it
encompass all segments of society, because enhanced
national unity is the single most important basis upon
which lasting peace and stability would take hold.
While the training of the Afghan National Security
Forces is essential to fulfilling the transition by the end
of 2014, civilian capacity-building and economic

11-40242

sustainability will be just as important post-2014. We
urge all donors to intensify their contributions to
civilian capacity development and economic viability.
A benign regional order is an indispensable pillar
of Afghan peace, sovereignty, development and
prosperity. In turn, Afghanistan’s peace, sovereignty
and prosperity would constitute indispensable pillars of
the peace and prosperity of its neighbourhood. In this
regard, we will continue to pursue efforts in support of
the regional dimension discussed at the regional
countries’ meeting, hosted by His Excellency Ahmet
Davutoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, in
Istanbul on 10 May, which is referenced in the
Secretary-General’s report.
The preparations for the Istanbul Conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in Istanbul on 2 November
2011, have been launched. The meetings of the
International Contact Group’s regional cooperation
working group, held respectively in Istanbul and Kabul
on 3 and 26 June under the co-chairmanship of Turkey
and UNAMA, have been useful in eliciting broad
support in the region and beyond for the upcoming
Istanbul Conference.
A set of commonalities are already emerging. The
2002 Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly
Relations (S/2002/1416) was a groundbreaking
document. The 2007 Istanbul Statement on Friendship
and Cooperation in the “Heart of Asia” (S/2010/70,
annex) went even beyond the Kabul Declaration by
setting up a common regional vision, and constituted a
welcome milestone.
But since Istanbul last year, the regional work, as
well as circumstances and requirements, have moved
on significantly, and we hope that all of this will be put
on paper in a format that will then be undersigned by
the Istanbul Conference participants. We know that this
is what Afghanistan wants from the regional meetings.
We therefore intend the Istanbul Conference to be
a turning point in the regional dimension.
As always, we look forward to the strong support
of the international community, the importance of
which has already been emphasized in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We will be working closely with
Afghanistan, the United Nations and all other relevant
countries and organizations in the run-up to the
Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, which is slated to
be one of the top international events of this year.

31

S/PV.6574

The President: I give the floor to Special
Representative De Mistura to respond to the comments
that have been made.
Mr. De Mistura: I have three brief points. First, I
thank Council members for all their comments. We
have taken due note of the comments, advice and
support offered by each member of the Security
Council and beyond.
Secondly, on behalf of all my 900-plus
colleagues, I also wish to thank all participants for
their very kind and warm words regarding the sacrifice
that my colleagues are making and the sad events that
took place in Mazar-e-Sharif. It does help.

32

Lastly, I believe that Ambassador Tanin and I will
bring back to Kabul a strong message of support and of
the consistent interest and engagement of the
international community in Afghanistan. I think that
that will help us during the difficult months ahead
leading up the Istanbul Conference and Bonn.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

11-40242
