United Nations

A/RES/65/29

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 82

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2010
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/65/470)]

65/29. Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its biennial resolutions on the status of the Protocols Additional to
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts, including its resolution 63/125 of 11 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
0F

Reaffirming the continuing value of established humanitarian rules relating to
armed conflicts and the need to respect and ensure respect for those rules in all
circumstances within the scope of the relevant international instruments, pending
the earliest possible termination of such conflicts,
Stressing the need to consolidate the existing body of international humanitarian
law through its universal acceptance and the need for wide dissemination and full
implementation of such law at the national level, and expressing concern about all
violations of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 2 and the Additional Protocols, 3
1F

2F

Calling upon Member States to disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law as widely as possible, and calling upon all parties to armed
conflict to apply international humanitarian law,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of national commissions and
other bodies involved in advising authorities at the national level on the
implementation, dissemination and development of international humanitarian law,
Noting with appreciation the meetings of representatives of those bodies
organized by the International Committee of the Red Cross to facilitate the sharing
of concrete experience and the exchange of views on their roles and on the
challenges they face,
_______________
1

A/65/138 and Add.1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
3
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513, and vol. 2404, No. 43425.
2

10-51428

*1051428*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/29

Stressing the possibility of making use of the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission in relation to an armed conflict, pursuant to article 90 of
Protocol I 4 to the Geneva Conventions,
3F

Stressing also the possibility for the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission to facilitate, through its good offices, the restoration of an attitude of
respect for the Geneva Conventions and Protocol I,
Taking note of the fact that, in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its resolution 1894 (2009)
of 11 November 2009, the Security Council noted the range of existing methods
used, on a case-by-case basis, for gathering information on alleged violations of
applicable international law relating to the protection of civilians, underlined the
importance in that regard of receiving information that is timely, objective, accurate
and reliable, and considered the possibility, to that end, of using the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission established by article 90 of Protocol I,
Mindful of the role of the International Committee of the Red Cross in offering
protection to the victims of armed conflicts,
Noting with appreciation the continuing efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross to promote and disseminate knowledge of international humanitarian
law, in particular the Geneva Conventions and the Additional Protocols,
Noting the special responsibilities of national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies, as auxiliaries to the public authorities of their respective States in the
humanitarian field, to cooperate with and assist their Governments in the promotion,
dissemination and implementation of international humanitarian law,
Noting also that the year 2009 marked the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions, and welcoming the various high-level meetings and
seminars organized to celebrate that event, which gave new momentum to efforts to
strengthen and improve implementation of international humanitarian law,
Calling upon Member States to actively participate in the Thirty-first
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, to be held in Geneva
in November 2011,
Noting the serious concern expressed by States regarding the humanitarian
impact caused by cluster munitions, and taking note of the entry into force of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions 5 on 1 August 2010 and the ongoing negotiation of
a proposal on this subject within the context of the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, 6
4F

5F

Welcoming the significant debate generated by the publication in 2005 of the
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross on customary international
humanitarian law and recent initiatives by the Committee, including the online
launch of the updated study, as well as the growing number of translations into other
languages of parts of the study, and looking forward to further constructive
discussion on the subject,

_______________
4

Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
A/C.1/63/5, enclosure, part II.
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
5

2

A/RES/65/29

Acknowledging the fact that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court 7 covers the most serious crimes of international concern under international
humanitarian law and that the Statute, while recalling that it is the duty of every
State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible for such crimes,
shows the determination of the international community to put an end to impunity
for the perpetrators of such crimes and thus to contribute to their prevention,
6F

Noting the amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, relating to war crimes under the Statute, adopted at the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala, on 10 June 2010, 8
7F

Acknowledging the usefulness of discussing in the General Assembly the status
of instruments of international humanitarian law relevant to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts,
Welcomes the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,2
1.
and notes the trend towards a similarly wide acceptance of the two Additional
Protocols of 1977; 9
0H

8F

2.
Calls upon all States parties to the Geneva Conventions that have not yet
done so to consider becoming parties to the Additional Protocols3 at the earliest
possible date;
1H

3.
Calls upon all States that are already parties to Protocol I,4 or those
States not parties, on becoming parties to Protocol I, to make the declaration
provided for under article 90 of that Protocol and to consider making use, where
appropriate, of the services of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission in accordance with the provisions of article 90 of Protocol I;
2H

Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider becoming
4.
parties to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict and the two Protocols thereto 10 and to other relevant treaties on
international humanitarian law relating to the protection of victims of armed conflict;
9F

5.
Calls upon States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict; 11
10F

6.
Calls upon all States parties to the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions to ensure their wide dissemination and full implementation;
7.
Affirms the necessity of making the implementation of international
humanitarian law more effective, and supports its further strengthening and
development;
Notes with appreciation the adoption at the Thirtieth International
8.
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to
30 November 2007, of resolution 3 entitled “Reaffirmation and implementation of
international humanitarian law: preserving human life and dignity in armed
conflict”, which, inter alia, reiterates the obligation of States to take national

_______________
7

Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
See resolution RC/Res.5 of the Review Conference.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
10
Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511, and vol. 2253, No. 3511.
11
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
8

3

A/RES/65/29

measures to implement international humanitarian law, including training the armed
forces and making this law known among the general public, as well as adopting
legislation to punish war crimes in accordance with their international obligations;
Welcomes the activities of the Advisory Service on International
9.
Humanitarian Law of the International Committee of the Red Cross in supporting
efforts made by Member States to take legislative and administrative action to
implement international humanitarian law and in promoting the exchange of
information on those efforts between Governments, and notes in particular the new
manual on domestic implementation of international humanitarian law;
10. Also welcomes the increasing number of national commissions or
committees for the implementation of international humanitarian law and for
promoting the incorporation of treaties on international humanitarian law into
national law and disseminating the rules of international humanitarian law;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session a report on the status of the Additional Protocols relating to
the protection of victims of armed conflicts, as well as on measures taken to
strengthen the existing body of international humanitarian law, inter alia, with
respect to its dissemination and full implementation at the national level, based on
information received from Member States and the International Committee of the
Red Cross;
12. Encourages Member States and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in transmitting information to the Secretary-General, to focus on new
developments and activities during the reporting period;
13. Encourages Member States to explore ways of facilitating the submission
of information for future reports of the Secretary-General and, in this context, to
consider the convenience of drawing up guidelines or a questionnaire by Member
States, where necessary with the assistance of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, at the request of Member States and, as appropriate, in consultation with
the Secretariat;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session
the item entitled “Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts”.
57th plenary meeting
6 December 2010

4
