United Nations

S/PV.3932

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-third Year

3932nd Meeting
Tuesday, 29 September 1998, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dahlgren . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Dosari
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Niehaus
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue Rewaka
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Owada
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Odera
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations
Report of the Secretary-General (S/1998/883)

98-85918 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations
Report of the Secretary-General (S/1998/883)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Indonesia, Norway,
Pakistan and the Republic of Korea, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Kouliev
(Azerbaijan), Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Pohan
(Indonesia), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan) and Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Stephen Lewis,
Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, and to Mr. Kofi Asomani, Director of the Liaison
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees at United Nations Headquarters.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
document S/1998/883.
It is my pleasure to give the floor to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Fréchette.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I am pleased to
present to the Security Council the Secretary-General’s
report on the protection of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations. This report,
which the Council requested, sets out the challenges and
obstacles which confront humanitarian agencies operating
in violent and dangerous environments. Operating on the
front lines of numerous conflicts, humanitarian agencies
are all too aware that their ability to be effective — to
stanch suffering — is extremely limited when defenceless
civilians are deliberately targeted and access to
humanitarian assistance is denied.
What is happening to civilians in today’s war zones
is an abomination. Never before have we seen such
widespread and deliberate attacks against people who are
massacred in their homes, have their villages flattened,
have their schools and crops destroyed, and are essentially
treated as the enemy. Terrorized and traumatized by
armed violence, millions are obliged to flee and abandon
their farms to become refugees or internally displaced. An
unknown number are trapped in war zones, unable to
escape or to be reached by those who could offer
assistance. Notwithstanding the positive achievements in
the ratification of the landmines treaty, these weapons are
still being used, with tragic consequences for civilians.
They are also a direct impediment to the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council also
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, Head
of the delegation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.

2

This phenomenon of directly targeting civilians, and
the use of “scorched-earth” tactics, is not new, but the
scale of such atrocities, and the horrendous cost in human
suffering, has reached an unprecedented level. In recent
days, the Council had before it the situation in
Afghanistan, in Kosovo and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to name just a few of the conflicts where

Security Council
Fifty-third year
the pitiless slaughter of civilians and the destruction of their
means of survival is commonplace.
When the killing, maiming, and displacement of
civilians is not an incidental element of a political or
military strategy but constitutes its major objective, the
limitations of humanitarian action become all too apparent.
Humanitarian action is not designed or equipped to
stop the slaughter and deliberate displacement of civilians.
As noted by various speakers at the open debate of the
Security Council last year on this issue, there is a dramatic
need to rethink what is meant by “humanitarian action” in
today’s war zones and to reformulate our understanding of
what is required to protect and safeguard the well-being of
civilians.
No one will dispute that warfare reflects a breakdown
of political structures. It is the responsibility of the Security
Council to be bold, committed and determined when
confronted by such crises. Unquestionably, securing a
durable peace is the most important role of the Council and
represents the best support it can provide to humanitarian
agencies struggling with the humanitarian consequences of
warfare. There is no substitute for ending conflict, putting
an end to abusive practices and generating the conditions
essential for lasting peace.
It is against this background — the essential role of
the Security Council in addressing the immediate and
underlying causes of conflict — that the report before the
Council has been prepared. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has been
instrumental in the preparation of this report, which also
benefited from consultations with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, other United Nations
humanitarian agencies, the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of
Legal Affairs and the United Nations Security Coordinator.
This report draws on the experience of humanitarian
agencies operating in conflict situations. They more than
anyone else are aware that one of the most compelling and
problematic challenges confronting humanitarian actors is
the difficulty of operating in hostile environments where
civilians are directly targeted and the work of relief
agencies is deliberately obstructed. The changed nature of
warfare means that every day humanitarian personnel must
deal with the consequences of massive violations of basic
humanitarian norms, as armed groups avoid direct
confrontation and attack unarmed civilians.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Disrespect for basic humanitarian norms implies
added risk for relief workers. As the number of civilian
casualties rises, so too does the number of workers who
have been killed, wounded, kidnapped or assaulted while
trying to carry out their humanitarian task. Lawlessness
and contempt for humanitarian norms imperil
humanitarian personnel and their ability to help people in
need, and further endanger the women and children who
constitute the bulk of the population dependent on
assistance for survival.
As members are no doubt aware, this year has seen
more United Nations civilians and United Nations military
personnel killed in the line of duty. The report before the
Council explains why the changed nature of warfare is so
alarming and what should be done to protect the millions
who are internally displaced or trapped in war zones. It
also sets out specific measures to enhance the protection
of refugees.
Holding perpetrators of crimes against humanity
accountable will not end war, but it will definitely help in
ending some of the most egregious abuses. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court is
central to ending a culture of impunity. Every effort
should be made to accelerate the establishment of the
International Criminal Court.
As recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report on Africa, combatants should be held financially
liable when civilians are made the deliberate target of
aggression. To this end, a trust fund to support reparations
to victims should be established.
The Secretary-General is pleased that the Council is
giving serious attention to this issue. Humanitarian
agencies are equally appreciative of the interest shown by
the Security Council in the enormous hurdle they face in
contemporary war zones. They look to the Council for
concrete action, particularly in situations where civilians
are deliberately targeted.
The need to address the fact that conflicts with
horrendous humanitarian consequences are increasing in
number, duration and severity is now pressing. The
Secretary-General has put forward a number of
recommendations for the Council’s consideration and
stands ready to assist with any action which will give
peace a chance and reduce the bulging statistics of human
misery.

3

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The President: I thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her statement.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. The report provides an
excellent summary of some of the most critical problems
faced by the multilateral community today. We would also
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
introductory remarks this morning.
The culture of impunity, which permits attacks on both
defenceless refugees and the humanitarian personnel who
provide relief, must end. The United States believes the
Council could be most effective in dealing with the
protection of refugees and the safety of humanitarian
personnel separately.
The United States is working with other Security
Council members in a working group which is considering
ways to maintain the security and neutrality of refugee
camps, one of the Council’s six working groups on Africa.
Although the focus of this Group is on refugee camp
security in Africa, the recommendations that will eventually
come from this group will doubtless be applicable
elsewhere.
While the working group’s discussion will include
protection of humanitarian workers, security of
humanitarian personnel is not its focus. The United States
believes it an excellent proposal for members to begin
separate consideration of practical measures for improving
the security of humanitarian workers.
The nature of the threat to humanitarian personnel has
changed. Humanitarian workers are not only being killed in
the crossfire — they are now often specifically targeted for
both political and economic gain, as the Deputy SecretaryGeneral has noted. The nature of conflicts has also changed
— they are often internal and chaotic, with host
Governments no longer capable of assuring the security of
humanitarian workers.
For the international community to deal effectively
with situations of great humanitarian need, including
situations that may pose a threat to international peace and
security, we must improve the security of humanitarian
personnel. We therefore believe that Members should begin,
as a matter of priority, the development of a comprehensive
strategy aimed at enhancing the safety and protection of
humanitarian workers. As part of this effort, we should

4

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
explore, inter alia: first, asking the Secretary-General to
appoint a high-level personality to investigate and report
on cases of violence against humanitarian workers such as
those identified in the Secretary-General’s report, with a
view to identifying those responsible for these attacks
where possible; secondly, encouraging strengthened
enforcement of existing criminal and humanitarian law
prohibiting such attacks through vigorous and effective
action by national authorities; thirdly, developing concrete
incentives to encourage States and non-State actors not to
engage in or to tolerate such attacks; fourthly, examining
the value and feasibility of a possible protocol to the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel aimed at increasing the protection
of humanitarian workers; and, fifthly, we should consider
means to ensure that relief workers receive adequate
training in personal security.
Today’s debate sheds light on one of the most urgent
and troublesome issues facing the international
community today. The ideas we put forward today will
serve as the basis for the work we must undertake right
away to help ensure the safety of refugees and the
humanitarian workers who provide them aid.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): First of all, I wish to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her important introduction.
In late May last year the Security Council conducted
an open debate on the protection of humanitarian
assistance and subsequently issued a presidential
statement requesting that the countries concerned,
especially the parties to conflicts, comply with the
relevant rules of international law, guarantee that
international humanitarian assistance operations could
continue to be carried out without interference, and
guarantee that the safety and security of relief workers be
protected.
In the various conflicts that have occurred in recent
years, innocent civilians, especially women and children,
have suffered the most and been the most affected. Many
people have been forced to leave their homes and become
refugees, with no guarantee of their basic livelihood.
Under such circumstances, the international community
has the obligation to provide necessary humanitarian
assistance to meet the urgent needs of the refugees and
displaced peoples so as to mitigate the difficulties facing
them. However, as is stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, owing to various factors, attacks against

Security Council
Fifty-third year
international humanitarian assistance operations and their
personnel have been going on unabated.
The question of the safety and security of international
humanitarian relief operations and relief workers is a matter
of concern. Therefore, it is necessary for the Security
Council to once again hold an open debate to draw the
attention of all parties to this question and push for the
adoption of necessary measures so as to guarantee fully the
safety and security of humanitarian assistance operations
and their personnel.
China appreciates the report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council and basically agrees with the
analysis contained therein. We are seriously concerned
about the constant attacks against and kidnapping of
humanitarian relief workers. We believe that the key to the
resolution of this problem lies in strict compliance with and
implementation of international law by the parties to the
conflicts and in the renunciation of the practice of pursuing
political goals by attacking humanitarian relief workers or
by kidnapping such workers.
At the same time, the relief operations and the
personnel should strictly abide by the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality. During their work
they should be careful to respect the local history, culture,
religious practices, customs and traditions.
China is in favour of the Secretary-General’s
recommendation regarding strengthening coordination
between the Security Council and other institutions like the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
We support the further strengthening of information
exchange between the Security Council and other organs
such as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children’s
Fund and the International Committee of the Red Cross so
that there is a clear division of labour and each can carry
out its functions, coordinate with the others and guarantee
the safety of humanitarian assistance personnel.
We also believe it would be appropriate for the
Security Council in the authorization of future peacekeeping
operations to consider the inclusion of protection for
humanitarian assistance where there is a practical need for
it.
Finally, China supports the Security Council’s issuing
of a presidential statement and will further study the
specific recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Secretary-General’s report prepared at
the request of the Security Council on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations provides us with an opportunity to consider
more profoundly this urgent matter.
Experience shows that without effective
humanitarian assistance to refugees, displaced persons and
other categories of civilians, we cannot expect to succeed
in preventing conflicts from escalating or in promoting
the stabilization of conflict areas, or can we provide
reliable assurances that such conflicts will not be
resumed. That is why as a rule peacekeeping and
humanitarian operations are carried out in parallel, and
very often the humanitarian component becomes one of
the key functions, in the multifaceted peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council.
The Council is often asked to provide active political
support for the work of humanitarian organizations. Such
support provides assurance that the actual work of these
organizations in providing humanitarian assistance will
not only be supported but also protected by the authority
of the Security Council.
At the same time, the work of the Security Council
and that of humanitarian organizations cannot be equated.
While the Council bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
humanitarian agencies have their own mandates and deal
with specific tasks distinct from — although often quite
closely related to — the functions of the peacekeeping
contingents. In his report the Secretary-General quite
rightly questions the practical need for maintaining this
functional distinction. Certainly it would be expedient to
establish clearer coordination between the military,
political and humanitarian components of peacekeeping
operations, inter alia through the effective distribution of
operations between the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and the humanitarian coordinators.
We are seriously disturbed about the recent incidents
involving attacks and other uses of force against
international humanitarian personnel. Such illegal actions
cannot be justified in any way whatsoever. At the same
time, we cannot forget that an important requisite for
assuring the safety of humanitarian personnel is not only
the presence of military contingents sent by the Security
Council to protect them, but also strict compliance with
the principle of impartiality in providing humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian assistance cannot under any

5

Security Council
Fifty-third year
circumstance be used as a means of bringing political
influence to bear on either side to a conflict. Otherwise, it
would conflict with its basic objective. Instead of being an
effective means for stabilizing situations and supporting
political settlements, it would contribute to the escalation of
conflicts. The sad examples of Somalia and Rwanda force
us to give serious thought to these matters.
We fully agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the need to develop in the mandates
for peacekeeping operations clear and feasible humanitarian
tasks — backed by adequate human, material and financial
resources.
There is a real need for broader consultation and
cooperation between the Security Council and humanitarian
agencies, including primarily the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), at
the stage of planning and preparing for peacekeeping
operations that involve humanitarian tasks. In this context,
we are pleased to note increased activity by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its close
cooperation with the Security Council.
The use of force by the international community is an
extreme means of bringing pressure to bear on the
conflicting parties with a view to the settlement of crises
and conflicts. This applies fully in the humanitarian area
also. One cannot fully exclude the use of the military, or
force, factor in ensuring the safety of humanitarian
personnel and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
However, the notion of humanitarian coercion or
humanitarian intervention raises quite a number of general
and extremely practical issues. In any event, the functions
and prerogatives of the Security Council are enshrined in
the United Nations Charter and cannot be interfered with,
including, primarily, the Council’s exclusive authority to
provide humanitarian operations with elements of coercion.
The specific parameters and limits for the use of force
must be very carefully worked through, depending on the
actual situation, and must be clearly set forth in mandates
for operations approved by the Security Council. A
comprehensive, critical assessment is required, inter alia, of
the experience in establishing “safe areas” and
“humanitarian corridors”. Civilian populations must not be
used as hostages in actions involving force, which are not
always impartial, even when these actions are officially
considered to be purely humanitarian.

6

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Curbing the flow of arms into conflict areas is one
of the main stabilizing factors which can help solve
humanitarian issues. The Secretary-General’s report
touches on the burning issue of enhancing the
effectiveness of arms embargoes imposed by the Security
Council. This is an area for focusing collective efforts,
primarily by the members of the Council. Arms
embargoes with holes in them can simply intensify the
military confrontation of the parties to the conflict and,
indeed, undermine the authority of the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole.
We trust that today’s debate will help ensure more
effective humanitarian assistance, through the United
Nations, in the maintenance of international peace and
security. This task is, of course, broader than simply
protecting humanitarian assistance. We need here a
comprehensive and all-encompassing approach, as has
been very rightly noted by the Secretary-General. The
Russian Federation will continue to make an active
contribution to the preparation and implementation of
such an approach.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, and the delegation of Sweden for having
proposed this debate, which allows us to continue to look
at ways of improving protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
carrying on from last year’s ground-breaking debate under
the presidency of the Republic of Korea.
A balanced and useful report has been forwarded to
the Security Council in response to the request contained
in the presidential statement of 19 June 1997. It provides
us with updated input for our efforts to develop a
common understanding on the role of the Security
Council in addressing the plight of civilians caught in
situations of conflict.
My delegation is pleased to note that the latest report
(A/53/1) on the work of the Organization defended the
promotion of new forms of cooperation between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in tackling the economic,
social and humanitarian prerequisites of human security.
In that report, the Secretary-General also suggested that
as the Security Council is called to address economic,
social and humanitarian crises that threaten global
security, it may wish to invoke a dormant provision of the
Charter — namely, Article 65 — which establishes a
basis for invigorating the relationship between the
Economic and Social Council and this Council. Brazil has

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998

been of the same opinion for some time and welcomes the
position taken by the Secretary-General.

contributing to long-lasting peace. Lord Owen, the former
British Foreign Secretary, stated in this respect,

Let me highlight a few points that relate specifically
to the Security Council’s area of competence in the report
we have just received. We agree with the importance of
promoting adherence to and compliance with international
humanitarian law in improving assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. The nearly 5,000 Brazilian
troops that have served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations since 1993 were previously given orientation
courses by representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) on the modalities and applicability
of international humanitarian law. Clearly, there is a need
for much wider dissemination of humanitarian principles
and rules, notwithstanding the commendable work being
carried out by a number of State and non-State actors
worldwide and the valuable contribution made by the ICRC
in particular.

“after recent experience, humanitarian
interventions which require a delicate
interpretation of the United Nations Charter
will be harder to mount and will be viewed
with greater skepticism”.

At the same time, let us not forget that the basic tenet
of humanitarian law is that assistance must be provided in
an impartial and neutral way. The extraordinary success of
the Red Cross where others have often failed can be
explained by its adherence to this philosophy.
Governments, of course, may arrive at the conclusion
that the scale of abuses and violations in a specific situation
are such that enforcement action is justified or necessary.
It should be borne in mind, in such instances, that the resort
to Chapter VII action can negatively affect the provision of
humanitarian assistance, as indeed pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/1998/883), which states in
paragraph 24,
“humanitarian organizations have been concerned
that the use of the military for humanitarian
activities, particularly in the context of Chapter
VII operations, compromises their impartiality
and neutrality, affects their ability to assist
victims on all sides of the conflict and, at times,
even leads to increased violence against United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel”.
Until not long ago, those who favoured the use of
force to deal with mass abuses of human rights or rampant
violations of humanitarian law assumed that they occupied
the moral high ground. Today it is necessary to reassess the
situation and recognize with greater caution, and perhaps
wisdom, that the resort to force on humanitarian grounds
entails many risks and should be treated as a serious option
only in cases where it clearly stands a chance of

The international community must not shun its
collective responsibility to respond to the humanitarian
needs of refugees and other inadvertent victims of
conflict. But the lessons of the 1990s warn against the
establishment of an automatic correlation between
collective responsibility and collective security in the
humanitarian field. In attempting to establish a few clearcut categories for describing humanitarian operations, the
Secretary-General’s report makes it clear that
humanitarian access can be satisfactorily assured through
negotiations, without Security Council involvement or
action, and that even when there are serious security
problems, these may be successfully tackled with the
consent of the parties.
In the extreme cases where there is a serious security
situation and one or more of the parties to the conflict
does not consent to the presence of external security
forces, coercive options may have to be considered. At
this point, however, it will be essential to bear in mind
that humanitarian objectives will not be achieved unless
they are combined with an effective political strategy for
cessation of hostilities and stabilization. As the SecretaryGeneral stated in his speech to the General Assembly
only a week ago, we should avoid placing the Security
Council in a situation in which it finds itself deploying
desperate humanitarian efforts to deal with consequences,
when it should be addressing the political roots, or the
causes, of a conflict.
The recommendations included in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on protection for humanitarian assistance
indicate some of the areas where consensus may be
reached for progress to be made. The specific problems
created by the presence of armed combatants in refugee
camps is a matter that has already been brought to the
Council’s attention in connection with the SecretaryGeneral’s report on Africa, and we believe it deserves
priority attention, as does the question of the need to
regulate and monitor the trade in arms to areas of actual
or potential conflict.

7

Security Council
Fifty-third year
According to the latest figures, the total number of
refugees, displaced and other war-affected persons fell by
some 300,000 in 1997, but the overall figure remained
extremely high at over 22 million at the end of the year.
Not all these refugees would fall into the category of people
in situations of conflict, but in the former Yugoslavia the
continued displacement of about 1.8 million people
continues to confront the Governments in the region — and
the international community — with considerable political
and humanitarian challenges.
The outflow of refugees to Guinea-Conakry from
destabilized neighbouring countries has made that leastdeveloped nation the host of one of the largest refugee
populations in Africa. Many developing countries are
paying with their scarce resources the economic, social and
political costs of regional humanitarian crises. In order to
approach the humanitarian agenda in a balanced way, it is
necessary to correct the misperception that developing
countries are only recipients of assistance, when in fact they
are often donating what little they have.
The valuable work of the United Nations and its
various relief agencies in the humanitarian field is being
carried out in the face of severe resource constraints, not to
speak of the political and physical difficulties involved.
Greater political and material support for the work being
carried out by the United Nations in this field is clearly
required.
Let me conclude by renewing our expressions of
support for the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and all United Nations agencies in the humanitarian
field, whose competence and sustained commitment in
assisting the involuntary victims of conflict continue to
provide reassurance to Governments and comfort to the
dispossessed.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil for
his kind words addressed to me and my delegation.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Let me say first that
Portugal fully subscribes to the statement that will be
delivered later by the Presidency of the European Union.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate, which will allow the Security Council, for the
second time, to address the problem of protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees in conflict situations,
one of the most delicate and complex issues the
international community faces today. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for having provided a very good,

8

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
comprehensive and well-structured report, which my
delegation considers to be thought-provoking and a good
basis for future action.
We welcome the remarks made this morning by
Deputy Secretary-General Louise Fréchette. We welcome,
likewise, the participation in this debate of representatives
of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and hope to
see them and other, similar departments, agencies and
organizations more often in the debates of the Security
Council related to their work.
More than one year after our first debate, I believe
that no doubts remain about the legitimate and crucial
role the Security Council can play in the field of
humanitarian assistance to civil populations. As either a
cause or a consequence of conflicts, humanitarian crises
are a component of international peace and security.
Given the dimension and complexity of the problem, our
approach and action have to be coordinated with all the
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations —
this is a collective effort that engages the entire system —
as well as with other international, regional and
humanitarian organizations.
The mandates of the peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council should therefore, from
the very beginning, contain the necessary and appropriate
provisions for the safety of refugees, internally displaced
persons and the humanitarian personnel bringing relief to
them. The Council is paying increasing attention to the
question of the unimpeded and safe access of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and other civilians in
need. To this end, the Council must keep closer contact
with other organs and agencies of the United Nations and
needs timely and accurate information, including from
humanitarian organizations, under the appropriate
procedures.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
report, the protection of humanitarian assistance in
situations of conflict poses, above all, a question of
compliance by all the actors in the conflict — and we
mean here State and non-State actors alike - with all the
relevant instruments and provisions of international law.
Since a central element of humanitarian assistance and the
very essence of humanitarian law is the protection of the
human being and, in fact, of his basic human rights,
whenever a party to a conflict denies safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance, that party is violating

Security Council
Fifty-third year
a fundamental right - the right to assistance - and is not
abiding by its responsibilities and obligations under
international law. The international community, the United
Nations and, in particular, the Security Council must take
a firm stand on violations of this nature. Our reiterated
appeal for compliance must be reinforced with a clear
indication that there will be no “business as usual” with
perpetrators and that sanctions may be imposed on them.
States, which are responsible for the safety of refugees
and all other civilians, as well as for their safe and
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance, are also
primarily responsible for bringing to justice the perpetrators
of such violations. The international community should
raise its common voice against the culture of impunity and
be more consistently committed to supporting the efforts to
prosecute those who have violated international
humanitarian law and to bring them to trial at the national
level or before international courts, whenever appropriate.
Portugal welcomes the adoption of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and, in this context, we
consider particularly important its provisions stating that
attacks against humanitarian personnel are war crimes and
establishing the accountability of non-State actors, including
individuals, under international law and international
jurisdiction. This is certainly one of the major achievements
of the Statute. We must ensure that the creation of this
Court will prove to be a major instrument to roll back that
culture of impunity and to deter the perpetration of such
violations.
When we address the major issue of protection for
humanitarian assistance, we should focus our attention on
the situation of the United Nations and associated personnel
and the personnel of humanitarian organizations who carry
out their tasks, often at the risk of their own lives. I wish
here, on behalf of my country, to pay tribute to all those
men and women.
It is important to strengthen all relevant international
instruments of protection through the increasing accession
of States to them. In this regard, we regret that, four years
after its adoption by the General Assembly, the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
has not yet come into force. As it has done for several
years at the Commission on Human Rights and in the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, Portugal reiterates
here its appeal for the ratification of this Convention. In our
opinion, the Convention is also applicable to all civilians
involved in humanitarian missions.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Notwithstanding progress made in international
instruments of humanitarian law and human rights, attacks
against humanitarian personnel have been increasing. This
appalling situation calls for drastic action. The Council
must draw lessons from recent experience — as in the
Democratic Republic of Congo — and be innovative in
considering the elaboration of a mechanism to facilitate or
protect humanitarian relief and assistance. Perhaps the
Council can consider, in this context, the possibility of
deploying military units to protect humanitarian personnel.
Better coordinated and more efficient action by the United
Nations, involving all agencies dealing with humanitarian
assistance and peacekeeping operations, could address this
problem.
The report of the Secretary-General provides us with
a good set of recommendations. It is now up to the
Security Council to keep the issue of the protection of
humanitarian assistance high on its agenda and address it
in all its implications when dealing with a particular
conflict situation. Humanitarian activities are a component
of a comprehensive and coordinated approach, and the
Council cannot avoid its responsibilities in this field.
As a member of the Council, and even after it ceases
to be one, Portugal is ready and will continue to
cooperate with all delegations, departments, programmes
and agencies of the United Nations to protect refugees
and all other civilians affected by conflict situations. We
must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian assistance
to all those in need and protect the humanitarian workers
who bring them relief.
The President: I thank the representative of
Portugal for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by paying
tribute to you, Mr. President, and to the delegation of
Sweden for your efforts that made today's discussion on
the protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations possible. I would also like to
join the other speakers in welcoming Deputy SecretaryGeneral Louise Frechette and express appreciation for her
remarks at the beginning of this meeting.
We see this open debate as timely and necessary.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. We believe that the content
of that report and the recommendations will be useful for
the future work of the Council.

9

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The nature of armed conflicts in the world has been
changing for some time now. The Security Council is
dealing increasingly, although not exclusively, with internal
conflicts and their tragic humanitarian consequences. We
can no longer speak of a clear-cut dividing line between
combatants and civilians. Fighting between different
factions that do not necessarily have clear political or
military objectives provides for an environment without
organized powers and, consequently, without law and order.
Forced displacements of innocent civilians are often
the main objective of the fighting. The plight of children in
conflict situations is appalling. International humanitarian
personnel are often deliberately targeted. The purpose of
these attacks is to prevent humanitarian assistance to people
in need, and they serve political or strategic objectives of
the parties to the conflict. We witness human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law on an
unprecedented scale.
There are many reasons why the question of protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations should be a standing item on the agenda
of the Security Council. Humanitarian emergency situations
are the most tragic symptom of the underlying threats to
international peace and security. They need to be addressed
as a matter of priority. However, humanitarian action must
not be used as a substitute for political or, where needed,
military action.
The main purpose of humanitarian action is to save
lives and alleviate suffering. It cannot be expected to solve
the root causes of the conflicts. It cannot relieve the
Security Council of its responsibility to address political
and security issues. The Council's responsibility remains a
key element in the international community's response to
humanitarian crises. The Council has to respond to
emergency situations in a timely, adequate and united
manner, using the range of options at its disposal, defining
clear mandates and objectives and, in this way, helping to
create the necessary conditions for effective humanitarian
aid.
One of the most worrying aspects of the new warfare
and non-international conflicts in general is the erosion of
respect for the norms of international law. We agree with
the Secretary-General in his analysis of this problem. We
believe there is a need to strengthen our efforts to ensure
respect for and implementation of existing provisions of
international law, including, in particular, humanitarian law,
human rights and refugee law.

10

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Violations of international humanitarian law cannot
go unpunished. Prevention of impunity is primarily a
responsibility of the States and their national criminal
justice systems. However, it is also a legitimate concern
of the international community. The currently prevailing
sense of impunity must be stopped and the perpetrators of
crimes brought to justice. We welcome the adoption of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as
a ground-breaking step forward in providing justice to
victims, limiting impunity and deterring the commission
of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
In the light of the experience of recent conflicts
which have dramatic humanitarian consequences, such as
the situation until recently in Sierra Leone and currently
in situations like that of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Afghanistan and Kosovo, to name just a few, we
would like to stress the importance of ensuring
humanitarian access to refugees and others in need. We
share the view of the Secretary-General expressed in the
report that serious consideration should be given to
developing a range of options to maintain law and order
and create a secure environment for civilians endangered
by conflict and for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in conflict situations.
In many situations, the key to the solution lies in the
need to achieve a ceasefire and to start a political
dialogue and negotiations. On the other hand, when one
or more parties to the conflict deliberately obstructs
humanitarian assistance to civilians, coercive options,
including military enforcement, may be the only effective
response to the mounting problems of a complex
emergency situation. We agree with the approach
explained by the Secretary-General in paragraph 25 of the
report, which addresses one type of such situations which
occurs very frequently.
International humanitarian organizations work on the
basis of the concepts of neutrality, impartiality and
independence. It is therefore unacceptable that, in their
efforts to help people in need, they often become
deliberate targets of the parties to the conflict. This is
partly because of the distorted perception of humanitarian
action. In most cases, however, their presence is simply
perceived as an impediment to achieving political or
military objectives of the parties to the conflict, or as an
undesirable witness to grave violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
organizations, therefore, require every form of support
possible, and the Security Council must be aware of that.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
We strongly believe that the spirit of humanitarianism
can never die. However, we are also convinced that certain
security conditions have to be met in order for humanitarian
organizations to carry out their mission in reasonable safety.
We strongly condemn acts of violence against humanitarian
workers and welcome the provisions of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court, under which attacks against
United Nations and humanitarian personnel now constitute
war crimes and fall within the competence of the Court.
Let me say the following in conclusion. The work of
the Security Council is mainly situation-specific. A general
discussion like the one today can help in addressing broader
issues and in providing guidance to specific situations. The
report of the Secretary-General on the protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations contains valuable recommendations that should be
thoroughly and promptly considered by the Security
Council. Slovenia is willing to actively participate in this
effort.
The President: I thank the representative of Slovenia
for his kind words addressed to me.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
Permanent Representative of Austria, in his capacity
representing the Presidency of the European Union, will be
making a statement later in this debate, with which the
United Kingdom fully agrees.
Mr. President, you were right to schedule a further
open debate on this subject, and I pay tribute to Sweden's
forward role on it. Since we last addressed the issue, we
have seen yet more evidence in far too many conflicts that
a culture of impunity still surrounds attacks on the
provision of humanitarian assistance. We have seen the
murders of United Nations staff in Afghanistan and
Burundi. We have seen the deaths of humanitarian
personnel in the conflict in Kosovo and in Tajikistan. We
have seen hostage-taking in the Caucasus. And we have
seen attacks on those local populations who have turned to
the international humanitarian organizations for shelter and
protection. All of this is unacceptable.
But it is not enough simply to say that this is
unacceptable. We need an agenda for action. It is in this
context that I would particularly like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his focused and action-oriented report,
supported by the clear and insistent statement of the Deputy
Secretary-General this morning.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
I will not address each of the recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report, but I would like to address
one or two key issues.
First, the international community should take
seriously its responsibilities under international law. In
this context, we welcome the adoption in Rome of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. We hope that
this will help end the culture of impunity and so make the
world a safer place for everybody, including humanitarian
personnel. We particularly welcome the explicit reference
to humanitarian personnel in the list of war crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court. The work which United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
others do, often with great personal courage, to bring
humanitarian relief to those caught in conflicts, is too
important for us to take a complacent or routine approach
to this question. The United Kingdom would also like to
take this opportunity to urge all States to ratify the 1994
United Nations Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel without further delay.
Secondly, host countries should fulfil their
obligations towards humanitarian personnel. The
Secretary-General's report notes that solidarity and
burden-sharing are important in encouraging States to
respect humanitarian principles and obligations, but they
are not prerequisites. Host countries should make every
effort to bring those responsible for violations of these
principles to justice.
Thirdly, the Security Council should make every
effort to ensure that humanitarian assistance is given
adequate protection. The United Kingdom would be very
willing to discuss further the five suggestions made this
morning by the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States. The Secretary-General's report rightly
makes clear the importance of providing clear, realistic
and appropriate mandates to United Nations troops in
support of humanitarian operations.
Providing such support cannot be a soft option. The
force must be properly equipped to respond to the threats
it may face and receive suitably robust rules of
engagement. All too often, we have asked the military to
do the impossible and failed to give them the resources
they need.
Furthermore, I support the view expressed just now
by the Permanent Representative of Brazil that the role of
military forces in such situations may have to be assessed
against the need to address the causes rather than just the

11

Security Council
Fifty-third year
symptoms of a conflict. This needs further analysis and
debate.
This debate will have a lasting value only if it is seen
as part of a continuous process. The Council is looking at
some of the recommendations contained in this report in the
context of the follow-up to the Secretary-General's report
on Africa. My delegation stands ready to play a full and
active role both in that process and in support of any other
action to address the problem.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to my
delegation.
Mrs. Odera (Kenya): My delegation welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations and is pleased to participate in today's formal
meeting. We attach much urgency and importance to this
issue.
As conditions for the provision of humanitarian
assistance become increasingly precarious around the world,
the international community has a collective responsibility
to ensure the safety and security of the personnel of the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and other
humanitarian organizations.
Coming in the wake of the Council's discussion of 21
May 1997 and the subsequent presidential statement of 19
June 1997, which invited the Secretary-General to study the
matter of protection for humanitarian assistance further, this
report represents a clear and succinct study of the main
aspects of the problem and takes note of such important
elements as the increasingly violent environment in which
refugees, displaced persons and other victims of conflict
find themselves. It also reminds us of the disregard for
humanitarian norms and the high risks faced by
humanitarian personnel.
The African continent holds the unenviable record of
having the highest number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The situation is aggravated by changing
patterns of conflict. Today, all the taboos concerning
conflict have been violated, as we witness whole societies
being mobilized for war, children as young as nine being
recruited and trained to fight and civilian populations
including women and children being specifically targeted.
In the recent past, the civilian character of refugee
camps has changed; such camps now include, in some

12

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
cases, armed elements, militias, mercenaries and child
soldiers. In addition, a culture of impunity has developed,
as violators of human rights and humanitarian law
continue to wreak havoc unpunished. In this regard,
Kenya welcomes the recent establishment of an
International Criminal Court, which will ensure
accountability of those who violate international law by
stressing the individual responsibility of such violators.
We wish to rise to the challenge to both States and
non-State actors to comply with existing international
legal instruments that are designed to assist and protect
civilian populations from harm and that outline urgent
measures to ensure that refugees, displaced persons and
other affected people in conflict situations have access to
international protection and assistance. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the adoption of the guiding
principles for the protection of internally displaced
persons, as noted by the Economic and Social Council at
its substantive session of 1998.
In our capacity as a host country, we in Kenya have
always endeavoured to ensure that refugees, displaced
persons and other civilians have safe and unimpeded
access to such assistance as a right. We know at first
hand the social implications and environmental
degradation caused by a high concentration of refugees in
designated areas, and now we urge the international
community to assist by enhancing local capacity for
provision of humanitarian assistance. Today, our greatest
contribution to refugees and displaced persons is to ensure
that access to this assistance remains neutral and
impartial. In this respect, we call upon the Security
Council to continue to play a decisive role in
humanitarian operations.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report. We find it to
be very instructive in its analysis of the problem of
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. We would also like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on arranging this open
discussion of this burning issue.
There are adequate legal mechanisms designed by
the international community for the protecting of refugees
and other persons affected by conflict and for the
protection of humanitarian assistance to such persons.
Notwithstanding this body of laws, we are increasingly
burdened by the problem of access of refugees and other
vulnerable populations in conflict situations to
humanitarian assistance, and the related problem of the

Security Council
Fifty-third year
safety and security of the personnel of the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations.
It is disheartening to note that between 1 January 1992
and 31 August 1998, 153 United Nations personnel have
lost their lives and 43 incidents of hostage-taking of United
Nations personnel have been reported. This trend cannot
continue; it should not be allowed to continue. The Security
Council and other concerned bodies and organs of the
United Nations system should do everything possible in
accordance with their respective mandates to bring to an
end this perennial problem.
My delegation believes that first and foremost the
issue of compliance with international law should be
addressed. States and non-State actors in conflict situations
must respect their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. In this context, we
agree with the Secretary-General's recommendation that
Member States should reaffirm their commitments to the
international law regime that deals with the subject.
Member States which have not yet acceded to the relevant
legal regimes should endeavour to do so.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
rights continuously with impunity. My delegation looks
forward to the coming into effect of the Statute of the
Court and encourages Member States to consider signing
the treaty.
The burden of hosting refugees is often very great.
Its political and socio-economic impact on developing
countries that receive large populations is often heavy.
We agree that solidarity and burden-sharing are important
to encourage States to respect humanitarian principles as
well as their international obligations. We also recognize
that the international community should be ready to assist
these States, and that such assistance should not be at the
expense of official development assistance.

With regard to non-State actors, we agree that
knowledge of or respect for the international law regime
governing people in conflict situations is generally lacking.
We must not, however, overlook the fact that in some
instances violations of these laws mainly result from factors
other than lack of knowledge of them.

The creation of a secure environment for civilians
endangered by conflict and for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance is a matter that requires thorough
and urgent consideration. Many States, particularly in
Africa, lack the capacity to do this. The options
articulated in the report of the Secretary-General are
numerous. My delegation would like to take special note
of the need to build local capacity in this regard. An
international mechanism to assist host States to deal with
these issues would be in order. Since the ad hoc Working
Group of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolution 1170 (1998) is considering these issues as part
of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on Africa, my delegation eagerly awaits
the product of its work.

In any case, dissemination of the norms and principles
of international law is a very important step. We welcome
the advocacy activities of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Division for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). My delegation would
welcome a stepping up of these promotional activities and
a better targeting of the audience.

Of equal importance to the issues of access to and
protection of refugees and vulnerable groups in conflict
situations is the security of humanitarian personnel. While
we agree that Member States should ratify the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
and the Statute of the International Criminal Court, other
concrete measures should be adopted to ensure their
safety. One such measure is mandatory training of
humanitarian personnel on security procedures prior to
deployment.

Enforcement of the relevant international norms and
principles should be a priority. The culture of impunity
must be brought to an end. Individuals responsible for
crimes against humanity and violations of international
humanitarian law must take personal responsibility for their
actions. That is why my delegation welcomes the
establishment of the International Criminal Court to ensure
an appropriate international response to gross violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. Henceforth, no army,
no ruler, no junta anywhere will be able to abuse human

In this connection, my delegation welcomes the joint
training package on security training by the United
Nations Security Coordinator and UNHCR. We hope that
the organizations concerned will come up with the
necessary funds to undertake this training. We also
encourage States to contribute to the trust fund for
security.
Finally, in our view the Security Council has a role
to play in protection for humanitarian assistance to

13

Security Council
Fifty-third year
refugees and others in conflict situations. There is, however,
no definite position by the Council on this issue. It is not
enough that the Council merely condemns or, even less,
just expresses concern over these issues while the United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel are increasingly
attacked and sometimes killed in conflict situations. The
time has now come for the Council to be more actionoriented in dealing with these issues. In this context, my
delegation would support the development of clear-cut
guidelines to deal with the pressing problems raised in the
Secretary-General's report. The very first step in this
direction is to deal with the root causes of conflicts.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Gambia for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation is pleased that this open debate on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and other
victims of armed conflict is taking place. It will allow us to
take another look at some of the cardinal principles that we
believe must guide the actions of the Security Council and
our Organization.
In May last year, during the first debate on this issue,
my delegation advocated a new concept of conflict
resolution. We maintained that conflict management and
resolution by this Council must be based on a new concept
of security, centred on the human being, and rejected the
prevailing concept of peace and security seen from an
exclusively military standpoint. We maintained that Security
Council actions should necessarily be extended so as to
promote and ensure respect for human rights and provide
better living conditions for victims of armed conflicts. Our
experience over the past year has strengthened my
delegation's position on this matter.
Security and peace are not matters for States alone. In
the final analysis, States are fictitious creatures with no
more reality than that given to them by the people who live
in them. Security, peace and order are worth nothing if the
people who make up those States exist in the most abject
living conditions and their fundamental rights are flouted.
The true objective of international peace and security is the
happiness of human beings, who should be allowed fully to
develop all their capacities in freedom and justice every day
of their lives.
The first step to attaining this lofty ideal is to protect
innocent civilians from the impact of armed conflict,
preventing them from becoming direct targets of military
action and providing them with at least the most basic

14

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
living conditions during crisis situations. In this context
respect for international humanitarian law, humanitarian
assistance to refugees and displaced persons and
protection for those providing such assistance becomes
particularly relevant.
First, we believe it essential that the parties to a
conflict respect international humanitarian law, both
customary and treaty law, in particular the norms of the
1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1977 additional
Protocols thereto. Furthermore, we believe that all parties
must respect the principles and norms of human rights
under all circumstances. In this connection, we are
pleased to note that this Council has begun calling on
parties explicitly to comply with those norms and
principles. We also believe that all parties must respect
the international law on refugees and, in accordance with
those norms, must permit access for humanitarian
assistance to all persons in need.
Secondly, we agree with the Secretary-General that
there must be an increase in international solidarity in
response to the humanitarian needs of refugees and
displaced persons. Costa Rica, which took in refugees
during the crisis in Central America, is fully aware of the
economic, social and political burden involved in
receiving such populations in need, and we can testify to
the indispensable role of international cooperation to
lighten the burden.
Thirdly, we believe that additional measures must be
taken to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance
and to ensure the safety of those providing it. In our
view, a range of measures is needed, ranging from
ratification of international conventions guaranteeing the
protection of those providing humanitarian assistance and
the recently adopted statute of the International Criminal
Court to the adoption of concrete mechanisms and other
tools for ensuring the physical safety and integrity of
assistance providers and of their bases of operation and
their means of communications and transport. We
recognize that humanitarian personnel have the right to
self-defence in the event of unjustified attack, but we
believe in avoiding the use of force to the extent possible,
with a view to preserving the conditions that are
indispensable for impartiality and neutrality. In every
case, we condemn the taking of these heroic humanitarian
personnel as hostages and their murder as an act of
reprisal.
Fourthly, we believe that the situation of refugee and
displaced-persons camps must be given greater attention.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
It is unacceptable that some camps should be used as bases
for combatant groups or that they should become the site of
battles among factions. We believe that all parties must
respect the neutrality of refugee and displaced-persons
camps; under no circumstances can these be regarded as
legitimate targets for attack. Moreover, all parties must give
humanitarian organizations access to refugee and displacedpersons camps, not only to provide assistance but also to
assess the living conditions of the inhabitants. The valuable
work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in this area has been
universally recognized, and we take this opportunity to
reiterate to Mrs. Ogata Costa Rica's full support for her
work and for her unquestioned leadership.
Fifthly, there should be no impunity for those who
attack the security and safety of humanitarian personnel.
The belligerent parties must take all measures necessary to
prevent attacks on such personnel and in the event that
these occur to punish those responsible with a view to
avoiding further attacks. Here we reaffirm the relevance of
the provisions of the statute of the International Criminal
Court declaring attacks on humanitarian personnel to be war
crimes. We regret that the Security Council as a whole was
unable to include in the statement to be read out by its
President later today explicit reference to this important
progressive development in international law, owing to the
reluctance of some members.
Belligerent States and other parties bear the primary
responsibility to guarantee full respect for international
humanitarian law and to permit the distribution of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons
who need it, as well as to guarantee the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel. But this does not exonerate the
international community, or the Security Council in
particular, from the obligation to ensure respect for these
basic norms and to promote better living conditions and
improved security for the victims of armed conflicts. Only
when we have done this will the sun of justice shine upon
us from on high, enlightening those who dwell in darkness
and in the shadow of death, and guiding us along the path
of peace.
Mr. Owada (Japan): More than a year has passed
since the Security Council held extensive discussions and
issued a presidential statement on the agenda item we are
discussing today. We were very much aware then, as we
are now, that it is necessary for humanitarian
organizations — those within the United Nations system as
well as others, such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) — to conduct their operations on the

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
ground under difficult and dangerous circumstances. Thus,
we called upon all parties concerned to ensure the safety
and security of those personnel who are dedicated to
saving the lives of people in areas of conflict. It was our
hope then that there would be no more incidents where
the lives of such personnel were threatened, aid goods
and material looted, or entire humanitarian operations
jeopardized. Unfortunately, that has not been the case.
From many areas affected by conflict —
Afghanistan, Angola, Burundi, the northern Caucasus, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kosovo, Rwanda,
Sudan and Tajikistan — we have continued to receive
tragic reports of humanitarian personnel being attacked,
abducted or murdered, and humanitarian supplies looted.
The need for the international community to cope with
this situation is clearly ongoing and urgent. It is up to the
Security Council, in discharging its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to take
action in that effort.
The issue of the protection of humanitarian
assistance in conflict situations is a complex and
multidimensional one. Based on the discussions we had
in this Council last May, as well as the discussions of the
General Assembly, which led to its resolution 52/167,
together with the report of the First Periodical Meeting on
International Humanitarian Law, convened by the
Government of Switzerland in January at Geneva, which
discussed this issue in depth, and also the report of the
Secretary-General before us today, I believe that the
problem may be considered in the following three major
aspects.
First is the aspect of dissemination of awareness and
advocacy of the problem. The lack of respect for basic
human rights and international humanitarian law among
people in conflict-affected areas, including the leaders of
warring parties, has resulted in disregard among warring
factions for the basic principles on which those
humanitarian operations are based. An attempt to
annihilate certain social groups in opposition — whether
ethnic, religious or otherwise — sometimes becomes the
very purpose of the conflict and thus results in total
disregard for human rights. Under such circumstances, the
logic that those who give assistance to the enemy make
themselves the target of attack can come to prevail.
The second aspect is that of the legal framework for
protection. This concerns the adequacy of international
instruments in protecting humanitarian personnel. Among
the most important to be discussed in this regard is the

15

Security Council
Fifty-third year
question of implementation of such instruments by the
international community through strict application of
relevant rules of law, including the prosecution of those
who violate them. This would send a clear signal by the
international community not to allow a culture of impunity.
The third aspect is in the area of practical measures
for protection. This includes such practical matters as
measures aimed at minimizing security risks and those
aimed at remedying any existing security risks.
As for the first aspect, the report of the SecretaryGeneral correctly points out that the advocacy of
humanitarian principles is critically important in avoiding
extreme situations where a humanitarian operation itself is
seen as a hostile act by one or the other warring party.
When tensions stemming from ethnic, religious or other
rivalries reach the level of conflicts of mutual annihilation,
it is impossible for humanitarian organizations to conduct
their operations without provoking hostile action against
them from one side or the other. The dissemination of
knowledge and understanding of basic human rights and
humanitarian principles, including the right of refugees and
other victims of war to live and to have access to basic
materials, is the most fundamental deterrent against such
situations.
The international community, including bodies within
the United Nations system such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Children's Fund, as well as other
humanitarian organizations such as the ICRC, should
redouble in a coordinated manner its advocacy efforts,
especially in regions of potential conflict. The Security
Council, for its part, can strongly support those efforts by
urging Member States to respond positively to them and to
cooperate with them. It can also facilitate the process by
requesting the Secretary-General to promote cooperation
through more effective measures, for example through the
use of his special representatives and envoys for such
purposes.
With respect to the second aspect of the issue, the
adequacy of existing international instruments in providing
protection for humanitarian personnel is a problem we
should address in a more serious manner. Here I should like
to propose that the Council consider the possibility of
requesting the Secretary-General to conduct a thorough
study of this problem, including the possibility of a
comprehensive convention covering all aspects of

16

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
humanitarian assistance in the context of the changing
characteristics of today's conflicts. In the meantime,
however, as one of the first countries to become party to
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, Japan calls upon all Member States
to join it as soon as possible.
Ensuring a more effective implementation of
international humanitarian law is another critical
dimension of the legal aspect of the issue. In this context,
I wish to draw the attention of the Council to the
significance of the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. Under the Statute of this Court, which
was adopted in July this year, attacks against
humanitarian personnel constitute war crimes which
would come under the jurisdiction of the Court.
We must not ignore the fact that, even with the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, the
primary responsibility for prosecuting the perpetrators of
international humanitarian law lies with Member States.
The importance of the fight against the culture of
impunity at the national level through the prosecution of
perpetrators, therefore, should be emphasized in the
advocacy activities of various organizations, as well as in
any future actions of the Security Council on this issue.
The third aspect concerns a number of problems
which have to be addressed at the practical level in order
to enhance the security of refugees, as well as
humanitarian personnel. We must first of all consider how
to minimize the security risks to such personnel on the
ground. Ensuring the neutrality and security of refugee
camps by such means as separating combatants and
civilians is, in the view of Japan, a complicated but
essential task which has to be implemented with decisive
action. Stemming the illicit flow of arms to and in Africa
would also significantly improve the security of
personnel. Tackling these issues was recommended in the
report of the Secretary-General on peace and development
in Africa.
On this score, my delegation expresses its full
support to the delegation of the United States, the
coordinator of the working group on the security of
refugee camps, in achieving effective and practical results.
My delegation, as the coordinator of the working group
on illicit arms flows, expresses its own determination to
achieve concrete results in this area, taking into
consideration the views expressed at the ministerial
meeting of the Council held just last week.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The appropriate training of humanitarian personnel and
the adherence of humanitarian organizations to the principle
of strict impartiality are other factors which need to be
addressed in order to minimize the security risk on the
ground. Japan welcomes the development of the security
training package by the United Nations Security
Coordinator in collaboration with UNHCR. Japan reiterates
its commitment to make contributions of about $1 million
to the United Nations to support security measures for
United Nations personnel, and calls upon other States to
contribute to the Trust Fund that was formalized in June for
that purpose.
My delegation would also like to suggest that the
Council take into account in its future actions the code of
conduct for organizations participating in humanitarian
operations, developed by the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Taking measures to protect humanitarian operations
from existing security risks is another important task. The
strict adherence of humanitarian organizations to the
recognized principles of humanitarian assistance continues
to be essential for ensuring the security of humanitarian
operations. For this reason, my delegation is of the view
that humanitarian operations should as much as possible
avoid relying on forces to protect their activities.
In reality, however, there has in recent years been a
trend for a humanitarian operation itself to become the
target of an armed attack, making the provision of armed
protection indispensable. Even in this situation, however,
such protection should be commensurate with the potential
threat. Against threats from bandits, protection by civilian
police could be more effective. Against threats of a military
nature, armed protection by military organizations may have
to be considered as an option, although the involvement of
armed force for the purpose of such protection can be
counter-productive. The Security Council, in deciding to
provide assistance to such humanitarian relief activities,
should carefully weigh this factor. It is the considered view
of my delegation that the following conditions should be
met when United Nations peacekeeping forces are to be
involved as an instrument for the protection of humanitarian
efforts.
First, the mandate of such an operation must be clearly
defined and its terms of reference precisely specified.
Secondly, the actual situation on the ground must be
such that under this mandate the mission of protection may

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
realistically be expected to be accomplished through the
means offered.
Thirdly, the operation must be equipped with the
necessary human and material resources to accomplish the
mission.
Lastly, the Security Council must closely monitor the
situation so that the operation can adapt to the rapidly
changing situation on the ground.
There are many more issues which I have not
touched upon today but which need to be addressed in
this area from the viewpoint of how to ensure the security
of humanitarian efforts. I wish to conclude my
intervention by reverting to the most fundamental point
that must be constantly kept in mind — namely, that the
problem of refugees and other humanitarian crises can
only be eradicated through attacking the underlying root
problems. It is therefore necessary for the international
community, and especially for the Security Council, to
tackle these situations as an organic and comprehensive
whole and to take a holistic approach to the conflict
through efforts to bring about a ceasefire, ensuring strict
observance of such a ceasefire and through engaging
already at an early stage in rehabilitation and reintegration
of the people involved.
The President: I thank the representative of Japan
for his statement. I take the liberty to do so with special
emphasis, since it is my understanding that today is the
last day that Ambassador Owada will be present in this
Chamber as the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations and as the representative of his country on
the Security Council. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council in wishing our colleague all the
very best in his future endeavours. He will be greatly
missed in this circle, especially with respect to the keen
insight with which he has addressed the major issues
confronting the Security Council.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
expressing on behalf of all the members of the Council
the feelings of respect, friendship and esteem that we all
have for Ambassador Owada. I readily join in the wishes
you have just expressed for the success of his future
endeavours. I think it is quite appropriate that we should
be invited by you to adopt a presidential statement on a
subject to which the Permanent Representative of Japan
himself has devoted a great deal of time and thought.

17

Security Council
Fifty-third year
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
the very good report he has submitted on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations, following the debate we had last year. This
report contains recommendations which stem from
experience and deserve the full attention of the Council. We
hope that the report of the Secretary-General will mark the
beginning of comprehensive thinking on the means
available to us to cope with the deterioration of the
situation of civilian populations in conflicts and of the
conditions in which humanitarian personnel are working in
the field.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
humanitarian components. In the field, this should be
reflected in a close coordination among the political and
military components on the one hand and the
humanitarian components on the other, while bearing in
mind the particular nature of their respective tasks. This
is an ongoing problem that is not always resolved in an
entirely satisfactory manner. We are aware that
humanitarian personnel often have to carry out tasks that
are viewed by the local civilian population to a certain
extent as alibis for our inability to settle the conflict
militarily or politically.

Civilian populations, and women and children in
particular, have become not only the principal victims but
also the targets of current conflicts. Massive displacements
of people are occurring on a daily basis. Civilians are being
massacred. Children, caught up in the spiral of war, are
being slaughtered. Humanitarian personnel are taken
hostage and threatened, and they must work in constant fear
for their lives.

Hence the risk to humanitarian personnel, and the
caution we must therefore exercise often leads to paralysis
in the Council and an inability to live up to our
responsibilities. In Central Africa in November 1996, in
spite of a decision taken by the Security Council to set up
a multinational force to ensure the safe delivery of
humanitarian relief to hundreds of thousands of people —
women and children — in dire circumstances, that
operation was not deployed and a very serious
humanitarian disaster ensued.

The Security Council cannot remain indifferent in the
face of this situation. It must, in carrying out its mandate,
take greater account of the humanitarian dimensions of
conflicts, anticipate them and provide for them in its
statements and resolutions. The Council has instruments at
its disposal that might help to protect humanitarian
assistance. It must therefore muster the resolve to put these
into effect.

Today the same consideration should make us
doubly careful regarding the situation in Kosovo. We all
understand the need for caution, but once again the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities in
order to avoid another humanitarian catastrophe — and
fortunately it began to show evidence of this last week.

We have had failures in recent years, which should
compel us better to shoulder our responsibilities. There was
Somalia, which had a regrettable impact on the opinions of
some, though we know that in humanitarian terms some
good work was done in that country. That experience made
us aware of the importance of not disassociating
humanitarian activities from the general social, political and
economic context of a conflict.
In this connection, I should like to commend the
efforts of Under-Secretary-General Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, who endeavours regularly to inform the Security
Council of developments in the humanitarian situation of
the conflicts of which the Security Council is seized.
The experience of the United Nations Protection
Force, with which Mr. Vieira de Mello is deeply familiar,
has taught us that when the Security Council decides to
deploy United Nations contingents to support humanitarian
activities, it should define in a clear, precise and realistic
mandate the respective responsibilities of their military and

18

Monitoring respect for the norms and principles of
international law is crucial. The creation of an
International Criminal Court is a major step forward in
our fight against the impunity of war criminals. Our
country was among the first to sign the treaty in Rome,
and we hope that those countries that have done yet done
so will join us. We wish to contribute to making the
Criminal Court a credible and effective instrument in the
service of human rights and humankind.
As we said earlier, we are concerned at the
deterioration of the working conditions of humanitarian
personnel. Increasingly they are used as targets by parties
to conflicts. In this regard I cannot but recall with sadness
that since January 1998 one of our fellow countrymen,
Mr. Vincent Cochetel, who worked for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in North
Ossetia, has been held hostage by his captors for nine
months now.
We should therefore do everything in our power to
ensure conditions of safety that are satisfactory for

Security Council
Fifty-third year
humanitarian workers. The 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel is a legal
instrument to which we attach great importance. We have
signed it, and the ratification process is under way in the
French Parliament. Obviously we hope that many States
will do likewise. But that instrument is not enough. The
Convention is not enough, because it does not cover all
categories of humanitarian personnel and is therefore
unlikely to resolve complex problems with multiple causes.
We have tried to come up with ways of improving this
state of affairs. Last February France organized a national
meeting with non-governmental organizations in order to
determine how better to protect humanitarian personnel. We
shall consider the proposals made this morning by the
United States. I believe that above and beyond general
considerations — welcome as they are — we must devise
practical measures.
The most important thing is to make governing circles
and authorities aware of the need to provide for the
protection of humanitarian staff and civilian populations.
Gradually the United Nations is trying to propagate this
belief, and today our hope is that the statement we are
about to adopt will help us progress towards the objectives
proposed to us.
The President: I thank the representative of France
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): Like other delegations, we too would like to
commend the Swedish delegation for the welcome initiative
it has taken in organizing this meeting on the important
issue of protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations.
There is hardly any need to recall here that protection
of and respect for individuals has always been a concern of
the international community, under normal circumstances
and, in particular, in times of war. Thus, a series of
universal legal instruments have been adopted within the
frameworks of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We have in mind, inter alia, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
Additional Protocols to these Conventions.
But however abundant the legislation may be in these
areas, we must observe that it has not been strictly
implemented, either by States or by the various groups
engaged in conflicts. We deeply deplore this situation, the
consequences of which are well highlighted in the report of

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
the Secretary-General contained in document S/1998/883,
which we are considering today.
The international community can no longer stand by
while women, children, the elderly, refugees and the staff
of humanitarian organizations — in short, the civilian
population — is constantly targeted by armed groups. An
end must be put to such chronic abuses.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, between
January 1992 and August 1998, more than 100 staff
members of the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations paid with their lives for their dedication to
the humanitarian cause. We would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of those soldiers
of peace and humanitarian security. We repeat once again
that these attacks are totally unacceptable, and we should
do our utmost to put an end to them by adapting and
strengthening existing instruments.
Similarly, we would like to express our gratitude and
our encouragement to the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and all governmental and
non-governmental organizations involved in assistance
and humanitarian relief.
In this context, my delegation firmly supports the
useful recommendations of the Secretary-General aimed
at increasing protection for refugees and displaced
persons, as well as for the personnel of the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations.
However, all our efforts will be in vain if no
concrete action is taken to build confidence between
humanitarian organizations and the parties in conflict,
who sometimes accuse these organizations of supporting
one group at the expense of another.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate what our
delegation emphasized last 24 April in this Chamber: that
a solution to armed conflicts — the source of so much
human suffering — requires that we look for a global
solution to their causes.
This is equally valid for the item we are discussing
today.
The President: I thank the representative of Gabon
for his kind words addressed to my delegation.

19

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
First of all, I would like to express my thanks to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open meeting and this
important debate. I am also pleased to express deepest
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the excellent
report he has given us on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations.
For decades now the international community has been
aware of the importance of ensuring the safety and security
of refugees and displaced persons and others affected by
conflicts. Therefore, sustained efforts were made in order
to have the necessary legislation in place to protect these
people. This is why many conventions and agreements have
been signed — for example, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights of 1948, the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
the Additional Protocols of 1977 and the 1951 Convention
and 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees.
On the other hand, it has become clear that
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons
is often hijacked, so to speak. Moreover, humanitarian
personnel have also become victims of attack. This
continues to be one of the main problems that the
international community has to resolve.
In this connection, my delegation expresses its great
concern regarding attacks on international personnel who
are providing emergency assistance. We condemn the
attacks on them, because they are violations of international
law.
My delegation is in full agreement with the
conclusions reached at by the Secretary-General in his
report with regard to the responsibility incumbent on States
to provide for and ensure the safety and security of
personnel of the United Nations and of humanitarian
organizations.
It is of the utmost importance that the Security
Council be kept regularly informed of the humanitarian
situation in various conflict areas so that the Council can
have a comprehensive picture of what is going on, and
thereby be able to adopt the appropriate resolutions in order
to deal with any problems encountered.
My delegation also endorses the recommendations of
the Secretary-General’s report, including improving the
level of safety for humanitarian and emergency assistance
in conflict areas and the means of providing such
assistance. Efforts must be made at the national and

20

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
international level in order to find a solution to these
matters.
In conclusion, I must pay tribute to the international
and regional efforts made to ensure protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons.
The role played by the United Nations and its specialized
agencies is an important pioneering role. Governmental
and non-governmental organizations also undertake farreaching activities in this domain.
My delegation would also like to stress the need for
coordinating the efforts made by States for the purpose of
providing better humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons, and for ensuring the safety of
providing that assistance. Accordingly, we await eagerly
the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution on
this matter.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Sweden.
Let me start by stating that Sweden fully endorses
the statement that will be delivered later today by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. I would also at the outset like to express my
Government’s high appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and of the presentation by the Deputy
Secretary-General earlier this morning.
The report confirms that violations of international
humanitarian, refugee and human rights law jeopardize
international peace and security. Concern for victims of
armed conflict and efforts to assist them have therefore
become a major aspect of the work of the Security
Council.
Refugee flows and displacements of people are both
consequences of and contributing factors to instability.
Armed groups often mix with civilians and use them as
human shields in violation of humanitarian law. Not only
are civilians in this way deprived of the protection to
which they are entitled, but their lives and livelihoods are
further threatened. This tendency is alarming, both
because of the human suffering it causes and for the
effect it has on peace and security.
Sweden condemns all attacks against innocent
civilians and against personnel of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations. In this context, my
Government welcomes the provisions of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court which state that attacks

Security Council
Fifty-third year
against humanitarian personnel constitute war crimes. This
is a major step towards breaking the culture of impunity for
such acts and ensuring that the culprits are held personally
responsible.
The Security Council has a responsibility, together
with the Secretary-General and the United Nations system
at large, to address the security and safety of humanitarian
assistance to all those in need. The objective must be to
prevent humanitarian crises by providing early and viable
solutions to their root causes. Regular briefings to the
Council by key humanitarian actors are important to ensure
a comprehensive approach to complex humanitarian
emergencies. Last week’s Security Council resolution on
Kosovo is, to our mind, a good example of a strong
political response to an increasingly acute humanitarian
situation.
Sweden welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts to
build closer coordination between the various responsible
United Nations entities, inter alia, through joint meetings
with the Executive Committees on Humanitarian Affairs
and on Peace and Security, as well as the United Nations
Development Group.
The report of the Secretary-General reviews the past
experience of a variety of arrangements to enhance the
safety of humanitarian operations. As always, clear
mandates are essential. The mutually supportive relations
between the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and the Humanitarian Coordinators should be
further enhanced. There are also important lessons to be
drawn from the United Nations guards in northern Iraq and
from the more recent international monitoring presence in
Bosnia and in Kosovo.
We need to continue to develop mechanisms to ensure
humanitarian security without necessarily relying on
military deployment. Important steps are also being taken
by the humanitarian community itself to address these
issues.
Many of the recommendations of the report are closely
related to recommendations in the Secretary-General’s
Africa report. Clear links exist between the follow-up to the
two reports. This is, for example, the case when it comes
to creating an effective international mechanism for security
in refugee camps.
Today’s meeting is another step in the Council’s
efforts to strengthen its role in supporting humanitarian
action. It is the second time in two years that we have had

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
a wide-ranging debate on this topic in this Chamber. The
report should be thoroughly and promptly reviewed,
taking into consideration our discussion here today.
Concrete conclusions must be drawn on actions to be
taken to ensure effective protection of humanitarian
assistance. Such conclusions must also be drawn
concerning the responsibilities of the Security Council in
this field.
My delegation looks forward to discussing the
concrete proposals for further action presented here today
by the delegation of the United States.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): I would
like to express my delegation’s gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your initiative in organizing the
Security Council’s open debate today on the important
and urgent issue of protection for humanitarian assistance.
My thanks go also to the Deputy Secretary-General for
her important introductory remarks.
As conflicts persist in the post-cold-war era, the
plight of tens of millions of innocent civilians continues
with an alarming intensity. In particular, children, women
and other vulnerable groups are abused in many
deplorable ways. Moreover, as we have all witnessed in
recent months, an ever increasing number of those who
volunteer to help innocent people in conflict situations
find their lives threatened or sacrificed. It is indeed
regrettable that their safety and security are constantly
endangered by wanton attempts at abduction, detention
and killing.
The Republic of Korea believes that the time has
come for the international community to stand up and
deal seriously with these challenges. It was for this reason
that my Government, then occupying the presidency of
the Security Council, took the initiative to organize the
first open debate on this issue in May 1997. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for taking the lead in preparing the follow-up
report on this issue, as requested in the Security Council
presidential statement of June 1997. We agree with the
analysis pertaining to the sources of problems and

21

Security Council
Fifty-third year
strongly endorse the recommendations contained in the
report.
Allow me to take this opportunity to highlight the
following points. The first concerns the urgent need for the
international community to translate the recommendations
contained in the report into action. Indeed, a variety of
sources of problems have been identified. Unfortunately,
however, these sources have not been addressed adequately
by the international community due to the lack of will and
resources. Now is the time to take resolute steps to tackle
them.
The Secretary-General’s report contains a number of
specific recommendations. We should all look into ways
and means to implement them. Given the complex nature
of the issue at hand, the international community should
take a coordinated and comprehensive approach.
This leads to my second comment, on the role of the
Security Council.
We welcome and support the presidential statement to
be issued today at the end of this debate, which will
express the Council’s intention to have a serious follow-up
to the Secretary-General’s report. A number of areas
suggested in the report are directly or indirectly related to
the Council’s mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Although humanitarian assistance and
peacekeeping operations are distinct from each other, the
fact remains that the Security Council’s involvement is now
indispensable for the protection of humanitarian assistance
in conflicts.
We must not forget that the primary responsibility of
the Council resides in promoting the political settlement of
conflict situations. Political inaction on the part of the
Council results in procrastination in the resolution of
conflicts and thus the prolongation of civilian suffering. In
such cases, humanitarian assistance cannot be a substitute
for political action and therefore is not sustainable.
Humanitarian activities should be backed by the political
initiatives of the Council as well as its willingness to take
the necessary security measures, including the deployment
of peacekeeping forces.
When peacekeeping operations are deployed by the
Council in support of humanitarian operations, the Council
should strive to appropriately match their mandates to their
resources. Clear rules of engagement are also required. The
Council has learned useful and sometimes painful lessons
from its past experiences in dealing with the situations in

22

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Somalia, the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and the former
Zaire. We hope that these lessons learned will help the
Council in future deployments of peacekeeping forces.
We would like to invite the special attention of the
Council to the need for the separation of armed
combatants from bona fide refugees and displaced
populations. Refugee-hosting countries are often unable or
unwilling to maintain law and order in refugee camps. In
such cases, the Council is strongly requested to ensure
that appropriate measures are taken in a timely manner to
prevent armed elements from turning refugee camps into
military bases. Militias must also be stopped from using
refugees as human shields.
The Council also possesses the useful leverage of
arms embargoes. The proliferation of arms in areas of
actual or potential conflict remains one of the most
serious sources of insecurity for refugees and their
protectors alike. The Council should explore imposing an
arms embargo targeted against a region where crossborder movements of arms are frequent and rampant.
Serious consideration also needs to be given to better
ensuring the effective implementation of arms embargoes
by the Council. Once imposed, arms embargoes need to
be monitored and enforced through a more effective
mechanism. Failure to do so will not only aggravate
civilian suffering, but also undermine the credibility of the
Council’s action.
My third point concerns the legal framework. The
culture of impunity must be prevented from further
spreading. Ensuring universal respect for international
humanitarian norms is a necessary precondition for the
restoration of a safe environment for the conduct of
humanitarian work. In achieving this objective, the
establishment of ad hoc International Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda was an important step
forward. A milestone along the path in combating the
culture of impunity was set by the recent adoption of the
Statue of the International Criminal Court.
Further efforts must be made to strengthen law
enforcement against the violators of international
humanitarian norms at both the national and international
levels. Specific measures should be taken to hold
transgressing parties and their leaders physically and
financially liable to their victims under international law.
Another related issue is the scope of humanitarian
personnel covered by the relevant United Nations

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Convention. Such a scope should be expanded to provide
adequate legal protection to the local staff of humanitarian
organizations.
Last but not the least, I would like to suggest that the
Council expand its discourse with other relevant organs and
agencies, in particular the General Assembly, on this issue.
The Secretary-General’s report before us today touches
upon many areas which go beyond the mandate of the
Council. My delegation is of the view that serious thought
should be given to submitting the report to the General
Assembly for consideration under a related agenda item.
The international community has to rise to the
daunting challenge of providing adequate security to United
Nations and humanitarian workers. The time for action has
come. We welcome today’s open debate as an opportunity
to increase international awareness of this issue. We
sincerely hope that all the views, suggestions and proposals
presented today will be fully reflected, examined and
agreed upon, if possible, in the Council’s follow-up on this
issue. We further hope that it will be done in close
collaboration with other relevant United Nations organs and
agencies, as well as with the United Nations membership as
a whole.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that my
Government stands ready to continue to make contributions
in this regard.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Austria. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Sucharipa (Austria): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you rather belatedly, Sir, on your exercise of
your high office in September. It was good to see the
presidency in such capable and experienced hands.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia — and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Let me also thank your delegation, Sir, for
organizing this debate on an issue which, in the view of
the European Union, is of greatest importance. Our
thanks, of course, also go to the Deputy Secretary-General
for her valuable introductory remarks.
Let me also express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and, of course, to Under-SecretaryGeneral Vieira de Mello, for the report on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. The European Union highly values the clear
and structured manner in which the report approaches one
of the most complex issues the international community
has to deal with today. We sincerely hope that this
document will not only serve as an essential and most
needed analytical tool, but also stimulate in-depth
discussions and guide practical efforts.
In May last year, the question of the protection of
humanitarian assistance was, for the first time, discussed
in an open debate of the Security Council. We could
quote numerous examples to illustrate that international
humanitarian law and human rights continue to be gravely
violated with impunity. Whether these violations occurred
as a result of a combination of brutality and ignorance, or
of systematic and organized action, is irrelevant as such:
The victims are deprived of their human security. The
report before us clearly points out that simplistic concepts
that do not address the conflicts leading to and produced
by massive displacement of civilian populations and
humanitarian crises will fail. Humanitarian action has to
be fully consistent with broader United Nations peace and
development activities, and coordinated accordingly.
The compliance of States and non-State actors with
the provisions of international law, and in particular
humanitarian law, is an indispensable prerequisite for the
effective protection of humanitarian assistance operations.
A major problem in recent years has been the failure of
States to bring to justice those responsible for violations.
The adoption of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, which the European Union worked hard to achieve,
is a significant step forward. In today’s conflicts, where
non-State actors play a growing role, ensuring the
accountability of the individual under international law is
of great importance. The jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court over individuals will promote the greater
accountability of State and non-State actors alike.
The Statute of the International Criminal Court also
covers the security needs of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel by providing that the act of

23

Security Council
Fifty-third year
intentionally directing attacks against personnel involved in
humanitarian assistance or involved in peacekeeping
missions in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, as long as these missions are entitled to the
protection given to civilians under the law of armed conflict
constitutes a war crime. It thus brings these attacks under
the Court’s jurisdiction and ensures that those acts will be
prosecuted.
The European Union, therefore, considers early entry
into force of the Statute to be of paramount importance.
The European Union encourages the countries which have
not yet done so to sign the Statute and all States to ratify it.
The General Assembly at its fifty-third session must take
all necessary measures to ensure entry into operation of the
International Criminal Court without undue delay.
On a more general level, States must become parties
to and implement all other relevant instruments of
international law and should intensify their efforts to
disseminate the respective rules within their armed and
security forces, as well as among the civilian population.
Armed and security forces have to be trained in
international humanitarian standards, and national
legislation must give effect to rules which safeguard
civilians and humanitarian workers and hold perpetrators
accountable. As the majority of civilian victims of acts of
violence in situations of armed conflict are women and
children, the European Union reiterates that a gender
perspective, as well as the important dimension of children
in armed conflict, has to be taken more seriously into
consideration. In the field of training and capacity-building,
the United Nations, not least through its relevant
programmes and bodies, and regional organizations and
international humanitarian organizations have an essential
role to play.
The European Union also believes that the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
report on Africa (S/1998/318) with regard to holding
combatants financially liable to their victims under
international law, where civilians are made the deliberate
target of aggression, is certainly worth exploring.
The European Union considers the right of safe and
unimpeded access of international humanitarian
organizations to refugees, displaced persons and vulnerable
populations in conflict situations to be a fundamental
principle. Faced with the tragic situations in Kosovo and
elsewhere, we must emphasize this principle again and
again. The European Union strongly condemns the arbitrary
denial of these rights.

24

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Furthermore, we strongly believe that State
sovereignty cannot be used as an argument to deny
humanitarian access. In this regard, the European Union
wishes to reiterate that it would welcome the
establishment of an international mechanism to assist host
Governments, at their request, in maintaining the security
and neutrality of refugee camps and settlements, as
proposed by the Secretary General earlier this year. We
welcome, of course, ongoing work on this topic within
the Council.
The European Union deeply deplores the growing
number of attacks against personnel of United Nations
and humanitarian organizations. These attacks are often
carried out by parties to armed conflicts in the context of
a military strategy and in deliberate disregard of their
responsibility to ensure the safety, security and freedom
of movement of such personnel. In this context, the Union
wants to draw particular attention to General Assembly
resolution 52/167 on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and calls for the full
implementation of this resolution and the accession to the
relevant legal instruments, in particular for early
ratification of the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel.
The European Union believes that States should
cooperate more closely with each other in the field, with
the United Nations and with other competent international
institutions to prevent attacks against humanitarian
workers, notably through a better exchange of
information. In this context, the European Union draws
attention to the proposals contained in the European
Commission’s working paper “Security of Relief Workers
and Humanitarian Space”, which can be provided on
request.
We also think that humanitarian organizations should
put even more emphasis than before on adequate training
for their personnel, taking into account the importance of
the principles of humanitarian law in humanitarian
operations. We strongly encourage humanitarian agencies
to enhance their security arrangements and make every
effort to coordinate their activities so that the risks to
which they might be exposed are reduced to a minimum.
The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental
Organizations in Disaster Relief should be duly taken into
account.
States on whose territory attacks on humanitarian
workers have taken place should initiate without any

Security Council
Fifty-third year
delay impartial and efficient inquiry procedures. The
European Union considers it imperative that States ensure
that any threat or act of violence committed against
humanitarian workers on their territory is fully investigated
and that those responsible for such acts are prosecuted, in
accordance with international law and national legislation.
The European Union stresses that appropriate and
realistic mandates, as well as adequate resources, must be
provided for any operations authorized by the Security
Council to provide for the safety of refugees, displaced
persons and other civilians, as well as for the security of
the United Nations personnel and other humanitarian
organizations, and to ensure the unimpeded and safe
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
As the world’s largest humanitarian donor, the
European Union expresses its sincere hope that today’s
discussions will lead to practical results and thus be an
important step to put an end to the culture of impunity,
which has left such ugly marks on the history of this
century.
The President: I thank the representative of Austria
for his kind words addressed to me and my delegation.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my list.
In view of the lateness of the hour and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed
at 3.40 p.m.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Argentina. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like first of all to congratulate the
delegation of Slovenia on its dedicated and outstanding
work while presiding over the Security Council during the
month of August.
I should next like to thank you, Sir, for the initiative,
taken under your presidency, to take up again the question
of protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations, an issue that was raised by the
Republic of Korea last year. Its relevance is undeniable.
Since September 1997, over 30 civilians dedicated to
humanitarian tasks in the field have died — one of the
highest figures ever recorded in a 12-month period. We pay

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
sincere tribute to these personnel from the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other agencies.
There is a further reason to consider this issue: the
competence conferred by the Charter on the Security
Council gives it an indispensable role in such crises.
Provoking humanitarian crises has become an
additional tool available to the parties to a conflict. Events
in recent years have led us to conclude that the creation
of a humanitarian emergency, with concomitant attacks
against the personnel sent out to deal with it, often ends
up benefiting the party that provoked it. In our opinion,
that is the main factor to be taken into account in
analysing the causes of such crises. We therefore
understand that the action of the United Nations in
general, and of the Council in particular, must be geared
towards increasing the political and military cost to the
parties to a conflict of violating the norms of
humanitarian law, human rights or the rights of refugees.
We also believe it necessary to emphasize that this
problem did not originate in the conflicts of the past two
decades. The countries that appear from time to time on
the agenda of the Security Council are not the only ones
responsible. Making civilian populations the target of
military action is one of the scourges that have only been
increasing since the beginning of this century.
As a first step, it is fundamental to ensure adherence
to and compliance with the relevant international norms.
Argentina is a party to both the Geneva Convention and
its Additional Protocols, and we participated actively in
drafting the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and, recently, in the
negotiations to establish an International Criminal Court.
For several reasons the International Criminal Court
represents unprecedented progress in efforts to improve
the situation of personnel providing humanitarian
assistance. Categorizing attacks against personnel
participating in peacekeeping operations or humanitarian
assistance missions as war crimes constitutes explicit
recognition of the gravity of such acts. Furthermore, the
Convention not only defines these unlawful international
acts, but provides for the means necessary to bring to trial
and sentence those who commit them. Lastly, since the
basis of the measure is the individual accountability of the
people who commit the crimes, there is no advantage to
non-State actors, whose accountability is not clearly
defined in any other international instrument.

25

Security Council
Fifty-third year
All the statements that we have heard, both today and
in May last year, have emphasized that it is vital to bring
to trial and sentence those responsible. The statement made
on 24 September by the Foreign Ministers of the five
permanent members of the Security Council is also
important in this respect. As the International Criminal
Court is the most appropriate means of dealing successfully
with this type of crime, we are confident that its Statute
will enter into force as soon as possible.
The excellent and forceful report submitted by the
Secretary-General in response to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/1997/34) of 19 June 1997, and introduced this
morning by Ms. Fréchette, constitutes an excellent
evaluation of United Nations action on this subject. We
fully support both the diagnosis and the course of action
proposed in that document, in particular with regard to the
comments in paragraphs 51 to 53. We would like to add to
those conclusions that, notwithstanding the Security
Council’s competence with regard to humanitarian crises,
all the Members of the United Nations should be regularly
and immediately informed about such situations.
Ambassador Vieira de Mello has shown his great
willingness in this respect, and we are profoundly grateful
for that.
We hope that the Security Council will periodically
continue to consider, in public, issues of general importance
such as that before us today.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation to participate
in this important meeting on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
timely report on this item.
There can be no doubt that recent attention to the
prevention of deadly conflict is justified. The greatest
protection that can be offered to civilians, of course, is to
avoid war and prevent violence. Yet no one sitting in this
Chamber today needs to be reminded that dozens of violent
conflicts persist. It is therefore fitting that the Security
Council should continue to focus its attention on the

26

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
provision of assistance for those suffering the ravages of
war.
We must recognize at the outset that humanitarian
assistance is designed to do no more than respond to the
needs of the victims of war. Four years after the genocide
in Rwanda, the principal lesson drawn from the
international community’s response to that nightmare
continues to ring true: humanitarian action is no substitute
for political action. Effective humanitarian action depends
upon corresponding action from political entities, and in
particular from the Security Council, to bring diplomatic
and, where necessary, military pressure to bear both to
protect civilians and to resolve the conflict in question.
Ensuring that the most vulnerable are afforded basic
protection is one of the most difficult challenges we face.
Because of this requirement for protection, military
personnel increasingly are being called upon to respond
to humanitarian crises. Canada has learned a number of
lessons from integrated military-civilian peace support
operations: a thorough understanding of the capabilities
and roles of political, military, humanitarian and human
rights partners is an important factor in any response to
a complex emergency; any confusion among political,
military and humanitarian mandates merely serves to
impugn the impartiality of humanitarian organizations; an
intervention force must have clear and realistic military
objectives and must be equipped with the means
necessary to achieve them; and efforts to disarm
belligerent parties and to separate refugees from
combatants are dangerous, and are bound to fail if an
intervention force is not structured or equipped for such
a mission.
(spoke in English)
Canada continues to support United Nations efforts
to improve the United Nations system’s ability to respond
quickly to complex emergencies. The faster the United
Nations can respond to a crisis, the greater the likelihood
that the dramatic and disruptive consequences of such a
crisis, including massive population flight, can be
contained or avoided. The need for an improved rapiddeployment capacity in the United Nations is manifest,
and we urge that action be taken to establish this vital
capability in the United Nations as soon as possible.
To further increase the capacity for effective
response, it may be both timely and prudent to reexamine just how the various organs of the United
Nations involved in peace support missions actually plan

Security Council
Fifty-third year
and conduct these operations. Canada believes it is essential
to strengthen the working relationships among the
Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations and the humanitarian agencies. Each must be
fully integrated in the consultative and planning processes
for complex emergencies. We must also expand and
integrate the roles played by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other United Nations agencies
responsible for protecting human rights. We welcome the
establishment of the working group of the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security and the Executive
Committee on Humanitarian Affairs to better define the
relationship between special representatives of the
Secretary-General and humanitarian coordinators, as well as
those of the human rights and other components of United
Nations missions.
The support that political organizations can extend to
their humanitarian counterparts should not be narrowly
conceived. As the Secretary-General indicates in his report,
the Security Council should give consideration to
developing a range of options to maintain law and order
and to create a secure environment for civilians endangered
by conflict, and for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in conflict situations. Allow me to enumerate a few of the
approaches that Canada believes to be the most promising.
The Secretary-General’s report emphasizes the
importance of international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law in helping to protect individuals and to build
durable peace. All States must respect basic humanitarian
principles and comply with their international legal
obligations. Disseminating the principles and provisions,
and monitoring implementation and compliance, are
essential steps in promoting their effectiveness. Take, for
example, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, which received its crucial
fortieth ratification only two weeks ago. Our efforts must
now turn towards ensuring universal ratification, towards
monitoring compliance and towards disseminating the
principles of the Convention.
Like the establishment of international tribunals to
adjudicate violations of international humanitarian law in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, the recent agreement
in Rome to establish the International Criminal Court is a
major step towards eliminating a culture of impunity and
improving protection for victims of conflict. By
demonstrating our intent to hold individuals accountable for
the atrocities they commit, the Court will help to deter
some of the most serious violations of international

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
humanitarian law and will give new meaning and global
reach to the protection of refugees and other victims of
conflicts.
Among those who need protection during conflict,
none are more vulnerable than children. The targeting of
children in warfare, both as fighters and as victims, is
intolerable. The ground-breaking efforts of Graça Machel
and the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara
Otunnu, merit special and ongoing support. Canada also
applauds the increased attention the Security Council has
focused on the practice of recruiting child combatants and
the attention it has brought to the issue of the
demobilization of child combatants.
As the report of the Secretary General on the
protection of humanitarian assistance highlights, the
routine physical danger encountered by humanitarian
workers is a subject that demands immediate attention and
vigorous action. Attacks on personnel who volunteer to
work in highly insecure and unstable environments in
order to bring succour to those in desperate need have
increased dramatically. In an ominous development,
civilian deaths now exceed those of the military among
those who represent the United Nations in the field.
Canada is profoundly concerned at the numerous attacks
perpetrated against United Nations personnel and the staff
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and other humanitarian organizations. The growing
number of casualties among humanitarian workers
demands that we give urgent attention to improving
security measures for humanitarian personnel, including,
of course, local employees. If we are to continue to ask
workers to operate in such dangerous environments, we
owe it to them to ensure that practical measures, as
outlined by the Secretary-General, are taken to provide
for their protection.
At the same time, we must not fail to place the
responsibility for the safety of humanitarian workers
where it belongs first and foremost — with the parties to
the conflict. State and non-State entities alike must be
held accountable for the protection of United Nations and
other aid workers operating in territory under their
control.
As the report before us indicates, as a result of the
right of civilians to international protection and assistance,
humanitarian access cannot be arbitrarily denied. Where
humanitarian personnel have come under attack, no effort
should be spared to ensure that those responsible are

27

Security Council
Fifty-third year
brought swiftly to justice. While the illegality of such
attacks has never been in doubt, further clarification that
they constitute a war crime under article 8 of the Statute of
the International Criminal Court is welcome indeed.
Reversing the widespread availability of small arms is
a further measure to be pursued in support of humanitarian
assistance. The challenges arising from the proliferation and
widespread abuse of small arms and light weapons are
complex; but the impact on the security of the most
vulnerable — as well as United Nations and humanitarian
personnel — is clear, direct and devastating. Canada is
therefore pursuing a three-pronged approach to this
challenge, dealing with the illicit trade, the licit trade and
the peace-building challenges of small arms proliferation.
The challenges before the international community in
the face of ongoing humanitarian tragedies are indeed
grave. There can be no doubt of the urgent need for
sustained political engagement — not least from the
Security Council — for effective responses to be
implemented. Be assured that in this endeavour the Council
will have Canada’s unwavering support.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Mr. President, it is a pleasure
for me to participate in this debate under your presidency
and to render tribute to you for the exceptionally
transparent manner in which Sweden is conducting the
affairs of the Security Council during this month.
Through you, we would also like to salute your
predecessor, Ambassador Danilo Türk of Slovenia, for the
manner in which he guided the affairs of the Council
during the preceding month.
Allow me, Sir, to express our gratitude to you for
arranging today’s meeting to consider the report of the
Secretary-General on protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in conflict situations. We must also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive reports
on various aspects of the causes of conflict in Africa, as
well as for his recommendations for the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in the region.
These reports have generated enormous interest among the
Member States and encouraged them to address the issues
involved with a sense of due urgency.

28

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
In his latest report, the Secretary-General has aptly
identified the obstacles in the way of effective
humanitarian operations in various parts of the world.
Refugees, displaced persons, other victims of conflicts,
and humanitarian personnel are subjected to cruel
treatment both in conflict areas and in post-conflict
situations. They face adversities, despite the existence of
a substantial body of international law and principles
evolved over a long period of time to protect civilians,
refugees and humanitarian personnel.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocols of 1977 are well established norms of
international humanitarian law for the protection of
civilians and other persons who are not party to any
hostilities. Similarly, the 1951 Convention and the 1967
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees are the
principal international instruments concerning the
protection of refugees. We have a collective responsibility
in ensuring effective adherence to these legal codes by the
Members of the United Nations.
We share the view of the Secretary-General that
there is a perennial problem of effective compliance by
Member States with the relevant norms, principles and
provisions of international law in conflict situations.
These codes are particularly violated in situations of
internal conflict where whole societies are mobilized for
war, including armed groups, militias, foreign
mercenaries, child soldiers, criminals and other desperate
groups. There should be concerted efforts to create
awareness about the responsibilities of State authorities
for violations of humanitarian norms.
In this connection, we welcome the establishment of
the International Criminal Court, having jurisdiction over
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the
crime of aggression. Pakistan actively participated in the
deliberations of the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference in Rome.
It is our firm conviction that refugees, displaced
persons and other victims of conflict should be provided
protection and assistance under international law. In
fulfilling its moral obligations under international law,
Pakistan continues to host close to 1.5 million Afghan
refugees. Despite the adverse impact of such a large
number of refugees on our political, social and economic
systems, we will continue to provide shelter to these
Afghan refugees. Unfortunately, there has been a
continuing reduction in the assistance provided by the
international community for the Afghan refugees in

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Pakistan. They seem to have been totally abandoned by the
international community.
Conflict situations also persist in other parts of our
region, resulting in similar problems of displaced persons,
civilian victims and gross human rights violations.
The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out the
problem of humanitarian access in conflict areas. There is
a need for an in- depth study aimed at ascertaining the
reasons for the growing resistance in some societies to
unhindered access to humanitarian organizations. We also
agree with the assertion of the Secretary- General that the
“issue of resources is of critical importance not only
for the purpose of ensuring access but also for the
provision of humanitarian assistance itself.
Humanitarian access must be supported by sufficient
funds” (S/1998/883, para. 21).
In recent years, a number of humanitarian operations
have been undertaken by the United Nations in conflict
areas through the establishment of safety zones, safe areas,
neutralized zones, demilitarized zones and safe corridors.
While these efforts were generally welcomed by the
international community, the double standard in enforcing
humanitarian access in different parts of the world has
become the subject of criticism by Member States and
humanitarian agencies alike. We believe that there should
be uniform humanitarian treatment for all, irrespective of
cast, colour or region.
It is a matter of grave concern that between January
1992 and August 1998, 153 United Nations international
and local staff members lost their lives in the line of duty.
We render our condolences to their bereaved families. This
issue needs to be addressed on a priority basis. Some of the
reasons for such occurrences have been identified in the
report of the Secretary- General, the most important reason
being
“A general mistrust and suspicion regarding the
motives and intentions of humanitarian organizations”
(ibid., para. 27)
We need to study in greater detail the reasons for suspicion
and mistrust, and suggest effective measures to curtail these
negative tendencies.
While we believe that the General Assembly has
primary responsibility for providing policy guidance for the
United Nations humanitarian operations, the Security

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Council must also continue to play its due role in the
complex dynamics of conflicts in various parts of the
world. However, care needs to be taken so that
discrimination is avoided and selectivity is minimized.
In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm our support
for and cooperation with for the Secretary-General in his
efforts to identify the causes of conflict and for the
promotion of durable peace in Africa and in other parts of
the world.
The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Pohan (Indonesia): I should like to begin by
extending the Indonesian delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for submitting his report on protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations, and to you, Mr. President, for
convening the meeting today on this issue.
In our view, this is an issue of critical importance to
the international community, particularly in this post-coldwar era when refugees, peacekeepers and humanitarian
assistance personnel in conflict situations sometimes risk
their security and even their life. Indonesia has noted
various aspects of the report, especially those relating to
the protection of personnel, which warrant our serious
consideration. The report also defines the role of the
international community in preventing the risk of
humanitarian catastrophe due either to economic
difficulties or to a shortage of basic humanitarian
necessities.
Indonesia has in the past not only supported
concerted international efforts in alleviating the misery of
people caught up in conflicts but also has contributed to
numerous peacekeeping operations and related activities.
In this context, the United Nations, in the interests of
objectivity and impartiality, should play a greater role as
the coordinator of humanitarian assistance and should
base its activities on the guiding principles contained in
General Assembly resolution 46/182. It is our view that
many of the issues included in the Security Council’s
agenda have a humanitarian dimension, where refugees
and other displaced persons are the victims of conflicts

29

Security Council
Fifty-third year
and the environment is always more hostile when they are
denied humanitarian assistance and protection.
Refugees, displaced persons and other civilians in
conflict situations have a fundamental right under
international humanitarian law to humanitarian assistance.
Therefore, it is a daunting yet sacred task for humanitarian
workers and their agencies to ensure the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance. As is stated in paragraph 2 of the
annex to General Assembly resolution 46/182,
“Humanitarian assistance must be provided in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality”.
In our perception, humanity implies humanitarian action to
relieve suffering and to introduce fundamental values —
namely, life and human dignity — while neutrality implies
a refusal to take sides in hostilities, and impartiality implies
providing individuals with their basic needs, irrespective of
their affiliation with any group or factions.
Hence, a prerequisite for effective humanitarian action
is respect for these principles and the imperative of
alleviating human suffering by mitigating the effects of
conflict. Failure to uphold such principles will put human
lives, including those of humanitarian workers, in jeopardy.
In the same vein, the use of humanitarian assistance could
also be a tool for the parties concerned to achieve political
objectives. For us, the political objective should be to
defuse the conflict while maintaining the impartiality of
humanitarian actions. In order to remain effective and
preserve their independence and neutrality, humanitarian
actions should be kept distinct from political or military
activities.
My delegation views the relationship and cooperation
between peacekeeping and humanitarian operations as
complex. They are also undoubtedly complementary.
However, as clearly expressed by the heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Countries at their recent
meeting in Durban, South Africa, it is essential to make a
distinction between humanitarian action and United Nations
peacekeeping and peace enforcement, which is a view also
shared by numerous humanitarian agencies.
In situations where decisions would be taken by the
Security Council to deploy humanitarian operations, the
Council should consider measures for the protection of
humanitarian workers and also take steps to ensure the
impartiality of humanitarian agencies.

30

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
We would like also to stress that while humanitarian
assistance is being extended, concerns for the respect of
a country’s national laws should be taken into account.
Paragraph 16 of the report refers to the fact that States
deny access and defend such actions by invoking the
principle of national sovereignty in matters deemed
essentially within their domestic jurisdiction. We believe
that it is essential to recognize the sacrosanct principles of
independence and territorial integrity, which do not
absolve States from fulfilling their responsibilities to
refugees and others in conflict situations.
Nonetheless, the international community should
ensure that victims receive the assistance and protection
they need to safeguard their lives. Humanitarian personnel
should respect the national laws of those countries in
which they are operating in order to allow them to
perform efficiently their task of assisting the affected
civilian population, including refugees and internally
displaced persons.
The Indonesian delegation would like once again to
convey its appreciation for the Secretary-General’s report
and pledges its cooperation to achieve the objectives
contained therein and to ensure the smooth and effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the safety of
personnel.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Norway. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is an honour for me to
address the Council during the Swedish presidency.
On behalf of Norway, I would like express
appreciation for the Secretary-General's report on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations.
We would like to support the European Union
statement, with which we fully agree. In addition, I would
like to emphasize some points that we believe are of
particular importance.
First, the necessity of ensuring consistency and
coordination between humanitarian action and broader
United Nations peace and development activities should
be stressed. The contribution of targeted and efficient
assistance to people in distress is an important objective
of Norway's humanitarian policy. Providing protection
and assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998

often means operating in areas of conflict. Humanitarian
assistance should therefore always be part of a broader
international effort aimed at seeking political solutions and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts. In order to ensure a
cohesive response, the possible role of humanitarian
assistance in contributing to such broader goals should
therefore be analysed.

devoted to “Children and armed conflict” serve to give
focus to the inseparable twin themes of protection for
humanitarian assistance on the one hand and protection of
children in war on the other. UNICEF appreciates the
significance that this represents when seen in the context
of the influence of the Security Council on the affairs of
nation States.

Secondly, to improve the current situation, it is
important that those responsible for violations of
international law, including international humanitarian law,
be brought to justice. The International Criminal Court
should fulfil its potential by ensuring better accountability
of States, non-State actors and individuals. All Member
States are encouraged to sign and ratify the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and other relevant international
instruments.

It is not our intention to reconnoitre every subject.
We participated in those previous debates, or we helped
to inform their content. The speeches and views are on
record. We have listened carefully today and find
ourselves again in agreement with the great part of what
has been said. In particular, we strongly associate
ourselves with the visceral horror that everyone feels at
the pattern of targeting and slaughtering civilian
populations at will — populations, as the Deputy
Secretary-General noted, made up overwhelmingly of
children and women. There is no question about it — we
live in an age of madness, where flesh-and-blood human
beings in many conflicts are given no more value than
inanimate objects that are trampled and dismembered.

Thirdly, problems that have a negative impact on the
security situation of humanitarian workers could be
addressed in the context of a humanitarian strategy that
includes preventive measures. Such measures might be
based on international humanitarian law and could include
training for democracy and human rights.
Finally, firm measures must be taken against parties
that deliberately attack civilian staff members of the United
Nations and the personnel of humanitarian organizations. In
this context, I would like to mention that my Government,
in order to support training and enhanced security
management, has contributed $100,000 to the recently
established United Nations Trust Fund for the security of
United Nations personnel, referred to in paragraph 50 of the
Secretary-General's report. We encourage other Member
States to also provide resources to this fund.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is Mr. Stephen Lewis, Deputy Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Lewis (United Nations Children's Fund): Thank
you immensely, Mr. President, for giving the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) this opportunity.
The combination of the Secretary-General's excellent
report that informs today's debate, the strong and thoughtful
statement of the Deputy Secretary-General that introduced
it, the previous debate in May 1997, and the presidential
statement following that debate last June specifically

Against this background, we note the desperate
vulnerability — compounded time and time again — of
refugee populations and the internally displaced. We
reiterate again that children must be a distinct and priority
concern in all actions to promote peace, implement peace
agreements and resolve conflicts; that every peace
agreement must include specific reference to the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers; that
children's rights and special needs, of every kind, must be
specifically and systematically included in the mandates
authorizing such actions; that we must dramatically
reduce the availability of small arms and light weapons
which serve to transform children into junior militarists;
and that we must train all personnel — civilian, military
and peacekeeping — on their legal responsibilities to
children, particularly to protect them from egregious
violations of their rights — and, in that way, incidentally,
contribute to the development of national capacity. Above
all, we must challenge the obscenity of impunity through
the use of the International Criminal Court.
We have said all that before, and more, especially in
the context of the Graça Machel study. Today there are
three matters that we would particularly like to emphasize
before the Council, all of them flowing from comments
within the Secretary-General's report and, of course,
within the particular mandate of UNICEF.

31

Security Council
Fifty-third year
First, there is the matter of child soldiers. UNICEF
could not help but note that in the presidential statement of
29 June last, as in the report before us, there is no specific
reference to the age of recruitment. There is a strong
denunciation of the recruitment and use of children in
hostilities in violation of international law, but no reference
to age. UNICEF understands the sensitivities within the
Council, and it is not our intention to aggravate them. But
we feel morally obliged to say that until the age of 18 is
universally embraced as the minimum age of recruitment,
whether by way of adoption of the optional protocol or the
amendment of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
there will continue to be, in one sordid conflict after
another, the reckless abuse of children as child soldiers.
We recoil with horror at the idea of 10-, 11- and 12year-olds employed as fighters, porters, cooks, messengers
and sex slaves in regular and irregular armies. But we put
it to the Council that in terms of the effective damage —
some would say destruction — of a child's present and
future life, 15-, 16- and 17-year-olds are equally vulnerable.
We see the toll that is taken and try to deal with it on the
ground, every day, whether in Sierra Leone or, more
recently, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Children engaged in hostilities as soldiers are deprived of
every single right granted under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. UNICEF would argue that only when
we have an international agreement on the age of 18 will
we be able to say that we have put the protection of the
lives and psyches and futures of children ahead of other
considerations. When the international community
equivocates over the age of recruitment, it sends a sadly
ambiguous message to the military predators who haunt the
zones of conflict looking for children to abduct, to seduce
or to conscript.
Secondly, there is the matter of the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel. Many individuals and agencies
and nation States have spoken feelingly and eloquently of
the dangers to humanitarian personnel working in the field.
The Secretary-General's report provides statistics. Please
allow me to put information specifically from UNICEF on
the record.
In the past four years, 14 of our staff members have
died in conflict situations, and in the past two years alone,
25 others have been seriously injured, mostly by gunshot.
We have also dealt with the nightmare of rape. Indeed,
following the rape of a staff member in Goma on 12 May
1997, UNICEF made sure that every single office would
have access to post-exposure treatment for the HIV/AIDS
virus within 24 hours. If taken immediately after exposure,

32

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
this cocktail of medication significantly reduces the risk
of transmission. This approach is now being pursued
system-wide throughout the United Nations.
May I add that we are also pioneering the
development of an incident-tracking system that will be
made available to Member States and our colleagues
throughout the United Nations, and we have now
distributed Security Awareness Training programmes to
over 200 duty stations. I suspect that most of the United
Nations system is aware of our preoccupation with
security imperatives and our equivalent preoccupation
with the need for resources to address them. That is why
the Secretary-General's plea for resources is no idle
addendum: it speaks to the heart of the matter.
Thirdly and finally, there is the matter of respect for
international human rights and humanitarian law. This is
obviously the crux of this debate. Whether we are dealing
with refugee populations or the internally displaced;
whether we are dealing with peacekeepers or
humanitarian workers; whether we are dealing with bona
fide Governments or opposition groups or rogue
militias — everything hinges on the sanctity and
observance of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
Having said that, I would like to engage in a piece
of UNICEF dialectic. When the Convention on the Rights
of the Child was drafted, one of its most celebrated
aspects was the principle of indivisibility — that is, all
rights are equal: political, civil, economic, social and
cultural. Equal. It was a triumph of consensus. It then
became a manifestation of consensus when 191 countries
ratified the Convention and embraced its contents as
binding international law.
However, what is not always recognized about the
Convention on the Rights of the Child is another variant
of the principle of indivisibility: the Convention on the
Rights of the Child is the only international human rights
instrument which explicitly incorporates international
humanitarian law. The two are as one within the articles
of the Convention. What that means, of course, is that
instead of for ever trying to find a way of meshing human
rights law and humanitarian law, we have an existing
international covenant which does it for us, and were that
to be recognized and employed for children in conflict
situations, we would have the concrete expression of a
goal which the Security Council espouses.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Do we exaggerate? I think not. Let me take a moment
to remind the Council of article 38, paragraph 1, of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child:
“States Parties undertake to respect and to
ensure respect for rules of international
humanitarian law applicable to them in armed
conflicts which are relevant to the child.”
This is further underscored by paragraph 4, which
invokes international humanitarian law to ensure the
protection and care of children who are affected by armed
conflict.
Could it be more clear? Here we have a human rights
Convention giving the imprimatur of primacy — and
legitimacy — to international humanitarian law in conflict
situations. It represents the very core of this whole debate.
I am not going to be a chauvinist for the Convention.
It stands on its own. But it must not be depreciated simply
because it deals with children. There is always the tendency
to marginalize children in international debate. In this
instance, that would be folly because the Convention gives
exact expression to everything the Security Council wants
to achieve.
As I close, I must emphasize again how
extraordinarily valuable it is to have the Security Council
initiate these deliberations and permit our participation.
Every debate takes us another step forward. UNICEF is on
the ground before conflict, during conflict and after
conflict. Like our colleagues in the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, we wrestle with
these issues every hour of the day. We are inescapably
involved, whether with child refugees or internally
displaced children or any children made vulnerable by war.
As it happens, as we speak, Carol Bellamy, our Executive
Director, is on her way to Sierra Leone. It never ends. But
along the way, all of these pressing and critical issues arise,
and they must be dealt with.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is Mrs. Sylvie Junod, head of the delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
her to take a seat at the Council table and to make her
statement.

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red
Cross): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Council for the opportunity to
take part in this important debate.
Taking action to help the victims of conflict has
always involved a degree of risk. What is new and
particularly alarming about the tragedies of recent years
is the ever more violent and volatile environments in
which refugees, displaced persons and other victims of
conflicts find themselves, and in which humanitarian
organizations are expected to operate. It is in these new
environments that humanitarian workers are being
deliberately targeted and killed. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report, it is in this context that the
urgency and importance of addressing today's topic should
be seen.
There are a number of reasons why the security
problem has become more acute over the past few years.
Many of them have already been mentioned by other
speakers. We would like, however, to outline, without
being exhaustive, some factors contributing to the
worsening of the situation.
Economic interests, as well as criminal elements
engaged in drug- and weapons-trafficking, are often
involved. Organized crime and banditry play an important
role in many of today's conflicts. Bandits and many
armed groups covet the often considerable and highly
visible material deployed by humanitarian organizations.
They also know that most of the time these items are not
protected in any way and that no action will likely be
taken if they are stolen. Humanitarian organizations are
simply considered easy targets. The abduction of
expatriates for money is a new and growing dimension of
banditry. The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) would like to express its solidarity with
organizations that have been so targeted, in particular
those whose staff have been taken hostage or killed.
Another reason is that humanitarian action is being
increasingly politicized. Humanitarian action conceals the
fact that Governments are unwilling to take the risks
involved in addressing the root causes of conflict.
However, humanitarian action can be no substitute for
political settlements.
A further problem is that civilians continue to be the
main target of armed hostilities — indeed, they are
increasingly becoming an integral part of political and
military strategies. As a result, the main challenges today

33

Security Council
Fifty-third year
are the protection and upholding of the rights of a civilian
population, rather than merely material assistance, and the
promotion of a new culture of accountability to replace that
of impunity. When the aim of parties to a conflict is to
annihilate an ethnic group or permanently remove it from
a given territory, humanitarian workers can become
embarrassing witnesses, and humanitarian action as such
might be perceived as running counter to the objectives of
warring parties.
Yet another factor is that in certain parts of the world
humanitarian action is associated with “the West” and is
perceived as a vehicle for the spread of “Western values”.
This misconception means that international humanitarian
work in such places is accepted only with great reluctance,
if not completely opposed.
Confronted with these new challenges, humanitarian
action needs to adapt, and organizations need to work
together. With this in mind, the ICRC is firmly committed
to pursuing the following practical steps.
First, we must work more through local contacts and
networks. The ICRC has multiplied its efforts to enhance
the acceptance of its work not only by the people it seeks
to assist, but also by the warring parties and local
authorities.
Secondly, we must strengthen the ICRC's ability to
understand today's new conflicts by analysing political,
social and economic aspects, in order to better adapt its
operations.
Thirdly, we need to strive to develop a more coherent
approach to the various authorities in the field.
Humanitarian organizations are finding it more and more
difficult to gain access to the victims. Differences in ethics
and failure to respect certain principles can be hazardous to
the safety of humanitarian personnel. A common approach
by humanitarian organizations is necessary, and the
promotion of the Code of Conduct for the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental
Organizations in Disaster Relief should be pursued.
Fourthly, we must seek a more balanced relationship
between humanitarian organizations and the media, whose
growing influence has made public advocacy common
practice. While a degree of publicity is necessary for any
organization, there have been too many exaggerated
attempts to be in the picture at any cost, regardless of the
risks involved.

34

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
It should be emphasized that faithful implementation
of the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
as well as of refugee law and the various human rights
instruments, first and foremost aims at increasing respect
for the civilian population, including refugees and the
internally displaced.
In our view, a fundamental condition for any
humanitarian operation involving humanitarian assistance
or protection is the consent of the warring parties. Such
action should never be imposed by force. Rather, it must
be transparent in its objectives and impartial in its
implementation. Discussion and persuasion should be used
to negotiate access for humanitarian action, in full
accordance with the basic principles of neutrality and
impartiality. If one's work is accepted, one faces less risk.
It may be recalled that, during last year's debate on
this topic, the ICRC expressed the opinion that
humanitarian organizations need to preserve the strictly
non-political and impartial character of their work, the
perception of which could be jeopardized by the presence
of armed escorts. While ICRC delegations have hired
armed guards for its premises and staff residences against
criminal acts, it does not intend their use as protection for
humanitarian activities in the field or to have military
personnel or armed escorts in conflict areas. I know that
this is a well-known position, but it is maintained by my
organization. Humanitarian work must be clearly
dissociated from any military operations aimed at
ensuring security and restoring law and order in regions
plagued by violence.
In every situation, clarity regarding the sharing of
tasks between the various actors remains one of the best
guarantees for effective security and, in essence, the
ICRC feels that the following measures should be
respected.
First, humanitarian action must not become the main
instrument of foreign policy. Political entities should
focus on finding political settlement to a conflict.
Secondly, any international military presence, such as a
peacekeeping force, should have a clear and appropriate
mandate and not simply become a supplier of
humanitarian assistance. That can easily lead to confusion
and a distorted perception of humanitarian work. Thirdly,
the primary responsibility for the implementation of
international norms lies with the States. The ICRC and
other agencies, such as the United Nations Children's
Fund, can only assist in this endeavour.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Finally, we would like to emphasize once more that
combating impunity is the key factor in the prevention of
future violations.
The President: The next speaker is Mr. Kofi
Asomani, Director of the Liaison Office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at United
Nations Headquarters, to whom the Council has extended
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Asomani (Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
report of the Secretary-General on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations.
I should also like to thank all those who have made
generous remarks about the work of the Office of the High
Commissioner.
The report under consideration is of great importance
to the whole humanitarian community and to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), and we are deeply appreciative that the Council
is once again devoting the necessary attention to these
issues. I must say here that the report might not have seen
the light of day without contributions from several United
Nations sister organizations, agencies and departments, as
well as the keen advice and support of a number of
delegations in the Council, including, Mr. President, your
own.
In her introduction this morning, the Deputy SecretaryGeneral very competently placed the report of the
Secretary-General in the right context. Many delegations
have elaborated on key elements of the report. Allow me,
however, to share UNHCR's perspectives on aspects of the
report.
First, there is a need to strengthen compliance by both
State and non-State actors within the provisions of
international law. This problem of compliance has
dramatically worsened in recent years because of the
changing pattern of conflicts. Forced displacement of
civilian populations is now often a direct objective, rather
than a by-product of war. Many conflict situations have
been rendered particularly complex and violent because of
the involvement of militias, criminals and other disparate
groups that may have little knowledge of or respect for the

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
rules of international law. A further problem has been the
failure to bring to justice those who violate the law,
resulting in the development of what are now
characterized as “cultures of impunity”. This has been
particularly evident in the Great Lakes region of Africa,
and more recently in Kosovo.
To reverse these trends, UNHCR strongly supports
the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding the
vigorous promotion of accession to international legal
instruments, the dissemination and advocacy of
humanitarian principles, and more effective mechanisms
to ensure compliance with international law. Effective
compliance is also linked, in our view, to the important
concepts of burden-sharing and solidarity, which have
been stressed by other speakers. In this connection, I am
pleased to mention that this theme — the theme of
solidarity and burden-sharing — will be at the centre of
the debate of the governing council of UNHCR — the
Executive Committee — which will start meeting next
Monday in Geneva.
Secondly, there is the issue of humanitarian access,
which has been increasingly hampered in recent years by
various factors, including general insecurity arising from
conflict, the inability or unwillingness of parties to allow
access and, finally, obstruction of access, often through
armed attacks. The Secretary-General's report rightly
reaffirms that States have primary responsibility for
ensuring that refugees, internally displaced persons and
other civilians in conflict situations benefit from the
necessary assistance and protection and that United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations must have
safe and unimpeded access to these groups. Furthermore,
these groups do have a right to humanitarian assistance
and protection, and therefore humanitarian access should
not be seen as a concession to be granted to humanitarian
organizations on an arbitrary basis.
Predictable mechanisms should be developed to
ensure security and access for humanitarian operations.
Already, a number of measures are under consideration in
connection with the Secretary-General's Africa report
recommendations. In particular, efforts should be made to
ensure that refugee camps are located at a reasonable
distance from international borders, that armed
combatants are separated from refugees and other
civilians, and that trade in arms to conflict areas is
adequately monitored and regulated. I am pleased to
inform the Council, in connection with ongoing measures
being developed, that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNHCR are collaborating in preparing

35

Security Council
Fifty-third year
and elaborating a matrix that presents the range of options
which may be deployed in different security situations
where there are refugees and internally displaced persons.
Thirdly, I wish to highlight concerns that relate to the
safety and security of the personnel of the United Nations
and other humanitarian organizations. As the Deputy
Secretary-General has pointed out, there has been a
disturbing increase in recent years in the number and scale
of direct, calculated attacks or use of force against
humanitarian personnel.
Actors in conflict situations disrupt humanitarian
actions which they consider as undermining their own
strategic goals. Regrettably, there is even a desire to
remove actual or potential witnesses to human rights abuses
and other violations of international law by creating an
environment in which it is not safe for them to operate.
The existing instruments of international law, as many
speakers before me have said, do not effectively cover the
security needs of United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel. The Secretary-General's report outlines a number
of measures required to reinforce the safety of humanitarian
personnel, and UNHCR fully supports them. In particular,
UNHCR welcomes the provisions of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court whereby attacks against both
United Nations and other humanitarian personnel now
constitute war crimes and fall within the jurisdiction of the
Court.
As the Ambassador of France noted this morning, I
would, in the same vein, like to take advantage of this
occasion to remind the Council about the plight of our
French colleague, Mr. Vincent Cochetel, who was abducted
in North Ossetia 243 days ago. We still hope he will be
found and will be released soon.
Fourthly, I wish to highlight the role of the Security
Council in humanitarian operations. In the open debate,
held on 24 April 1998, on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Africa, the High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, strongly stressed how
humanitarian crises, particularly large-scale refugee
situations, often affect international peace and security, for
which the Security Council has primary responsibility. It is
therefore essential that the Security Council be kept
regularly informed of the humanitarian situation in cases of
potential or actual conflict, to ensure that humanitarian
activities are not viewed in isolation from the overall social,
political and economic context. Such actions may also
ensure that timely and appropriate action is taken.

36

3932nd meeting
29 September 1998
UNHCR therefore warmly welcomes the growing
commitment of the Council to these issues, and it is our
fervent hope that it will be accompanied by concrete
follow-up measures.
One final concern remains to be highlighted: the
need for adequate resources to implement these protective
measures. This need fuels a tension which we, as
operational agencies, must confront on a daily basis in
several humanitarian operations. A very current example
is the case of Guinea (Conakry), where all the
humanitarian actors are convinced of the need to establish
Sierra Leonean refugee camps at a reasonable distance
from the border, in accordance with the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report. This measure
is required in order to lessen the dangers of infiltration of
undesirable armed elements into the refugee settlements.
However, we continue to ponder whether the costs
involved are too high, and in the meantime the security
situation continues to deteriorate.
I would like to end on this somewhat grim note
regarding the tensions that we have to live with between
resources and needs relating to the protection for
humanitarian assistance.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
