VD.

Resolutlo111 adopted on Che reportl of the Fourth Committee

Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34 / 33.

lnformadon from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under Article 73 e of
the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation
with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 33/37 of 13 December
1978, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter9 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 10
Deploring the fact that some Member States having
responsibilities for the administration of Non-SelfGoverning Territories have ceased to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to
that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the
Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chap. XXXIII.
10 Al34/SS4.

34/34.

201

Question of Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat
and the Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories listed above, in particular
General Assembly resolution 33/35 of 13 December
1978,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above, 12
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration, on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results that can be
achieved as a consequence of United Nations visiting
missions to colonial Territories, which provide an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories
visited, and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of
such missions is essential for securing adequate and firsthand information in regard to the political, economic
and social conditions in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territories concerned and stressing the necessity of diversifying and
strengthening further their economies as a matter of
priority in order to promote economic stability and reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and the Turks and Caicos Islands;13
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. IV; V,
annexes 111-V; VI, annex III; and XXI-XXV.
12 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meeting, paras. 7-16; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
13 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.I), chaps. XXI-XXV.

General Aambly-Thlrty-fourtb Sesllon

202

3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. · Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, in consultation with the freely
elected representatives of the peoples of the Territories
concerned, to continue to take all the necessary steps
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set
forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories;
• 5. Calls upon the administering Power to expand its
programme of budgetary aid and to take all possible
steps, in consultation with the local authorities, as appropriate, to diversify and strengthen further the economies
of the Territories listed above and to work out concrete
programmes of assistance and economic development
for those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to
safeguard the malienable right of the peoples of those
Territories to the enjoyment of their natural resources by
taking effective measures which guarantee the right of
the peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
1. Requests the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected authorities and representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to pay
particular attention to the training of qualified local
personnel;
8. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations
visiting missions in the Territories under its administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee
to continue his consultations with a view to the dispatch
of such missions, as appropriate;
9. Welcomes in particular the invitation of the
Government of the United Kingdom to the Special·
Committee to dispatch a visiting mission to the Turks
and Caicos Islands in 1980;
10. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in
accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of those Territories;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos .Islands, including the possible
dispatch of visiting missions in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

34/35.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to

the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, u
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to American Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in American Samoa, 15
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as a
consequence of previous visiting missions to Non-SelfGoverning Territories and reiterating its conviction that
the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing
adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein
with respect to their future status,
Welcoming the positive attitude of the administering
Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations
visiting missions,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American
Samoa and stressing the necessity of diversifying the
Territory's economy as a matter of priority in order to
reduce its dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
American Samoa;10
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people of
American Samoa, to continue to take all the necessary
steps to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the
goals set forth in the Declaration with respect to the
Territory;
5. Urges the administering Power to continue its
efforts to ensure that the culture and identity of the
people of the Territory shall continue to be reflected in
the Government and administration of the Territory and
preserved to the fullest extent;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to continue
to take all possible steps to strengthen and diversify the
economy of American Samoa and to work out concrete
programmes of assistance and economic development
for the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of
American Samoa;
Ibid., chaps. IV and XIX.
u Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meeting, paras. 17-21.
18 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.I), chap. XIX.
14
