,

UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAH
h
MEETING:

28 MARCH

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/2424)
Adoption

1

............................................

of the agenda ......................................................

1

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) ..........

of

WPV.2424

1

--==w

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ a , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document indicates
the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system adopted
in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council.
The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January
1965, became fulty operative on that date.

2424th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,

28 March 1983, at 11 a.m.
Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Purushottam (India), Mr.
Serajzadeh (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr.Mufioz
Ledo (Mexico), Mr, &ores Typuldos (Panama), Mr. Pastor
de la Torre (Peru), Mr. Arcilla (Philippines), Mr. de Pin&
(Spain) Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mrs.
Coronel de Rodriguez (Venezuela) Mr. Hoang Bich Son
(Vie! Nam) and Mr. SiloviC (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them a! the side of the Council chamber.

President: Sir John THOMSON

(United Kingdom,
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Presenl: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

1. Adoption
2,

2. ThTmT?itES~Y
~sli~~10&XX$&im
meme
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bulgaria, El Salvador, the German
Democratic Republic, Italy, Mongolia and the Syrian
Arab Republic in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

of the agenda.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15651).
The meeting was called to order at J2.05 pm.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tsyetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Resales Rivera (El Salvador), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. La Rocca (Italy), Mr.
Narkhuu (Mongolia) and Mr. Ef-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15651)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2420!h to
2423rd meetings], I invite the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Honduras to take a place at the Security
Council table, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the Dominican Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Ecuador, Grenada, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Mexico, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Spain, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda. I
should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents: S/15654, a letter
dated 24 March 1983 from the representative of Mongolia to the President of the Security Council; and
S/15656, a letter dated 25 March 1983 from the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua to the
President of the Security Council.
4. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Honduras, Mr. Edgardo Paz Barnica. I welcome him
and invite him to make his statement.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Paz Barnica
(Honduras) took a place a! the Council table, Mr. Abada
(Algeria),
Mr, Mufiiz (Argentina),
Mr. Moseley
(Barbados), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. Salazar Paredes
(Bolivia), Mr. Bueno (Brazil), Mr.Sanz de Santamaria
(Colombia), Mr. Zumbado Jimenez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa
Kouri (Cuba), Mr, Al-Alfi (Democratic
Yemen), Mr.
Knipping Victoria (Dominican Republic), Mr. Jelonek
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador),

5. Mr.
from

PAZ BARNICA
(Honduras) (interpretation
Spanish): I wanted to speak personally in this

debate to reiterate what the representative of Honduras
has already said in this international forum and to clear
up any doubts that might still exist concerning the position of my Government on the painful internal conflict
that is now occurring in the sister Republic of
Nicaragua.
I

6, It is unusual for a State member of the Organization
of American States (OAS), which Nicaragua is, to have
recourse to the Security Council without having first
addressed itself to the regional body, in keeping with
Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations and in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the Organization of American states. HOWever, my Government is not shunning debate in this
world Organization, and it is participating in it in the
hope that we can agree on a civilized and peaCefU1 sob
tion to the complex problems of Central America.

the polls in 1981 to elect the President of the Republic,
representatives to the National Congress and municipal
mayors, with the participation of more than 80 per cent
of the electorate, and won international praise. The process towards Honduras democratization culminated on
27 January 1982 when President Roberto Suazo Cordova
assumed the presidency, supported by the majority of the
Honduran people, in the presence of various officials of
American countries, including Commander
Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, the Co-ordinator of the Governing
Junta of National Reconstruction of the Republic of
Nicaragua.

7, I have said and wish to repeat that the Government
of Nicaragua is involved in an armed struggle of an internal nature: Nicaraguans are fighting against Nicaraguans
on Nicaraguan soil. The present outbreak of violence,
unfortunately, is not sudden or unexpected. To any
impartial observer it was obvious that a few months
after the triumph of the Sandinist Revolution-which
had aroused such high hopes at the time of victory over
the dictatorship-it had begun like Saturn to devour its
own sons. Members of the Governing Junta of National
Reconstruction, like other high State officials, had not
only abandoned their governmental functions but had
atso openly and resolutely joined the opposition. Among
others there were Violeta de Chamorro; Alfonso Robelo,
Arturo Cruz, ex-members of the Governing Junta; Eden
Pastora, a hero of the Revolution, ex-Deputy Minister of
Defence and former Chief of the Sandinist People’s Militia; and many others who did not wish to take part in
diverting the Revolution from it original concepts. As
cause or effect of that fact, the regime has turned repressive. The prisons are full of political prisoners, basic ipdividual and social guarantees have been restricted and
freedom of the press and even of worship have been
limited, as was obvious during the recent pastoral visit to
Nicaragua of His Holiness Pope John Paul II, AI1 that
deserved rejection by men of good will throughout the
world.

10. The primary concern of the new Honduran
Government in internal matters was to maintain tranquillity in the country, strengthen democratic institutions
and promote the economic and social development of the
nation. Externally, our primary goal has been peaceful
coexistence with all the countries of the Earth by strict
implementation
of the principles contained in the Charter of the Organization,
especially those of nonintervention in the internal affairs of other States, the
right of peoples to self-determination and the obligation
to settle international disputes by peaceful means.
11. For that reason, barely two months after the new
Government took power, on 23 March 1982, it submitted
to the Permanent Council of the OAS a peace proposal
for Central America [see S/14919] made up of six points
which can be summed up as follows: first, to agree on the
cessation of the arms race in the area, the reduction of
arms and the prohibition of the importation of military
supplies-all in the interest of achieving general disarmament; secondly, to reduce and eliminate foreign advisers,
military and others; thirdly, to agree on the cessation and
prevention of illegal trafficking in arms in the region;
fourthly, to agree on a system of international supervision and control of the agreements reached; fifthly, to
refrain from creating new territorial or maritime disputes
that might aggravate the situation in the region; and
sixthly, to promote a multilateral dialogue of a regional
and permanent nature, making possible domestic politicaI agreements for the establishment of democratic and
pluralistic regimes based on the free, proper and honest
expression of the will of the people. Between then and
now my country’s Government has done its utmost to
see to it that that proposal and any other designed to
achieve the same peaceful end become a reality, to the
benefit of the entire region of Central America,

8. In the face of this sombre picture, aggravated by an
enormous economic crisis, the Government of Nicaragua, using a hackneyed tactic, has decided to make one
or more enemies in Central America, and nothing has
been more convenient than to blame some of its immediate neighbours, including Honduras, for what has happened or might happen in Nicaragua. Gradually,
relations between the States in the area have become
tense, both because of the border incidents provoked by
the Sandinist forces and the unfounded and brazen accusations that attempts are being made to destabilize the
Nicaraguan Government,

12. On this occasion Honduras reaffirms its unshakeable decision to begin as soon as possible a multitateral
dialogue, first and foremost with the Central American
countries and open to other democratically governed
Latin American countries in the Caribbean. We believe
that this is the right way to reach responsible and serious
agreements that will strengthen peace and security in the
region. A number of States have accepted this initiative.
However, not only has the Government of Nicaragua
remained completely silent on the subject, but its highest
leaders have also made threatening statements declaring
that a war against Honduras is inevitable, in flagrant

9. In order fully to comprehend how absurd those accusations are, it is necessary to take a look at history. In
1980, after nearly 20 years of de facto and irregular
Governments Honduras undertook, with perseverance
and sacrifice, to return to democratic institutions. It held
elections for representatives to the National Constituent
Assembly on 20 April 1980 in a climate of peace, freedom and honesty: a new Constitution for the Repubic
was adopted; and, while neighbouring countries were
involved in violence, the Honduran people returned to
2

-

violation of the fundamental principles recognized by the
international legal ,community.
13. It is clear, then, that Nicaragua wants war, whereas
wants peace. If that were not case, then one
might ask how it is that our country is prepared to open
up its territory without any restrictions to international
supervision, provided that Nicaragua does likewise, especially in the border areas, ports, airports and other strategic zones. How else can one explain our constant
willingness to enter into a dialogue? In addition there was
a long talk with the Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua, Mr, Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, last 8
October here at Headquarters, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General.
Honduras

to agree to machinery designed to prevent border i&idents and to establish a climate of dCtente in Central
America.
16. The Government of Nicaragua has still not replied
to the invitation for that further meeting of naval chiefs
to prevent maritime incidents. Last November I repeated
this invitation personally to the Co-ordinator of the
Governing Junta, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra,
and he told me that meetings of that kind were
unimportant.
17. It is truly regrettable that all these efforts by my
country to bring about a better regional understanding
have been fruitless and that relations between Central
American States have become only more tense. While
Honduras seeks the relaxation of tension and a dialogue
with all the countries of the region, Nicaragua threatens
us with imminent war. Here are statements by the highest
leaders, who have stated that they are prepared to confront Honduras and to start an international war. In
order to justify the massive mobilization of troops in the
border area begun last Thursday, the Government of
Nicaragua now publicly and directly accuses the armed
forces of Honduras of having bombarded and, what is
even more unusual, of having even invaded Nicaraguan
territory, charges which my Government vigorously
rejects as being completely unfounded and totally
brazen.

14. Subsequently, spontaneously and forthrightly, in
November I travelled to Managua bearing a message of
peace and understanding from my Government to the
people and Government and people of Nicaragua, a message that was radically censored in all that country’s
media by the Censorship Commission, which is under
the Nicaraguan Government. I have here clear and affirmative proof, a copy of the newspaper La Prensa of that
date, in which even a tiny notice about the arrival in
Nicaragua of the Foreign Minister of Honduras on a
good will mission of peace and harmony was censored. I
should like to present further evidence of that fact. Here
is a person who accompanied me during the press conference at the international airport in Managua and who
heard my statement and our willingness to promote
peace. He was witness to what I said, as well as to the fact
that that conference was completely censored. I refer to
the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
Mr. Victor Hugo Tinoco, who was seated at my side on
that occasion, In spite of that brazenness, and in view of
the continuous accusations that Honduras is harbouring
forces opposed to the Nicaraguan rCgime in camps from
which they supposedly attack Sandinist forces, in February of this year I issued a cordial invitation to Minister
D’Escoto Brockmann to travel with me to the border
area between both countries and see for himself that
there are no such camps on Honduran territory, whose
alleged existence led to an intensive and well-orchestrated
publicity campaign to discredit my country, in Nicaragua’s stubborn attempt to appear to be the victim, to
change its role from killer to victim, to radicalize its conduct, to distract attention from the serious internal conflict besetting that country and to continue to enjoy
reaping the benefits of international economic and military aid and handouts. I hardly need to say that the
Government of Nicaragua declined similar offers.

18. My country’s Government once again proclaims its
complete neutrality in the internal conflicts afflicting
neighbouring countries and its sincere interest that those
fraternal peoples enjoy the precious gift of peace and
democracy through dialogue, understanding and mutual
respect. Our interest in these objectives is particularly
great because, owing to our geographical proximity,
internal conflicts tend to extend beyond borders and to
affect normal development in our country. Proof of that
is that Honduras recently took in nearly 40,000 refugees
from Central American countries, especially Salvadorians and Nicaraguans. As the Office of the United
Nations Wigh Commissioner for Refugees can attest, the
number of Nicaraguans has increased alarmingly over
the last few weeks, The presence of refugees in Honduras
can be explained only by their awareness that the Honduran Government is remaining neutral in the struggles of
their countries and is guaranteeing a climate of freedom,
security and humanitarian understanding in face of the
climate of uncertainty and violence that exists in thier
respective countries. These are the only Nicaraguan
camps which, although we did not seek their existence,
exist on Honduran territory.

15. Militarily,
Honduras has also demonstrated its
desire for serious and civilized dialogue. During the past
year, first there was a meeting of senior military leaders
of both countries at the Honduran customs post of La
Fraternidad, presided over by the Chiefs of the General
Staffs, A little while afterwards, in the Nicaraguan port
of Corinto there was another meeting of the heads of the
respective naval forces, with a subsequent meeting scheduled but never held, because of Nicaragua’! reluctance

19. As the representative of a legitimate Government
arising from the freely expressed majority will of the
Honduran people, respectful of the law and of its international commitments,
I formally denounce before the
Council the unjustified acts of provocation and threats
made by the Nicaraguan Government against Honduras,
which constitute a real and serious danger to peace and
security in the Central American region. Similarly, I
3

Tegucigalpa-the
first visit to Honduras by a member of
the Governing Junta since the triumph of the Revolution, at a time when there had not yet been a visit at that
level from Honduras to Nicaragua-and
I accompanied
him personally. We had talks with Colonel Elvir Sierra,
then Foreign Minister. We reiterated to him that there
was a need to implement everything that had been agreed
upon in the Guasaule meeting in May of that year, We
made a series of proposals with respect to joint patrolling
of the borders with a view to preventing the installation
of counter-revolutionary
camps, which had only just
begun at the time.

appeal to the Council to adopt specific measures so that,
through dialogue and negotiation, a comprehensive
regional solution to the Central American tragedy may
be found, for the various factors at play are comprehensive and regional-the
political turmoil, the rents in
society, the economic contradictions and the violence
that has been unleashed, all of which have thrown this
region of the Latin American continent into a State of
upheaval.
20. I repeat that the most fervent desire of the Government of Honduras is for peace to return to Central America, thus promoting an atmosphere in which public
freedoms would flourish, the pluralistic democratic system would be strengthened and the dignity of the human
person enhanced.

26. On 27 January 1982, as a display of political good
will by Nicaragua towards Honduras, the Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction,
Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, as Minister Paz
Barnica just informed us, attended the ceremony of the
assumption of power by the new President of Honduras,
Mr. Roberto Suazo C6rdova.

21. Mr, TINOCO
(Nicaragua) (interpreta2ion from
Spanish): I shall address myself to a few central and basic
points which I believe it important to highlight with
regard to the statement just delivered by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Honduras, Mr. Edgardo Paz Barnica.

27. On 15 March our Foreign Minister, Mr. Miguel
in note NO. 108 invited the
D’Escoto
Brockmann,
already appointed Foreign Minister of Honduras,
Edgardo Paz Barnica, to hold a meeting between them at
whatever date deemed convenient by Honduras, in order
to reach a better understanding between our nations. On
19 March, -Foreign Minister Paz Barnica sent note
No. 185 DSM, dated 17 March, in which he said, “circumstances oblige me to be away from Honduras for the
,lext few days, and when I return we shall by common
agreement establish the dates for this meeting”.

22. We believe that it is important to bring out precisely those aspects which were ignored in that statement.
We wish to recall that, with regard to the oft-repeated
invitation, supposedly ignored by Nicaragua, to visit the
camps of counter-revolutionaries operating in Honduras-camps from which they have been infiltrating into
Nicaragua since February-we
have already clearly
expounded our position at an earlier meeting of the
Council. In this connection I think that the representative of Honduras could provide his Minister with the
verbatim records containing our reply on this matter
[242Oth meeting, paras. 128-1291.

28. Since the Foreign Minister of Honduras had not yet
come to Nicaragua, on 21 April it was decided that Foreign Minister D’Escoto Brockmann would go to Tegucigalpa, where he presented to the Honduran Government,
through Foreign Minister Paz Barnica, a six-point proposal aimed at preventing erosion in relations between Nicaragua and Honduras. The six points were: first, to hold
an immediate meeting of the army chiefs of both
countries-a
meeting which never took place, in spite of
the willingness
of the Government
of Nicaragua;
secondly, to sign a non-aggression agreement between
our two countries; thirdly, to set up a joint border patrol;
fourthly, to dismantle the Somozist counter-revolutionary camps; fifthly, to refrain from setting up any foreign
naval base in the Gulf of Fonseca, where Honduran and
Nicaraguan waters meet; and sixthly, to hold bilateral
meetings of all kinds and, with the co-operation of international organizations, to repatriate the Miskitos who
wished to return to Nicaragua.

23. With regard to the peace proposals of Honduras
and its alleged efforts to help bring about peace, I should
like to mention a number of steps taken by the Nicaraguan Government.
24. For example, I wish to draw the Council’s attention
to the fact that on 6 May 1981 the first step was taken by
the Republic of Nicaragua, when my country’s Government called for a meeting at the highest level in which
would also participate the Ministers of Defence and the
Chiefs of the General Staffs. This call was directed, in
note No. 064 of 6 May, to the Government of Honduras,
then headed by General Policarpo Paz Garcia. In its note
No. 178 of 11 May Honduras accepted Nicaragua’s invitation. It was precisely as a result of that meeting that a
series of agreements was reached, and since the beginning
of May 1981-before the process of escalation of the
activities of the counter-revolutionary camps in Honduras began and before the $20 million grant by the American Administration to help these bands was approvedwe have been working with Honduras, trying to prevent
that country’s being transformed into a spring-board
and, hence, an instrument for intervention against
Nicaragua.

29. On 20 May a meeting was held in La Fraternidad
with Colonel Jose Abdenego Sueso Rosa, Chief of the
General Staff of the Honduran armed forces. Unfortunately, however, nothing developed from that meeting.
On 24 August, to continue this outline of what are perhaps the most relevant points in the Nicaraguan process
of rapprochement with Honduras, in an effort to prevent
Honduras from becoming a spring-board for counterrevolution-Foreign
Minister D’Escoto
Brockmann,
completing
the proposal
of Commander
Ortega

25. In November of that same year, a member of the
Governing Junta, Mr. Rafael Cordova Rivas, went to
4

Saavedra, invited Foreign Minister Paz Barnica to meet
with him at Managua on 1, 2 and 3 September, if convenient, On 1 September, Foreign Minister Paz Barnica,
replying to that invitation, said that he could not accept
it because he had “prior commitments”. On 24 September Foreign Minister Paz Barnica was again invited to a
meeting with the Nicaraguan Foreign Minister, and the
Honduran Foreign Ministry issued the same excuses on
29 September. On 8 October the meeting between Foreign Minister Paz Barnica and Foreign Minister D’Escoto Brockmann was held, which is the meeting to which
Mr, Paz Barnica referred. On 12 November Foreign Minister Paz Barnica, precisely in response to the earlier invitation made on all the dates I have just mentioned,
decided to visit Nicaragua and met with Commander
Ortega Saavedra, of the Governing Junta, and me.

ity on the entire Honduran
about specific facts.

Government.

Let us speak

35. The other day, the representative of Honduras said
that they could not control all those thousands of kilometres of border; this can be read in the verbatim records
[ibid., para.64]. I would remind the Council that WChave
only 700 kilometres of border between us. That is not the
main point, though. There are areas along that 700kilometre border where the population density is relatively high, with roads and means of communication that
are systematically used by the counter-revolutionary forces. If the Government of Honduras had really wanted to
control those gangs then it would have done so quite
some time ago.
36. For example, from the first months of 1982 to the
first months of 1983, these counter-revolutionary gangs
have caused a total of 386 deaths, 284 wounded and 211
captured, mostly in the border area of our country. This
is no mere invention of the Nicaraguan revolution. The
family members, as reported in The New York Times of
today, the widows of those Nicaraguans killed along the
border can confirm this. During that period there were
about 183 attacks along the border, 131 of which have
been virtually right on the border line and other, more
recent, ones a few kilometres inside the border. In which
departments? Basically, in the Chinandega, Madriz,
Nueva Segovia and Zelaya departments.

30. On 19 February 1983-as I said earlier, this coincided with the mobilization of the counter-revolutionary
camps already concentrated especially in the Las Trojes
area, in the El Paraiso department of Honduras and in
the Mosquito Coast area of Honduras-an
invitation
was issued, to which we replied that we considered it
necessary to hold high-level meetings to determine how
to carry out the inspection. Of course, the Council has
been told that Nicaragua did not respond to that invitation, which is quite inaccurate.
31. I wanted to bring this to the attention of the Council in order to demonstrate that Nicaragua has been making an effort, not only to reach fraternal agreement with
Honduras, but also to try and prevent Honduras from
becoming a staging area for counter-revolutionary forces
opposed to the Sandinist Government, This has been
impossible to accomplish, however, because of the tremendous pressure and manipulation of the United States
Government through a number of steps we are familiar
with.

37. I was saying that if the Honduran authorities had
wanted to control the Somozist gangs at all they could
have done so. We are not talking about thousands of
kilometres, Let us just take one area-the El Paraiso
area, the Honduran department which borders on the
Nicaraguan department of Nueva Segovia. Or let us take
the Choluteca area that borders on the Nicaraguan Chinandega department. We are talking about a border area
of not more than 70 kilometres in length, and what has
happened there? There have been at least 36 attacks in
this area of less than 70 kilometres, no fewer than 36
attacks by counter-revolutionary gangs at various levels.
There was an attack on border guards at Santa Tom&
de1 Nance, an attack on the bridges over the Negro River,
where both bridges were blown up, an attack on the
bridge over the Toronado River, an attack on Peiia de1
Jicote, an attack on Las Mesas, an attack on La Guaruma, an attack on Ranch0 Los Encinos, an attack on La
Esperanza, an attack on Valle de Las Torres, two attacks
on Ranchon Bibijagua, two attacks on La Zopilota hill,
two attacks on El Paraiso, two attacks on border guards
at La Ceiba, two attacks on border guards at El Variador, four attacks on Loma Oscura, four attacks on Vado
Ancho and five attacks on San Pedro de1 Norte. According to all elementary military logic the concentration of
attacks in an area widely known for its counterrevolutionary activity would have enabled the Honduran
Government or Honduran troops to have captured at
least one Somozist, but they have not been able to do so.
They have not. had even one encounter with a countcrrevolutionary force when operating throughout the
period of these 36 attacks in a very small area of
territory.

32. It is interesting to note that it has been glibly
affirmed here that the present aggression against Nicaragua is an internal conflict, that what has been happening
in Nicaragua is the result of an internal conflict between
Nicaraguan Somozist forces and Sandinist forces.
33. It is a secret to no one, as I have already explained,
that since early February 1982, when we began making
efforts to prevent Honduras from stepping up its participation in the counter-revolution, there were at least 13
camps along the Honduran border. We said that beginning in December those camps began to mass troops at
two strategic points in the Las Trojes and Mosquitia
areas basically, It is precisely from those areas, which
had already been centres of military activity, that Somozist gangs began to enter our country.
34. An attempt has been made here to deny the undeniable: that Honduran territory has been used for the activities of those counter-revolutionary
forces, with the
assent and under the direction of important sectors of the
Honduran army and Government. We wish to support
this thesis because we do not wish to foist all responsibil5

to be used for counter-revolutionary activities against
Nicaragua? There were elections in 1982, and the new
Government should not have allowed this. I should like
to say that we really thought that the situation would
change with the new Honduran Government, that the
new civilian Government would adopt a somewhat more
balanced position, that the forces in Honduras would not
be as influential, and that common sense would prevail
and there would be some sort of understanding promoted with Nicaragua.

38. Let me give some other examples so that people will
not go on saying that this is an internal conflict. This is
the very position maintained by the United States
Administration,
which says, “There is an internat conflict in Nicaragua; there is an internal conflict in El Salvador; therefore things are the same. Let us negotiate them
together.” Let hope that that means that they will be
willing to negotiate in El Salvador in the near future; that
could be one explanation. But let us look at the Nueva
Segovia area, which borders on the Honduran department of El Paraiso. What has happened there in the past
IO months? There have been 43 attacks from Honduran
territory. We can mention some: an attack on Ojo de
Agua, an attack on El Tablazo, an attack on La Ceiba,
an attack on Cerro de Ayote, an attack on San Jose de
las Manos, an attack on Teotecacinte, an attack on
Loma de las Islas, an attack on Planes de Bildn, an attack
on border guards at Zacateras, an attack on border
guards at Playa Hermosa, an attack on border guards at
Huanito, an attack on border guards at Rio Coca, an
attack on border guards at Cerro Jesus and other attacks
on border guards at El Porvenir, El Portillo, Mata de
Pldtano and Las Puertas. All of these attacks again took
place in an area of less than 70 kilometres, again close to
the border between Honduras and Nicaragua. Along the
same 70 kilometres there have also been two attacks on
El Suyital, two attacks on Los Arenales, two attacks on
border guards at Los Planes, two attacks on troops at
San Francisco, two attacks on Siuche and two attacks on
Las Pampas.
.

42. Indeed, we must be clear on the fact that there have
been two general trends in Honduras. A sector of Honduran society and of the Government-and
the interesting thing is that this sector consists of private enterprise,
which has business dealings with Nicaragua-has always
tried to avoid a conflict with Nicaragua. But the military
sectors, pressured by the American Administration especially since John Dimitri Negroponte was appointed
ambassador, have begun to harass all those who supported the policy of detente with Nicaragua. But we
hoped, after the 1982 elections, that the civilian sector,
which was seeking detente, would prevail over the military sector, which was promoting a policy of confrontation with Nicaragua and support for the counter-revolutionary bands.
43. But this was not possible, Little by little, the aggressive, war-mongoring sector undermined the civilian prodetente sector that exists-or existed, because I think it is
less influential now-in Honduran society. There has
been a series of attacks on those, even within the army,
who wanted conciliation with Nicaragua. But what has
happened is that instead of strengthening civilian power,
it is precisely the military’s power that has become
stronger. The chief of the armed forces, Gustav0
Alvarez, one of the most aggressive elements against Nicaragua, has been given all the power. He has assumed
new military powers in Honduras and, together with
Ambassador Negroponte, is directing all counterrevolutionary activities against Nicaragua. There have
been sectors within the Honduran army who wanted
detente with Nicaragua, and those sectors were excluded
a few months after the election in the internal struggle
between the sectors supporting peace and those supporting war. We have two very clear examples of this. The
leaders of the conciliation movement within the Honduran army who sought coexistence with Nicaragua were
expelled from Honduras, for all practical intents and purposes. Let us take the case of Colonel Hubber Bodden,
for example, who had been head of Honduran intelligence. Colonel Alvarez, supported by the American Embassy, sent him as a military attache to Argentina, which
was to send him very far away, especially at the time
ghen Argentina did not have active relations with Central America. And what happened to the other leader in
the Honduran army who wanted a conciliation with Nicaragua, Colonel Le6nidas Torres Arias? He also was sent
by Gustav0 Alvarez and the American Embassy to the
other side of the Earth to Taiwan. This gives some idea of
why Nicaragua has tried to follow the internal strife in
Honduras, because of the role Honduras is going to play

39. It would be very difficult to try to deny reality, All
the attacks I have just mentioned are only a few eyampies. They are not all the attacks that have occurred; they
are just those which have taken place along the border
area. We are not talking about any of the other attacks,
which have taken place 15, 20 or 25 kilometres within
Nicaraguan territory; we are speaking strictly about
border attacks.
40. If this were an internal conflict, what would be the
logic of the counter-revolutionary
Somozist bands, if
they are inside the country, to attack the border area,
which is precisely where the Sandinist army is fortified,
instead of attacking other areas within the country,
which are less heaviIy guarded because the Sandinist forces are at the northern border? It would not be at all
logical to think that counter-revolutionary bands within
the country are going to go to the most heavily fortified
points-in
the north-to
attack the frontier, The only
explanation for this is that those bands have been
trained, equipped and assembled and are attacking
across this border, attacking the aforementioned military
border posts all along the border between Honduras and
Nicaragua. This is what is being termed an internal conflict, in an attempt to deny the undeniable. An attempt is
being made to continue to deny what is generally recognized by the entire international community. Of course,
the United States is sponsor and patron and is financing
and deveIoping this undeclared war against Nicaragua.
41. But we ask ourselves, what is the logic of the Honduran authorities? Why are they allowing their territory
6

against Nicaragua. However, unfortunately, it is obvious
that the most aggressive side seems to be holding sway
now; hence these counter-revolutionary bands and Honduras’ complicity with the American Administration,

the President of Honduras, Mr. Suazo Cbrdova, and
Commander Ortega Saavedra, the Co-ordinator of the
Governing Junta-preferably
in the presence of the Presidents of Mexico and Venezuela, who would testify to the
good faith and the positions of the parties-to discuss
relations between Nicaragua and Honduras in any place
to be chosen by the Government of Honduras in Mexico
or in Venezuela at the earliest possible date, to be decided
on b4 Honduras. This is an official proposal that we
make’in the Council to the Government of Honduras for
a meeting between President Suazo C6rdova and Commander Ortega Saavedra at a time and place suitable to
Honduras to begin discussions on the relations between
our two countries.

44. Perhaps the representative of Honduras did not
give to his Foreign Minister the article that appeared in
The New York Times of today about counterrevolutionary camps in Honduras, which the author had
the opportunity of seeing. The article is by Stephen
Kinzer, an American reporter in Honduras who went to
the counter-revolutionary camp where they told him that
some of them had been infiltrating Nicaragua with the
support of certain Honduran officials, But all of this is a
lie, according to the American Administration.
And,
according to the American Administration, this is an
internal conflict and is not particularly relevant. But the.
American representatives here have not said anything
about another article that appeared in The New York
Times by Saul Landau, where he says that on 19 November 1981, William J. Casey, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), went to the House Select
Committee on Intelligence to talk about the $20 million
plan that was being developed. The American Administration claims that this too is a lie and that all the American congressmen criticizing this destabilization plan and
these funds allocated to destabilizing Nicaragua are paranoid. All congressmen, Republicans and Democrats-I
will not mention any names, for they are known to everyone here-who are in opposition are seeing things, and
no such plan of aggression against Nicaragua exists,
according to the American Administration.

47. As regards the United States Government, g decisive
factor in the Central American crisis and in the
aggression- not just the determining factor but the propelling factor and instigator of aggression against
Nicaragua-we
would propose that we immediately
begin direct and frank talks in a third country to be
chosen by common consent. It could be in any country
that has on past occasions shown a willingness to serve as
a venue for meetings between Nicaragua and the United
States; it could be in France, Spain, Mexico, Venezuela
or Panama, in order to discuss the relations and difficulties between our two countries.
48.

Those are two concrete proposals.

49. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (inierprerarion from French):
At a time when the report of the Secretary-General on
the work of the Organization’ is being considered, facts
brought to the attention of the Council by various speakers following Nicaragua’s presentation of its case have
concretely demonstrated the refusal of States to respect
the principles of the Charter to which they have subscribed, thus confirming one of the observations of the
Secretary-General, who wrote:

45. It should also be recalled, and I repeat, that the
American delegation in the Council has not deigned to
answer the three concrete questions put to it which might
help the Council to assessAmerican responsibility in this
matter. The three questions to which there have been no
replies are: is the CIA linked to the counterrevolutionary forces which are operating against NiLaragua? Has official money from the American Government
been approved for anti-Nicaragua activities in the sum of
$20 million? Are there counter-revolutionary
training
camps in the United States, or are there not? These are
three concrete questions which have not yet been replied
to; this lack of response reveals the level of interference
by the American Administration,
the nearly public
acceptance of its war against Nicaragua. We think it has
been important to denounce these facts in the Council
because we cannot allow these flagrant efforts to destabilize the sovereign Government of Nicaragua to pass
unnoticed.

“I sometimes feel that we now take the Charter far less
seriously than did its authors, living as they did in the
wake of a world tragedy. I believe therefore that an
important first step would be a conscious recommitment by Governments to the Charter.“*
50. Is it necessary to remind anyone that we the peoples
of the United Nations have declared our determination
to “save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war”, to “reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and
small”, and for these ends we have also resolved to
“practice tolerance and to live together in peace with one
another as good neighbours, and to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security”? Can we ever
tire of repeating that all States Members of the Organization are bound to respect those affirmations of the
Preamble to the Charter and to act in accordance with
the principles that derive from it, that is, the sovereign
equality of all Members, the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means and the non-use of force or

46. Finally, and in a more constructive vein, I wish to
state what the position of Nicaragua is, to see whether it
is still possible to find some way out, or a formula of
understanding, not as a result of any effort by the American Government, but by pressure that may be put on
that Government. I have received from Managua express
instructions to propose to the delegation of Honduras
and to Foreign Minister Paz Barnica of Honduras the
following: that there be a presidential meeting between
7

the threat of force against the territorial integrity and
political independence of any State or in any other way
incompatible with the purposes of the United Nations’?
5 I. In a world teeming with crises, particularly those
that are engulfing Central America, given the grave problems confronting Nicaragua, and after having heard the
different statements made in this Council, my delegation
must face up to a grim truth: that the law of the jungle
still reigns supreme in international relations. Justice,
law, equity and tolerance have been pilloried. The Council has in the course of its meetings on this matter been
made only too aware of acts of violence, murders and
massive violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and it has received information with regard to
intent to commit aggression and to cause destabilization.
52. These different factors, which are germs of conflagration and hotbeds of tension, can be analysed only in
terms of survival of the States of the region which, feeling
that their sovereignty is threatened, have taken certain
measures to safeguard that sovereignty. Those measures
often take the form of signing agreements and pacts with
friendly countries ready to provide them with the military material necessary for the defence of that sovereignty. Thus are forged alliances which, far from
contributing to the improvement of existing situations,
serve only to maintain them if not to worsen them and
thus fuel the fires of confrontation between the”blocs that
are the sources of these alliances. The factors of tension
will disappear once the threats of aggression and the violations of fundamental rights are brought to a halt and
guarantees of independence and peace are given to all
sides, and once all the States of the area concerned are
willing to respect the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and each State has the freedom to exercise its sovereign rights and freely to choose the new
social and political experiments desired by its people. It is
precisely in this spirit that the principles of the Charter
were conceived.

national peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a
solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or agreements, or other peaceful means of
their own choice.”
It is also the task of the Council to propose to the parties
appropriate measures for the bringing about of a settlement of the current conflict.
54. However, we cannot overlook the existence of the
mediation initiatives of Mexico and other States of the
area to bring about negotiations. Within this context my
delegation wishes to stress its wholehearted appreciation
of the attempts made so far to settle this crisis. We wish
warmly to encourage those initiatives and express the
hope that the parties will evince all the necessary good
will in the negotiations. It is important that the countries
concerned should embark upon dialogue with a view to
adopting practical measures to guarantee the peace the
region needs.
55. As I said last year in this very place:
“The people of Togo ardently wishes peace. , . for
itself and for all nations. That peace must be real and
must contribute to the effective emancipation of our
different nations. That is why, faced with the disarray
in our world which threatens the international equilibrium, Togo has always advocated recourse to fraternal dialogue and permanent consultation in seeking in
peace just solutions for the tragic conflicts shaking our
world” [2339th meeting, paw. 631.
56. It is such a dialogue that my delegation once again
invites all States concerned in the conflict now being considered by the Council to undertake. That dialogue
would be proof that the Organization to which we all
belong, and of which the Security Council is the peacekeeping organ, can preserve its raison d’&tre and deserve
the gratitude of future generations.

53. The delegation of Togo was happy to welcome the
statements of the parties with regard to their willingness
to enter into negotiations to guarantee peace and security
in the region. Thus the parties concerned are clearly
aware of their obligations under the Charter, especially
in its Article 33, which states that:

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

NOTES
’ Ofjicial

“The parties to any dispute, the continuation of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of inter-

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

Records

Supplement

No.

‘Ibid.,

p. 1.

I

of the General

(A/37/1).

Assembly,

Thirty-seventh

60205-Julv

Session,

1990--2,050

TO OBTAIN
UNITED
NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publicntions may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, SalesSection, New York or Geneva.
HOW

COrvfMXNT SE PROCTJREIR LES PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS
UNIES
Les publications des Nations Wnies sent en veme dans les bbrairies et Ies agencesdeposit&es
du monde entier. Informez-vous nuprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK l-IOJlYYMTb

H.AuMn
Maraammx
H arewrcmax BOBcex p~oeax MHpa. &IBoaaTe
cnpan~si 06 H3nammx B aamehi KHW~~HOM
mramie uns nmwre no anpecy: GpraHnaauna 06WmHeaHbsx HaurffI, Ceru.ms no
nponaxce n3namfB, Hbro-fioprc mm 3Keiiesa.
kkmWia

@XIIH&WUW~

I?3&QI&iR

OPTAFIH3ALII4M

06%enmiembIx

~RIIH~

MOXHO

OKbEIII4HEEELbIX
Ky115iTb

B KHWmiblX

COMO CONSEGm PUBLKACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de Ias Naciones Unidas estSnen venta en librerias y casasdistribuidoras en
to&s partes de1mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

ob400

60205-July 1990--2,050
