4

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

Convinced that Security Council resolution 242
(1967) of 22 November 1967 should be implemented
immediately in all its parts in order to achieve a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East in which every
State in the area can live in security,
Determined that the territory of a State shall not be
the object of occupation or acquisition by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force, which is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and to the
principles enshrined in Security Council resolution 242
(1967) as well as in the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security adopted by the General
Assembly on 16 December 1970,
Expressing its appreciation of the efforts of the Committee of African Heads of State undertaken in pursuance of the resolution adopted on 23 June 1971 by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its eighth ordinary session,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of Israel's
occupation of the Arab territories since 5 June 1967,
Having considered the ítem entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
1. Reaffirms that the acquisition of territories by
force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories
thus occupied must be restored;
2. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the
application of both the following principies:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
( b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency, and respect for and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of every State in the area and its right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries free from
threats or acts of force;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to reactivate the mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to tbe Middle
East in order to promote agreement and assist efforts to
reach a peace agreement as envisaged in tbe Special
Representative's aide-mémoire of 8 February 1971;16
4. Expresses its full support for all the efforts of
the Special Representative to implement Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
5. Notes with appreciation the positive reply given
by Egypt to the Special Representative's initiative for
establishing a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
6. Calls upon Israel to respond favourably to the
Special Representative's peace initiative;
7. Further invites the parties to the Middle East conflict to give their full co-operation to the Special Representative in order to work out practica! measures for:
(a) Guaranteeing freedom of navigation througb
intemational waterways in the area;
( b) Achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem;
(e) Guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and
political independence of every State in the area;
B. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly, as ap16 A/8541. Por the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971, document
S/10403, annex l.

propriate, on the progress made by the Special Representative in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Security Council to consider, if
necessary, making arrangements, under the relevant
Articles of the Charter of the United N ations, with
regard to the implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
2016th plenary meeting,
13 December 1971.
2817 (XXVI). Scientific work on peace research

The General Assembly,
Considering that the fundamental purpose of the
United Nations is to save mankind from the scourge of
war and to maintain international peace and security,
Considering that scientific research on the problems
of war and peace has expanded and that many national
and international institutions have made them the subject of their studies,
Noting with interest the work undertaken in this field
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations lnstitute for
Training and Research,
Conscious of the importance tbat States attach to
the study of the means and recourses to implement
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to build peace, security and co-operation in the world,
Considering it desirable to bring to the notice of the
international community the work done in the field of
peace research by national and intemational institutions and to promote on a permanent basis, in the light
of the purposes and principies of the Charter, a recording of the studies devoted to this subject,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare every
other year an informative report on scientific works
produced by national and intemational, governmental
and non-governmental, public and private institutions
in the field of peace research;
2. Invites the Governments of Member States and
the institutions referred to in paragraph 1 above to
provide the Secretary-General, to the best of their
ability and competence, with all the information he may
require;
3. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Researcb and those specialized agencies which
are active in the field of peace researcb to lend their
assistance in the drafting of the report referred to
above;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at the beginning of its twenty-eighth
session, the first report prepared under paragraph 1
above.
2018th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2833 (XXVI). World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for disarmament and the consolidation of peace,
Convinced that all peoples of tbe world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Believing that it is imperative that all States exert
further efforts for the adoption of effective measures of
disarmament and, more particularly, nuclear disarmament,
Believing also that a world disarmament conference
could promote and facilitate the realization of sucb
aims,
l. Expresses the conviction that it is most desirable
to take immediate steps in arder that careful consideration be given to the convening, following adequate
preparation, of a world disarmament conference open
to all States;
2. Invites all States to communicate to the SecretaryGeneral, before 31 August 1972, their views and suggestions on any relevant questions relating to a world
disarmament conference, in particular the following:
(a) Main objectives;
( b) Provisional agenda;
(e) Site favoured;
( d) Date and contemplated duration;
(e) Procedures to be adopted for carrying out the
preparatory work;
(f) Relationship to the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session a report
containing the views and suggestions communicated to
him;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
2022nd plenary meeting,
I 6 December 1971.

2837 (XXVI). Rationalization of the procedures
and organization of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolution 2632 (XXV) of 9 November

5

1970 on the rationalization of the procedures and
organization of the General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Rationalization of the Procedures and
Organization of the General Assembly, 17
Endorsing the view expressed by the Special Committee that the existing rules of procedure were generally satisfactory and that most improvements would
be achieved not through changes in the rules of procedure but througb their better application,
Conscious of the need to discbarge in the most efficient manner the functions incumbent upan it under
the Charter of the United Nations,
l. Decides to amend its rules of procedure by incorporating therein the modifications set forth in annex I
to the present resolution;
2. Approves the conclusions of the Special Committee on the Rationalization of the Procedures and
Organization of the General Assembly as they appear
in annex II to the present resolution;
3. Declares tbe conclusions of the Special Committee to be useful and worthy of consideration by the
General Assembly, its committees and other relevant
organs;
4. Decides that the conclusions referred to in paragraph 2 above shall be reproduced as an annex to its
rules of procedure;
5. Further decides to review from time to time the
progress achieved in rationalizing its work and requests
the Secretary-General, as appropriate, to report on the
extent to whicb the conclusions of the Special Committee bave been reflected in the practice of the General Assembly.
2024th plenary meeting,
17 December 1971.
17 Oflicial Records of the General A.ssembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/8426).

ANNEX 11s
Amendment• to the rules of proeedure of the General Asseml,ly
l. Replace the present rule 39 by the following text [para.
130 of the report of the Special Committee]:
"If a Vice-President of the General Assembly finds it
necessary to be absent during a meeting of the General
Committee, he may designate a member of his delegation
as bis substitute. The Chairman of a Main Committee shall,
in case of absence, designate one of the Vice-Chairmen of
the Committee as his substitute. A Vice-Chairman shall not
have the right to vote if he is of the same delegation as
another member of the General Committee."
2. Replace the present rule 60 by the following text [para.
308]:

"Records of meeti11gs and sound recordings
" (a) Verbatim records of the meetings of the General
Assembly and of the Political and Security Committee (First
Committee) shall be drawn up by the Secretariat and submitted to those organs after approval by the presiding officer. The General Assembly shall decide upon the form of
the records of the meetings of the other Main Committees
and, if any, of the subsidiary organs and of special meet18 This annex was referred to the Sixth Committee for prior
consideration (see Of]icial Records of the General Assembly,
Twenty-sixth Session, Sixth Committee, 1299th meeting).

ings and conferences. No organ of the General Assembly
shall have both verbatim and summary records.
"(b) Sound recordings of the meetings of the General
Assembly and of the Main Committees shall be made by
the Secretariat. Such recordings shall also be made of the
proceedings of subsidiary organs and special meetings and
conferences when they so decide."
3. Replace the present rule 69 by the following text [para.
198]:

''The President may declare a meeting open and permit
the debate to proceed when at least one third of the members of the General Assembly are present. Toe presence of
a majority of the members shall be required for any decision to be taken."
4. Replace the present rule 74 by the following text [para.
210]:

"The General Assembly may limit the time to be allowed
to each speaker and the number of times each representative may speak on any question. Before a decision is taken,
two representatives may speak in favour of, and two against,
a proposal to set such limits. When the debate is limited and
a representative has spoken his allotted time, the President
shall call him to order without delay."
