S/PRST/2011/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 February 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6479th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 February 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security: the interdependence between security and
development”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security and its readiness to strive for sustainable peace in all situations under
its consideration.
“The Security Council underlines that security and development are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing and key to attaining sustainable
peace. The Council recognizes that their relationship is complex, multifaceted
and case-specific.
“The Security Council reiterates that, in order to support a country to
emerge sustainably from conflict, there is a need for a comprehensive and
integrated approach that incorporates and strengthens coherence between
political, security, development, human rights and rule of law activities, and
addresses the underlying causes of each conflict. In this regard, the Council
affirms the necessity to consider relevant economic, political and social
dimensions of conflict.
“The Security Council affirms that national ownership and national
responsibility are key to establishing sustainable peace. The Council reaffirms
the primary responsibility of national authorities in identifying their priorities
and strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding, with a view to ensuring national
ownership.
“The Security Council re-emphasises the importance of considering and
initiating peacebuilding activities from the earliest stages of planning and
implementation of peacekeeping operations, including through clear and
achievable mandates. The Council stresses the importance of clarity of roles
and responsibilities of the UN peacekeeping operation and the UN country
team and other relevant actors for the delivery of prioritised support to a
country consistent with its specific peacebuilding needs and priorities, as
outlined by national authorities, in order to ensure effective integration of
effort. The Council recommends that particular focus be given to improved

11-23178 (E) 110211

*1123178*

S/PRST/2011/4

integration of UN effort where peacekeeping missions are operating together
with peacebuilding activities of other UN actors, such as in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Sudan.
“The Security Council notes that successful implementation of the many
tasks that peacekeeping operations could be mandated to undertake in the areas
of security sector reform; disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration; rule
of law; and human rights requires an understanding of and acting with a
perspective which takes into account the close interlinkage between security
and development. In this context, the Council notes with appreciation the
contribution that peacekeepers and peacekeeping missions make to early
peacebuilding, including through creating a conducive environment which
enables economic recovery and the provision of basic services. The Council
acknowledges that this contribution can help to establish and build confidence
in the mission.
“The Security Council undertakes to consider how peacekeeping
operations can best support national authorities, as appropriate, to articulate
peacebuilding priorities, and acting in accordance with these priorities, can
both support other national and international actors to implement
peacebuilding activities and undertake certain early peacebuilding tasks
themselves. The Council underlines that reconstruction, economic
revitalization and capacity-building constitute crucial elements for the longterm development of post-conflict societies and in generating sustainable
peace, and, in this regard, attaches special importance to national ownership
and stresses the significance of international assistance.
“The Security Council notes that in matters relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security under its consideration, conflict analysis
and contextual information on, inter alia, social and economic issues is
important, when such issues are drivers of conflict, represent a challenge to the
implementation of Council mandates or endanger the process of consolidation
of peace. In this regard, the Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that his reporting to the Council contains such contextual information.
“The Security Council stresses the importance it attaches to the
sustainability of peace in post-conflict situations. In this regard, it reaffirms
that the overarching objective of peacekeeping missions should be to achieve
success through creating the conditions for security and sustainable peace on
the ground, thereby allowing for reconfiguration or withdrawal of the mission.
“The Security Council recalls the role played by the illegal exploitation
of natural resources in fuelling some past and current conflicts. In this regard,
it recognizes that the United Nations can play a role in helping the States
concerned, as appropriate, upon their request and with full respect for their
sovereignty over natural resources and under national ownership, to prevent
illegal access to those resources and to lay the basis for their legal exploitation
with a view to promoting development, in particular through the empowerment
of governments in post-conflict situations to better manage their resources.
“The Security Council encourages close cooperation within the United
Nations system and with regional, sub-regional, and other organizations on the
ground and at Headquarters in order to properly engage in conflict and post-

2

11-23178

S/PRST/2011/4

conflict situations, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations, and expresses its willingness to consider ways to improve
such cooperation.
“The Security Council underlines that integrated action on the ground by
security and development actors needs to be coordinated with the national
authorities and can significantly contribute to stabilizing and improving the
security situation and ensuring the protection of civilians. The Council also
notes the importance of cooperation with civil society in this context. The
Council affirms that sustainable peace and development cannot be achieved
without the inclusion of all relevant stakeholders and underlines that women
must be included as active participants in all stages of peacebuilding, peace
agreements and development programs. The Council expresses its willingness
to engage in dialogue, where necessary, on specific situations on its agenda
with other actors, including UN agencies, funds, and programmes and
international financial institutions.
“The Security Council encourages Member States, particularly those
represented on the governance structures of the UN agencies, funds, and
programmes, to promote coherence in the United Nations’ work in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its readiness to make greater use of the
Commission’s advisory role. The Council further recognizes the need for
coordination and dialogue with the Commission. The Council calls upon the
Commission to continue to promote an integrated and coherent approach to
peacebuilding and to seek to ensure that development and security-related
activities supported by the Commission are mutually reinforcing.
“The Security Council highlights the contribution that the Economic and
Social Council can make in addressing economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian issues and underlines the importance of close cooperation in
accordance with Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations.”

11-23178

3
