UNIED
NATIONS

Security

Council
Distr
.
GENERAL
S/1998/643
14 July
1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 JULY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
AJlDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT
OF THE SECURITY
COUNCIL

I have the honour
to transmit
from the High Representative
fcr
and Herzegovina
(see annex).

to you herewith
Implementation
of

a letter
dated
14 July
1998
the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia

I should
be grateful
members
of the Security

would

letter

98-20630

(E)

160798

if you
Council.

bring

this

I1111111111111111111111111111111111111
IIIllll

to

the

attention

(Siqned)

Kofi

of

A.

the

ANNAN

/ ...

S/1998/643
English
Page 2

Annex

Letter
dated 14 July
1998
for Imnlementation
of the
and Herzesovina
addressed

from the Hish Representative
Peace Aqreement
on Bosnia
to the Secretary-General

I am sending
herewith
my report
for implementation
of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia
and Herzegovina
for the months of April
to June 1998.
I will
be
presenting
the report
to the Security
Council
on 27 July and hope to be able to
meet with you on that
day.

(Siqned)

Carlos

WESTENDORP

/ .. .

.--

LI_-

--

-.

-

. ...

..-_--

-.

S/1998/643
English
Page 3

Appendix
Report
Peace

of the Hish
Representative
for
Implementation
Aqreement
on Bosnia
and Herzeqovina
for
the
April
to June 1998

of
months

the
of

I. INTRODUCTION
1. By its resolution
1112 of 12 June 1997, the Security Council endorsed my appointicnt
as
High Representative
and reaffirmed the impoxtance of the role of the High Representative
“in
monitoring
the implementation
of the Peace Agreement
and giving guidance to and coordinating
the activities of the civilian organisations
and agencies involved
in assisting
the
parties to implement the Peace Agreement”
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2. Pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1031 of 15 December 1995, in which it requested the
Secretary General to submit reports Tom the High Representative in accordance with Annex 10
of the Peace Agreement and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation Conference of
8-9 December 1995. I herewitheprescnt the tenth report to the Council.
3. The Report covers the activities of the Office of the High Representative and developments in
the areas listed below during the period from the beginning of April 1998 to ths end of June
1998.
XI- INSTITUTIONAL

ASPECTS

4. The period under review has seen substantial progress. This includes the consolidation of the
position of the Government in the RS, the emergcncc of greater pluralism in both Entities, and
improvement in the economic situation across the co~try.
By the end of the reporting period,
one half of the persons indicted for war crimes by the ICTY were in custody; cooperation by
Entity justice sectors with the TCTY improved; the results of last September’s elections had been
implemented in all but one of the 136 municipalities; an MOU on the restructuring of RTV BiH
had been signed. Minority returns have started in earnest and there is progress on property
legislation. The Konvertible Marka has been iniroduced. new legislation on privatization adopted
by the Council of Ministers. and legislation on foreign investment and St&c and Entity budgets
passed; and an IMF standby agreemcnl. has been reached Common license plates are now the
norm rather than the exception on vehicles throughout the country. The Coat of Arms has been
introduced.
5. But almost all progress has required continued and intensive efforts from the international
community and in several cases I have had to resort to making interim binding decisions in
accordmce with my authotity under Annex 10 of the Peace Agreement.
A crucial moment in the
peace implementation process has now been reached. As we approach the end of the

/ .. .

S/1998/643

English
Page 4

consolidation period, the progress made thus far, although substantial, is still not irreversible.
Civilian peace implementation in BiH cannot yet proceed without continued international
military support. Progress itself generates rcsistarxc Erom hardiinc nationalists, who see their
power on the wane and their influence diminishing. The continued presence of SFOR remains
vital to the preservation of the secure environment in which nation-building can take place. I
welcome NATO’ s and the UN’s decision to extend SFOR’s mission. The situation in nearby
Kosovo, meanwhile, gives additional cause for concern; naturally it is one which I and other
agencies in theater are watching closely.
6. Two and a half years on From Dayton, the great prize of a sustainable peace is within sight - if
the international community is willing to see the task through to the end. It is critical also that
Bosnia and Herzegovina now start to take responsibility for its own fiture and prepare to make
its 0~11 way in the world. The present &gee of international support will not last for ever, and is
now at its peak. Bosnia’s leaders should exploit the window provided by it, and by the recently
extended international military presence, to build their country based on effective political
institutions and a f?ee market economy.
7. Now is the time for the all the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to act in accordance with
all aspects of the Peace ABeement and to implement the commitments they undertook at
Dayton: buildmg viable institutions; promotion of democracy; protection of human rights and the
rule of law; reform of the educalional system; economic recovery; reconciliation and the return
process.
8. The September 199s elections are a vital opportunity for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves to express their own wishes about the future of their country; to
examine
the record of their elected leaders and to judge them on it; and to elect those candidates
ready to display the leadership and make the difficult compromises necessary to create a lasting
peace, and allow Bosnia and Herzegovina to t&e its rightful place in Europe.
9. I and my Office press on with our task of civilian implementation. My regional Offices in
Mostar, Tuzla, Brcko and Banja Lnks continue to promote regional co-ordination and
monitoring of the situation on the ground and to facilitate contacts at a local level, assisting
inter-Entity
co-operation. Given the positive developments in the RS I intend to reinforce further
the regional offke in Banja Luka.
10. During the period described the termination of assignments of the majority of international
staff seconded to my Office by the respective Governments rcsultcd in a substantial turn over of
personnel. The capacity of my Office to maintain its effectiveness depends on the continued
v~il1inl;acs.s of Governments to maintain their current level of commitment. I am grateful to the
Governments which have replaced or extended the terms of duty of secondees and hope that a
steady contribution in this regard will be maintained
Peace llmnlementation

Council

11. The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIG) has continued to meet on a
regular basis at the level of Political Directors of respective Foreign Ministries. I have also
continued to convcme weekly meetings of the Board at ambassadorial level in Sarajevo. The
meeting held in Sarajevo on 29 April dealt with refugee return, fmancial aid to the Republika
Srpska and the September elections. A meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Steering Board of the

/. . .

S/1998/643
English
Page 5

Implementation Council took place in Luxembourg on 9 June and set out concrete
requirements for the acceleration of peace implementation for the remainder of 1998, including a
clear plan of action to review and track progress in meeting specific goals. The Conclusions of
the Luxembourg meeting have been distributed as a Security Council document. They highlight
the following peace implementation priorities for the remainder of 1998:
Peace

The acceleration of refugee and displaced person returns in a phased and orderly manner in
accordance with the Peace Agreement.
Police and judicial reform.
The acceleration of economic rcintcgration and reform.
Free and fair nation-wide elections in September.
The implementation of the High Representative’s media strategy.
9 The strengthening of governmental institutions at all levels.
l

l

l

l

l

A full mcctiag
of the Foreign Ministers of the Peace Implementation Council will be held in
Madrid in December 1998.

III. COORDINATION

OFCIVILIAN

IMPLEMENTATlON

12. I have continued extensive consul~tions with representatives of governments and
organisations at different levels. On 11 May, I met senior UN officials in New York and on the
same day reported to the members of the Security Council on progress in peace implementation.
I have also had meetings with the Secretary General of NATO.
13. Regular discussions with the Principals in Sarajevo have heen maintained. These
consultations, with participation of the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General, the
UN IPTF Commissioner, the UNHCR Special Envoy, COMSFGR and the OSCE Head of
Mission, continue to be very useful and I intend to maintain them.
14. The Bconoworce
(I?=), which meets under my chairmanship, remains the main
body for co-ordinating .eeonomic reform policies and international reconstruction assistance.
The ETF brings together key donors in the international community and from my Office to
discuss economic policy issues in a timely and coordinated fashion.
15. The Refwee
Return Task Force (RRTF) structure requested by the Bonn PiC is now fully
operational, A Central Secretariat has been established, and a further local office was opened in
Derventa on 26 June. The RR.733 Action Plan was endorsed by the Donor Conference held in
Brussels on 7/S May. Following the Ministerial meeting in Luxembourg on 9 June the RRTF has
been required to strengthen its links with neighbouring countries in the region. An initial
planning meeting with representatives of UNHCR and OSCE f?om Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia was held in Sarajevo on 16 June.
16. Cooperation with, and coordination of international organizations has been greatly enhanced
by the creation of the Inter Agency Planning Group, chaired by a senior representative of my
Office. This body, by bringing together military and civilian organixations on a weekly basis,
has allowed rapid and responsive pl arming to take place in a rapidly changing environment. The

! ...

S/1998/643
English
Page 6

active involvement
of SFOR in this group has ensured that the political/military
which successful implementation
depends has been further strengthened.

cooperation

on

17. The members of the Human Ri tits Task Force have continued to work to address the
priorities set for 1998, both inditidually and through the work of the Human Rights Coordination
Ccnter and its Steeriug Board.
Common

Tnstitutioql

ofBosnia and &gzwovina

18. The Presidency, the Council ofMinistis
and the Parliamentary Assembly have continued to
meet regularly
in the last months. Although
the efficiency of their work continues to be
hampered by insuf5cieut political cooperation among the officials, there has been progress in
institution - building.
19. On 12 June, the former Parliament Building in Sarajevo, partially renovated with financial
contributions from the European Commission arid the World Bank, was officially opened as the
seat of the common institutions.
The common services of the Council of Ministers moved into
the building which should house, after the September elections, the plenary meetings of the
common institutions and part of their administrations.
20. In the reporting period, the Preaidcucy held few working
sessions, but met frequently with
high-ranking international delegations. Decisions of note were the approval of the proposal by
my Office to establish a penmnent location for common institutions at the former Parliament
Building in Sarajevo (24 April ) and the liquidation of the National Bank of Bosnia and
Herzegovina
(28 May ).
21. The Council of Ministers meetings during this period have been increasingly focused and
professional. The main overall emphasis was on the continued implementation of the Council of
Ministers Law. through proper staffmg and establishment of the Ministries consistent with their
new organizational plans. The Council has benefited greatly corn the assistance of its new
International Coordinator, who has worked closely with the Chairs ta ration&e
procedures, hire
staff, and fiialize
the move of the Council’s Services into their ‘new offices. As these
improvements proceed, the Cotmcil’s effectiveness and efficiency should also increase. Other
important issues dealt with by the Council are the implementation of the Law on Travel
Documents and the adoption of the draft Law on Privatlzation.
22. At its eighth session on 27 April, the Parliamentam
adopted the State Budget for
1Y98 and established a Commission to investigate Inter - Entity Crime and Corruption. At its
ninth session on 18 May, the Assembly adopted the Law on Foreign Investments which I had
previously put into force on an interim basis.
23. lt failed, however, to adopt the law on the Coat of hns
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. AS a
consequence, I decided to enforce the Law on Coat of Arms on an interim basis. The new Coat
of Arms follows the design of the flag.
24. In its session held on 5 June 1998 the Mtutional

Court laid down two decisions in respect
of appeals in cases decided by the Human Rights Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina and a
decision on the right of one of the Co-Chairs of the BiPi-Council of Ministers to initiate
proceedings before the court. The judges are working
with efficiency and professionalism. They

/ ...

S/1998/643

English
Page 7

ageed by consensus to extend the mandate of the fist President of the Court in order to continue
the process of bringing the Court to 111 operational capacity. A serious obstacle, however, is the
failure of the BiH-authorities to make adequate resources available to the Court. The next session
will be held on 14 October. 1998.
..

25. Since my last report, the B
Comm ittee forms
(SCMMJ has held its sixth
and seventh sessions. Progress has been made on a proposal to allow cross-IEBL helicopter
flights for VIPs and the Secretariat has worked up a new six month program for approval at the

next meeting. Regrettably the issue of Defense Attaches has bad to be passed to the Presidency
after an agreed compromise was derailed by Bosniac withdrawal of consent. Within the
Secretariat itself, considerable progress has been made towards
self-sufficiency, with the chair
being handed from my SCMM Coordinator to the advisor of the presiding Member of the
Presidency. AJSO: pending the move of tie institutions to the former Parliament Building,
Secretariat meetings have moved from the neutral ground of my offices to other locations in BH.
So far meetings
have been held in Pale, Novi Travnik and Tuzla, and have all been characterized
by a positive and businesslike atmosphere.

Essential

T,e&Jatioq

26 My Office

is noti preparing
a list of basic legislation, which will hcJp entrench the rule of
law, as envisaged in paragraph 109 of the Luxembourg Conclusions27. The work on drafting laws on various subjects is proceeding well. A draft
Teleconnnunications Law was agreed upon and the draft signed by alJ participants, representing
both the St&e and the Entities and all constituent peoples, at a workshop held in Geneva in early
July, sponsored by the TTU, EBN) and my Office. The draft wiJl be forwarded to the Council of
Ministers very soon. The draft Immigration Law is also ready, and has been discussed with the
Ministers concerned. This &-aft will be sent to the Council of Ministers very shortly. The
Aviation Act is very near completion. As for citizenship legislation, the Citizenship Law of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been discussed at several meetings
and a draft is
completed. WC hope to start work soon together with the Council of Europe to assist Republika
Srpska to develop their citizenship law.
28. My Office is studying with experts of the Venice Commission different aspects of the
constitutional provisions in respect of the election of the presidencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina
as well as in the Federation of Bosnia and Hemegovina, which will be an essentidl part of the
permanent electoral law. A working group inoluding domestic and international expeits shah
then drafi the final version on the basis of the proposal from my Office.
29. An &Media\
the principles of objectivity,

was established, continuing our efforts to ensure
transparency, non-discrimination and proportionality in the media.

30. The role of the JMC is to establish a regulatoty regime for broadcasters and other
media in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The IMC will work to promote pluralism in the
media and to ensure that broadcast licenses are issued and regulated without
political interference.

S/1998/643
English
Page 8

3 1, My Office , togetha with experts from the UN and experts appointed by the Council of
Europe, have assisted working groups in both Entities to draw up a Criminal Code and Criminal
Law Codes which are in conformity with the European Convention of Human Rights. In the
Federation Codes are currently before the House of Peoples, while the Republika Srpska-codes
should be submitted to the National Assembly by the end of summer.
32. Currently the Rector’s Conference of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is the only coordination
structure for higher education in the country. It aims to represeot all universities in the country.
My Offtce encourages the Conference to become fully operational33. My Office is continuing its efforts to coordinate the drafting of different commercial and
capital market laws by USAID and experts of the European Union. Several laws have been
presented by USAID to the Fednation Government and are now being considered for adoption.
34. Due to the on-going efforts of my Office an important Memorandum of Understanding
concerning Water Issues was signed on 2 June and the Entities have formed a Joint Commission
for Water Management. Since last year, my Office has brought the Entity ministers responsible
for the environment together for discussions and on 14 July, my Office concluded a
Memorandum of Understanding on Environmental Matters between the Entities.
Special

Parallel

Rela@numl&mcssion

Issue..

35. Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia concluded an Agreement on
Estabiiuhment of an Inter-State Councilfor
Cooperation on 30 March 1998. This agreement
shall supersede the Agreement on the E..&blbhment of the Councilfor Joint Cooperation
between the Republic of Bosnia and Hexzegovina, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Republic of Croatia of 14 December 1995.
36. My Office was informed recently about a proposal for an Agreement on Special Parallel
Refa~ions bctwecn the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia. Such
an agreement is in certain rcspccts inconsistent with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the division of competencies bctieen the common institutions and the Entities. The parties
involved have been informed accordingly. My Off& is monitoring the situation closely.
37. Discussions on the compromise mini-agreement package on s
put forward by
the Special Negotiator at the end of March failed to lead to any consensus: four delegations
accepted the package but one (FRY) had substantial objections to it. Only very limited progress
has been made regarding effective acctss to records and data relevant to succession issues,
although the FRY has decided in principle to make certain documents available.
38. In its Declaration of 9 June 1998, the Ministerial Meeting of the Steering Board of the PIC
noted with concern the lack of progress in arriving at a consensus on substantive issues of
succession. It stated that these negotiations cannot continue indefinitely. It supported my
recommendations for a pause in the negotiations until the end of September to be followed by 3
further negotiating session on the basis of the draft Framework Agreement of 13 November
1997. should appropriate conditions exist. After that session, the Steering Board will, if
necessary, revisit the question including the option of referring key outstanding issues to
arbitration. In addition, consideration may be given to pursuing steps to distribute relevant assets
held abroad.

/. . .

S/1998/643

English
Page 9

39. On access to records, the Steering Board renewed its request made by the (Bonn) PIG and
stressed the importance of full compliance with it, and without delay. Such a move would enable
negotiations on the $rafi Framework Agreement
to proceed effectively and on an equal footiag.
J3rcko

llimute

40. ln accordance with the Supplemenhl Award of 15 March 1998, the Supervisor of Brcko and
his staff have pursued a vigorous policy of implementation. Both Entities improved in their
cooperation with the Supervisor, though major responsibility for implementation lies with the
Republika Srpslca. Security conditions for return have been generally satisfactory - no major
incidents on inter-ethnic grounds occurred during the reporting period.
41. Freedom of movement, both in the Zone of Separation (ZOS) and through and within the
Brcko city limits for vehicles other than Seth-Entity ngistraticm, is steadily improving.
42. The return of displaced persons (DPs) and refugees is now taking place in a greater number
of areas, including Brcko proper. To date 2,998 applications for return (approximately 12,000
persons) have been approved and more than 1,072 Bosniac and Croat fam3ie.s (an estimated
4,000 persons) have returned,
43. The problem of dealing with DPs occupying returnees’ houses has grow.
The tempo of
returns from the Federation to the Brcko area could be higher if Serb DPs in Brcko, now living in
abandoned Bosniac and Croat houses, were willing to contemplate return to the Federation,
whcrc an appropriate security environmen& jobs, and other social benefits in the Federation
would be made available . Along with some artificial bureaucratic impediments, the Federation
requirement that Serb DPs produce a certification as “to where they have been since 1991” does
nothing to reduce anxiety among Serb DPs contemplating returning to the Federation.
44. The multi-ethnic administration, judiciary and police were fully staffed by the czld of June
and are now operational - in accordance with the Supervisor’s orders. All three ethnic groups
appear to work satisfactorily together, especially in the police and judiciary. The multi-ethnic
police expanded their operation to include mobile and static multi-ethnic patrols, both in the ZOS
area and in Brcko proper. Two major problems remain to be resolved: lack of essential
equipment, such as radios and weapons; and the sizable disparity between Serb policemen’s
salaries (very low) and the original salaries of the other two ethnic groups carrying out the same
jobs in the Federation.
45. ‘l’he revitalization of Brcko’s economy envisaged both in the first Arbitral Award and in the
Supplemental Award is directly related to a ptaceful return process and progress ti enhancing
democratic institutions in Brcko: multi-ethnic administration, judiciary and police and other
establishments, fmanced by the Brcko Municipality budget. To make this happen a certain
number of Serb employees had to be laid off in order to employ Bosniacs and Croats. There arc
uo alternative jobs for those laid off. Returnees, steadily increasing innumbers, also have no job
opportunities. All this may contribute negatively to the stability and peace between the thtcc
ethnic communities and should bc addressed through improving their economic outlook.
46. Although my Brcko office and other international organizations in Brcko are achieving
steady progress in reconstruction of the municipal tiastructure,
housing reconstruction, and

! ...

S/1998/643

English
Page 10

micro projects (including small businesspromotion), Brcko’s economy remains stagnant and
lacks substantial employruent opportunities. Brcko is in critical need of employment
opportunities to support the multi-ethnic administration and returnees and to deter the potential
for social unrest.
47. Tn.order to make significant headway toward revitalization of the economy bcforc the final
arbitral proceedings begin at the end of 1998, a special economic -zone and a privatization
process must be established. For this to happen, increased and steady support of the international
donor community will bc necessary.
Joint

Commissionq

48. The activities of the Provisional Election Commission (Annex 3), chaired by the OSCE, arc
referred to in the elections sectioas of this report.
49. At the 8”’ and 9’ sessionsoftbe pal
M&.uments in BW
/~Ierz.?.eavina, held respectively on 8-9 May in Paris, and on 29 June in Mostar, the list of
monuments was extended to 110, and the Commission examined a preliminary report on

and

legislnticm
prepared
by UNESCO,
-ith P view to providing
Boo&o mnd I-Ic~~c~ovinn
with the
necessary legal apparatus to protect its cultural heritage. Morcover, at the June session the
Commission drafted-a letter to the competent authorities in both entities requesting that they take
the necessary steps to protect the sites of monuments which have been totally destroyed, and
inform the Commission of the measures taken.
Federatinn

lssnekq

50. My Office continued to focus its attention on Federation issues. A meeting of the Federation
Forum was held in Mostar on 16 April.
Agreements
were reached on a wide range of issues
includfng Mostar returns, the continuing dissolution of parallel structures and separate financial
channels as well as initiation of the second phase of municipal reform. My Office continues to
follow up the implementation of these agreements.
5 1. As a result of the Federation Forum, Governors and Vice-Governors of the Central Bosnia
and Herzegovina-NereWa Cantons have successfully paid joint visits to the municipalities in
their Cantons to accelerate the merging of parallel municipal adminisirations with specific
attention to the continued existence of parallel structures, fi~U functioning of joint municipal
administrations and implementation of Canton return plans. Results are, however,
still limited.
52. An Inter-Ministerial
Commission has been established to begin the second phase of
municipal re-organization, consisting of representatives of the competent Federation Minisbies,
as well as the Council of Europe and my Office. This Commission held its first meeting on 25
June and will continue, with the aim of concluding its work by 31 December 1998.
53. The most numerous minority rctum movement of the first months of 1998 was to Drvar.
These returns were, however, accompanied by an increasing number of house burnings and
security incidents, including the murder of two elderly Serbs on 15 Aptil. In light of the
continued failure of local authorities to provide sufficient security in the municipality, the
Deputy Mayor of Drvar and the Chief of Police wcrc removed from office.

/ ...

S/1998/643

English
Page 11

54. During an organized riot on 24 April,

the Drvar municipal offices were attacked, and the
Serb Mayor attacked and womded. Some houses as well as the local offices of my Office, the
UN IPW, UNHCR and OSCE were also attacked and severely damaged by tiic.
55. My Office, in cIose co-ordination with all the major implementation agencies, took measures
Lo assert the international presence in Drvar, to re-establish a secure environment, to initiate
investigations to identify the perpetrators and to make it possible for the return process could
resume. I have appointed a Resident Envoy to monitor and help stabilise the situation in Drvar.
Rmublika

&p&g

56. The period between April and June saw a consolidation of the position of the new RS
government, and the strengthening of the political parties forming the government coalition, at
the expense of the previously ruling hard-line parties. The Government strengthcncd its control
over the police, as well as the military, the judiciary and the customs authorities57. The RS National Assembly passed some essential legislation required by the Peace
Agreement. The Government coalition managed to block any attempt by the SDS led-opposition
to derail progress. In June, it voted to remove the representatives of the SDS and SRS from their
positions as President and Vice-President of the Assembly, which they had used to obstruct the
passage of essentia!- legislation, and replaced them with representatives from a moderate RS
party and a Bosniac from the Federation-based Coalition respectively. For the first time in post war BH, there is now a Bosniac Vice-Speaker of the RS Assembly.
58. In June, the three Serb Government parties fied

the Sloga coalition. They are confident
that they will strengthen their position in the upcoming September elections and thus create
conditions for a further progress in peace implementation in the RS.
59.1 am, however, concerned that the RS Prime Minister and the RS President should live up to
the promises which they have made. Minority return into RS municipalities remains negligible,
mainly due to the fact that many municipalities are still domina+d by the old nationalistic forces
of the SDS, ‘However, the RS Government failed to honor its political commitment as regards the
adoption of the so-called proprxly laws, which are the basis for refugee return, as well as to make
progress on the envisaged restructuring of the police forces.
Elect.im

60. Since my last report, the regulatory work of the Provisional Election Commission
for the
1998 general elections has been almost completed, except for the sections on voting and
counting. In addition to the changes I mentioned in my last report, the Provisional Election
Commission has reduced the term of office to two years for all levels of government, except for
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, which is regulated in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constilution. The Chair of the Presidency will rotate every eight months. According to the new
rules at 1-t one third of the first ten candidates on a political party or coalition list must be
women; candidates are obliged publicly to disclose their own and their family’s financial assets;
and paid media advertising is prohibited.
61. The voter registration period has closed, as has the period for the registration of political
partics, the forming of coalitions and alliances as well as the submission of candidate lists. In’

/. . .

S/1998/643
English
Page 12

order to reflect the rapidly changing political landscape the Provisional
Election Commission
extended the period for the registration of parties separating from already existing parties until 1
July 1998. The New Croat Initiative (NHI), headed by the Croat Member of the presidency,
has
applied to register as a party.
62. In addition to preparations
for the 1998 elections, monitoring of the implementation
of the
1997 municipal elections results continues. In June, the Provisional Election Commission
extended the period to revoke Final Certification
until the next municipal elections are held in
September 1999. This measure will help to apply pressure to ensure that municipal
councils/assemblies
function efficiently and the voluntary return of displaced municipal officials
to the municipalities
takes place.

Media
63. For the past three months my media strategy has continued to bc based on a three-pillared
approach, namely (1) re-structtig
of the media environment and the creation of a regulatory
framework,
(2) support to the independent m&a and provision of alternative sources of
information,
and (3) a public service information campaign designed to break the control of the
government and political parties of the media environment. We are now making progress in our
primary objective of redressing the balance of access to objective information,
and along with
the OSCE have agreed strict guidelines for fair and equitable access to the media in the preelection period.
64. First

As regards the re-structuring
and regulation pillar of my strategy, the
l-U& U”lC
lJalauwal
rcpv,
liug
et Srp&a
Radio
ToloGa~ja
(ESIT)
~-ALSOp ro~idbxl
of events in the Serb Entity. The new Board of Governors led by the International
Administrator
continues to function effectively. Since the appointment of the administrator,
the evening news
program no longer airs inflammatory
political commentaries.
However, the restructuring
process
at SRT has been hampered by a lack of financial and technical resources and I urge donor
governments
not to neglect this important technical part of the restructuring
process.
restn~rtnrin~

Pit&r

prowPOC

65. Due to the improvement
in the political climate and the success of the restructruing
effort,
SFOR troops have withdrawn
from all but two of the SRT tower sites which were taken over last
year, and early withdrawal
from remaining towers is envisaged.
66. The reform of RTV BiH has been the main media restructuring
activity of the reporting
period. The aim of this reform has been to protect the television from direct political control and
to enfranchise the main communities of the Federation and the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement. Two of the three members of the collective
Presidency, Alija Izetbegovic and Kresimir Zubak, signed a Memorandum
of Understanding
undertaking
to support a reorgsnization
of RTV BiH. The leadership of the Trade Union of RTV
BiH also signed the Memorandum.
The MOU calls for the establishment
of a public
broadcasting
corporation reflecting the constitutional
structure of BiH. Until the corporation
is
established, an interim Board of Governors and an international administrator
will begin
restructuring
the television network. The HighRepresentative
will ratify the Board of Governors
and appoint an international administrator.

/ ...

S/1998/643
English
Page 13

67. The independent Media Commission
@MC) was officially established on 11 June by a
Decision of the High Representative.
The IMC was formed in accordance with Annex 10 of the
GFA.P and in accordance with the Bonn PJC Conclusions.
The Decision sets out the authority of
the IMC to assign broadcast frequencies across BiH, issue broadcast licenses and to enact a press
code for print media. As part of the Decision, a moratorium art new licenses was declared to
allow for the l.MC to assess the current state of affairs in the broadcasting
sphere.
68. The aim of the IMC is to ensure that all broadcasters
and media outlets in the country
conform to a set of minimum standards based on Wcstem democratic principles and law. After a
transparent recruitment process, a Director General was selected as well as other experts to lead
the departments. The IMC has held press conferences to explain its work and continues to
consult with broadcasters about the details of a code of practice, which is expected to be released
on 1 August.
69. Second Pillar My Of&c has, over the reporting period, put in place a procedutc for the
systematic assessmentof existing and new independent media, with a view to ensuring a fair
distribution of inrcrnational support. My Office has tried to direct assistance to areas which lack
alternatives
sources of information, apart from those controlled by local authorities. This strategy
would benefit greatly from better coordination among donor governments on projects being
selected for financial assistance among the independent media. My Office will work to promote
that in the coming tionths.
70. The most ambitious independent media project supported by the international community
over the period, in line with objectives set out in previous reports, was the television cha.tmel the
j3~e1-1‘H&cast
Network m.
Due to phased donations by the international community of
financing and programming, the channel has now established a tii
foothold on the Bit3 media
scene. This is confirmed by independent polling and research. Unpredictability of f&ding has
been partially
overcome in the reporting period, enabling the channel to set a firm and coherent
programming and news schedule, at least until the end of this year. The OBN has also made
simificant progress in increasing marketing revenue, and is now firmly on the way to becoming
a fully-fledged commercial channel. The OBN’s commercial viability will, however, remain
linked to the economic development in BiH as a whole and its long-term sustainability will
depend on achieving Rbalancs between a gradual phasing out of international donations and
targeted commercial revenue.
7 1, Third PiUar The Pub1ic Service Information Campaign (PSIC), which makes up the third
pillar of my strategy, aims to provide clear, unbiased information, via commissioned
programming and advertisements, on a series of themes. The issues treated in the PSIC underpin
the main areas of work undertaken in the civilian area in support of the Peace Process. The
messageshave been designed by progra mming professionals to be clear and accessible to the
public. Both the advertising and programming strands of the campaign are now partially
completed, and are being broadcast by all media in the country. New advertisements and
programs. pursuing
the themes already developed, will continue to appear.

/ ...

S/1998/643
English
Page 14

72. Rctums have been slower than expected in the first half of 1998. The UNHCR had set a
target figure of 50,000 minority rctums for the first six months of the year. The actual figure is
closer to 11 -15,000.
73. As outlined in the RRTF Action Plan, the primary obstacles to return remain a lack of
political will on the part of the authorities, the absence of a sense of personal security for
minority returnees, housing shortages, a general lack of employment opportunities,
and legal and
administrative
problems.
74. The Bsnja Luka Conference on Regional Return marked the first in a series of steps to
promotc regional return.
The Conference set out the requirements
for accelerated return
between from Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
and from FR Yugoslavia to each of these two
countries. The emphasis was on the adoption of concrete renn-n plans and the implementation
of
appropriate legislative. adminisirative,
and social frameworks.
75. Croatia’s adoption of a new return programme’on
26 June 1998 marked a further step
towards the realisation of regional return. While failing to address all the issues raised at the
Banja Luka Conference, the Croatian return programme is promising and may yield significant
returns if implemented in good faith. The RRTF is strenthening its links witi key actors in
Croatia with a view to assisting in its implementation
and in expediting cross-border
return.
76. Also on the 26* of June, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees hosted the
Humanitarian
Issues Working
Group in Geneva. The meeting reviewed and endorsed the High
Commissio~er’s
Regional Return Stmtcby and underlined the importance of minority Mum as
key to solving tbc overall return problem in the countries of former Yugoslavia.
As my Deputy
pointed out at the Humanitarian
Issues Working Group (HIWG) however, the planning phase is
over now. It is now results that count.
77. Implcrnentation
of the Sarajevo Declaration has so far be- poor. The authorities refuse to
address systematic problcxns in the housing allocation system, adopting a burdensome and
opaque approach instead of dealing with individual cases one by one. US and European Union
assistance for Sarajevo.has been suspended as a consequence ofnon-compliance.
I will brief the
Slcering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council in full on 22 July 1998, and discuss with
them a package of possible measures to rectify the situation75. In a positive development, cross-Inter-Entity
Boundary Line (IEBL) returns are picking up
Bosnian Serbs have returned to places like Bosanslci Petrovac, Sarajevo, Drvar, and Central
Bosnia. Bosniak and Croat returns are taking place into the north-western
part of the Republika
Srpka in modest numbers. and are expected to accelerate over the summer as reconstruction
programmes
finish and more accommodation
becomes available. The European Commission’s
1998 programme
in support of return is a key factor in generatiug new housing space and
supporting infrastructure.

pace.

79. For the remainder of the year, I will continue to apply strict conditionality
in support of
return. I will not hesitate to use my authority to remove officials who try to prevent returns.
I
remain convinced, however, that 1998 is not the only year of return, however. The return of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
rcmgees and displaced people will take years. The prospect of the

/ ...

S/1998/643
English
Page 15

September elections may be contributing to this delay in the return process, as government
leaders shrink from previous commitments
to allow significant minority returns for fear that
these might adversely affect their political fortunes.
Freedom of Movement
80. The implementation of the Uniform License Plate System is proceeding well. To date, two
thirds of vehicle owners in BiII have been issued with the common license plates. To achieve
this, a series of high-level interventions by my Office and the UN BYIF has been required. hi
accordance with the Bonn PIG Conclusions, I asked the Peace Implementation Council Members
to permit only vehicles with the new license plates to cross international borders after 1 June. As
a result of the introduction of the new license plates, which do not reveal the place of origin or
etbnicity of the car holder, freedom of movement
across the IEBL has increased substantially
during the reporting period.
81. Progress on freedom of movement across the BX borders into Croatia for BiH citizens
resident in the RS and displaced Serbs from Croatia in that Entity has not been satisfactory. This
issue has been raised frequently with the Croatian Government, which has announced that there
will be no further discrimination against RS residents bearing new Bosnian passports. However,
the Croatian Government maintains visa and other impediments for bearers of other travel
documents resident in the RS.
82. Infrastructure issues continue to require the attention of my Office. Resumption of normal
railway traffic between BiH and Croatia has yet to come into effect. The agreement on border
rail traffic has recently been submitted to the Ministry of Civil Affairs and Communications for
approval by the Council of Ministers and discussion with the Croatian authorities. The recently
formed public corporation for railways has signed a similar agreement with Croatian Railways,
although it should be noted that this public railways corporation has yet to formalise a book of
rules governing its operations.
83. The decree on the regUkdtiOn
of inter-Entity bus traffic was signed in April. Instructions arc
now being drawn up for implementation of the decree. Meanwhile, no new inter-Entity bus lines
have been approved.
84. A protocol addressing regulation
of navigation on the River Sava has been prepared and
submitted to the Ministry of Civil Affairs and Communications for consideration and further
discussion with Croatian authorities. ‘Ibis protocol awaits approval.
85. Bridge programs for reconstruction of Una and Sava river bridges have been identified.
IIowever, at this time, no bridges have been reconstructed and numerous temporary structures
are in use. Seven bridges are under consideration by the EC, two by USAID and one bridge is
currently under reconstruction under a World Bank project. Efforts to co-ordinate reconstruction
projects through the involvement of the donors and representatives of Croatia, Bosnia &
Hcnegovina and the local authorities have yet to be realised.

/ ...

S/1998/643

English
Page 16

86. Regrettably no major improvements have taken place during the reporting period in relation
to police restructuring in the Federation. Of particular concern are two of the Federation
Cantons, which continue to exist without Ministries of Interior having been inaugurated. UN
TPT’F has however made progress in relation to the Federation Ministry of Tnterior. Tnauguration
of the Ministry is expected shortly.
87. In accordance with the Bonn PTC Conclusions and the Declaration of the Luxembourg
Ministerial meeting of the PIC Steering Board, my Office prepared, in cooperation with UN
TPTF, the necessary draft legislation for the establishment of a border police of BiH, which is
about to be submitted to the Council of Ministers for discussion and adoption.
MisninePersnns.

Mnos

Graveg

88. The issue of missing persons remains ~cry sensitive and is frequently manipulated by
different groups for political purposes. The Working Group on Missing Persons, chaired by the
ICRC, continue to make it possible for representatives of the family associations to have direct
contact with the relevant local authorities.
89. AII important step forward has been made by the Joint Exhumation Commission, chaired by
my Office. The Commission, comprising representatives of the three parties, is the principal
forum for inter-Party exhumations. During March, it became possible to conduct exhumations
for the first time without total reciprocity. The RS team started exhumations in Jajce on 2 March,
the Croat team began their exhumations in the area of Kakanj two days later and the Bosniae
team - in West Mostar, in the middle of March. The work continues in a co-operative manner. So
far approximately 250 bodies have been exhumed in 20-30 micro locations in 4 main areas since
the beginning of March.
90. The exhumations are perfom~ed with the help of the international community. Physicians for
Human Rights assists with technical and scientific expert%, sponsored by the International
Commission on Missing Persons, who also Provide funds for dc-mining and forensic materials.
The UN assists with mine assessmat visits to &he sites and the UN IPTF monitor the local.
police, who are responsible for security at the sites. SFOR provide area security and emergency
evacuation capability.

9 I. T am pleased with the continuing progress being made towards the goal of securing adequate
Human RiLrhts 0 mbu dsom
and@
and stable funding for thc,Human Rin me
Commission f-al
Prone* Claims (w.
Greater financial security has enabled the
institutions to deal more effectively with their rapidTy growing caseload. However, the
commitment by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Government to contribute DM 200,000 to each
institution from its 1997 budget and DM 500,000 from its 1998 budget has not yet been met. My
Office is continuing to work with the government to ensure that this obligation is fulfilled.
92. There is still a serious lack of cooperation on the part of the authotities in ensuring that the
decisions and recommendations of these institutions are effectively impIementecL After a long

/ ...

S/1998/643

English
Page

17

delay, an agent to represent the State in proceedings before the Chamber was f5naIly appointed.
Unfortunately, one has still not been appointed for the Ombudsperson. My Office is continuing
its involvement in monitoring authorities’ responses and coordinating intervention in cases in
which the authorities have failed to meet their obligations. Mechanisms and strategies to ensure
respect for the final and binding decisions of the Human Rights Chamber and the Commission
for Real Prop&y Claims as well as implementation of recommendations by the Ombudsperson
and the Federation Ombudsmen must be strengthened Implementing legislation for the
Commission
for Real Property Claims has been drafted and legislation on behalf of the
Commission on Human Rights is also under consideration. Coordination and cooperation among
the institutions is good and measurable progress has been made in terms of the in~titutiod
impact in contributing to the respect for human rights and the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
93. My Office is extrcmcly concerned by the increase in the number of incidents of destruction
of property and violence directed agiinst tctumees and minority residents, in municipalities such
as War, Stolac and Travnilc. The murder of an elderly Bosnian Serb couple attempting to return
to Drvar in April, the organised violent assault against Bosnian Serb returnees and members of
the international community on 24 April in Drvar, as well as a car explosion in Tramik resulling
in the death of a Bosnian Croat police officer and the wounding of his Bosniac police partner,
have been stiongly condemned by the international community. These incidents underscore the
failure of local and national authorities
to assume their responsibilities for ensuring a secure
environment essential for implementation of Annexes 6 and 7 of the Peace Agreement.
Allegations of human rights violations by local police continue to be reported in both Entities. In
response to the serious allegations of abuse in police custody in Teslic, however, the joint UN
WTF and RS police investigation has led to the suspension of members of the police force in
Teslic. It is hoped that the actions t&cn as a result of this joint investigation will send a clear
message to the authorities in both entities that such acts will not be tolerated.
91. An agreement was reached between the IWO Ministries of Education in May regarding a
review of all textbooks in use in primary and secondary schools (with the cxccption of textbooks
foT mathematics, science and technical vocational courses). Under the Agreement, coordinated
by my Office with the assistance of UNESCO, the Council of Europe axid the World Bank,
expert teams have been established by the Ministries to review the textbooks in order to identify
offensive material which should be removed in advance of the upcoming
school year. My Office
is also working with these international organizations to ensure necessary curriculum reform in
both entities.
95. While the adoption of the property and housing laws in April by the Federation National
Assembly has put in place the essential legal framework for return of refugees and displaced
persons to their pre-war homes, implementation of these laws has been slowed by numerous
forms of deliberate obstruction. In the Luxembourg Declaration, the Steering Board urged the
Federation authorities to take immediate steps to ensure full implementation of the legislation.
96. The Kepublilca Srpska government has failed to date to fulfil its commitment to ensure that
draft property and housing laws, which are essential to return and to peace implementation
generally, are adopted. A deadline of 3 1 August was set in Luxembourg for draft legislation
acceptable to my Office to be fmalizcd and passed by the National Assembly. My Office will
conlinue to work to ensure that this deadline is met.

/. . .

S/1998/643

English
Page 18

&cn?theninn

the Q&g of Law

and C!o-oDerawitb

TCIV

97. RccLmt developments
in the area of judicial cooperation have been encouraging, particularly
with the signing of the Memorandum
of Understanding
on Legal Assistance between Institutions
of the Federation and Republika Srpska on 20 May. Further, the Inter-Entity Legal Cooperation
Commission, established by the BiH Presidency in February 1998, held its inaugural session in
June. Once fully established, the Com.mission
will provide a forum in which concrete
recommendalions will be made as to how to expand and improve legal cooperation between the
Entities as well as to provide advice on the implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding on Legal Assistance.
98. Despite the PIC Conclusions in Bonn, which called for the Fcdcration to adopt the new
Federation Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code by 3 1 Januaxy 1998, both codes have
remained under consideration by the Federation Parliament for more than four months after this
deadline. In Luxembourg, the Steering Board therefore called upon the Entities to bring the
current, first phase of the Criminal Law reform to completion and urged the Federation and RS
to enact new criminal codes and criminal procedure codes by 30 June 1998 and 31 August 1998
respectively. The Federation has failed to meet its deadline of 30 June, despite nearly a half-year
extension. Both laws are essential for efiective protection of the rights and freedoms set forth in
the European Conv&tion on Human Rights and its Protocols as well as for the functioning of the
judicial systems in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Office has intervened strongly to ensure
adoption by the Federation of these laws and will continue to place pressure on the Republika
Srpska to meet its obligations under the Lux&mbourg Declaration.
99. In accordance with the BOM PIC Conclusions, my Office has continued to work to ensure a
comprehensive and coordinated approach to judicial system refinm. While ptogress has been
made in this field, I remain concerned that judicial reform efforts are not proceeding quickly
enough to address the urgent needs of the peace process. For example, the inability of the legal
system to address violence which threatens the return of refugees and displaced persons must be
addressed. Jn addition, there is a compelling need for reform of the judicial appointments
system. Along with other intemdiod
organizations. my Office has iakwened
to ensure that
judicial appointments are made on the basis of professional qualifications, rather than political
criteria. However, a more systematic approach is necessary, and to that ad draft legislation is
being prepared to address this issue. Moreover, I have asked the Venice Commission of the
Council of Europe for its Opinion on the question whether a judiciary at the state level needs to
bc established in order to hear, infer u&z, claims submitted by persons whose interests have been
prejudiced by actions of the BH institutions. If the Venice Commission’s Opinion is affirmative,
necessary Icgislative measures will have to be taken for the establishment of such a judiciary.
100. Also at Bonn, the PIC stressedthat “monitoring of the judicial system is an essential
element of this process” and called for “the necessary resources to be devoted to that task.”
Unfortunately, this appeal has not been met. Judicial system reform efforts continue to be
hampered by the current ad hoc approach to monitoring, which does not provide the requisite
information for effective targeting and development of reform programs. Comprehensive
judicial system monitoring would increase the efflcienoy of all other etiorts in this field, and
itself acts as a deterrent against abuses.

/ ...

S/1998/643

English
Page 19

10 1. Co-operation with ICTY continue5
with the detention of four Bosnian Serb indictees by
SFOR troops
during the reporting period, as well as the volmta~
surrender of a Bonian Serb
indictee in April.
102. My Oflice has also continued its work in supporting efforts underway to reform the legal
framework applicabIc to NGGs, to establish a proper legal and security environment which
supports the development of civil society organisations. A working version of a new draft Law
on Associations and Foundations was distributed in June for public discussion. This fitst
distribution is primarily aimed at domestic NGOs in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the aim being to
solicit their views on legislation that will crucially affect them. A sound legislative framework
for NC305 is vital. Freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly are fimdamcntal to
an Lnduring peace in Bosnia and Hemegovina.
Expression of these rights through a vigorous
civic society helps build social stability and respect for the rule of law. Appropriate legislation
protects these rights and instills accountability.

103. The Luxembourg Declaration of the PIC Ministerial Steering Board stressed the importance
of establishing an integrated economy in BiH, as well as moving the country towards a marketled economy. In this light, some important progress has been made in the period under review.
However, the implementation of reforms in economic management has remained difficult.
104. A major step forurard in creating the necessary
conditions for sustained economic
development was the approval by the IMF Executive Board on 29 May of a stand-by
arrangement. Under the arrangement, a total of USD 82 million is made available to stiengthen
the financial
position of the country in general and the Central Bank in particular. The loan will
facilitate the realization of the 1998-1999 macro-economic program as presented by the B&I
authorities. Further support for achieving key economic reforms in public finance is given jy the
World Bank; following the IMF agreement, the Public Finance Structural Adjustment Yreciit,
totaling USD 63 million, was approved on 4 June.
105. The IMF stand-by loan provided necessary reserve funds for the Central Bank of BiH
(CBBH). This in turn enabled the introduction of the Konvertible Ma~ka (KM), the new common
currency for BiH. The KM is pegged to the DM in a ratio of 1: 1. This exchange rate is secured
by the currency board constraints,
under which all KM in circulation w-ill be backed by DM or
other convertible currency. The introduction of the KM took place on 22 June. Even though the
initial introduction has suffered from some difficulties, I am confident that the KM will be
reliable currency for all of BiH.
106. An essential part of the establishment of a fully independent CBBH is the liquidation of the
former national bank, the NBBH. On 28 May, the Presidency of BiH approved the liquidation
plan for the NBBH. The plan is now being carried out by an experienced liquidator.
107. A unified economic -spaceis a pm-condition for the future economic development of Bill. It
is therefore encouraging that the legal framework concerning all aspects of customs for BiH is
nearly completed. As of 1 Janu,ary 1999, BiH will have modern customs procedures campatible
with EU practice. The Customs and Fiscal Assistance Office (CIAO),
funded by the EC, is

/ *. .

S/1998/643
English
Page 20

helping the local authorities
to ensure proper implementation
of the customs regime,
improve the administration
in ail relevant fields and to increase customs revenues.

and to

108. Apart from
a unified customs practice, internal trade without barriers is a second esrentia1
component of the unified economic space. With active support of my Office, the Entities have
started a constructive dialogue on issues concerning trade within BiH. Even though many
barriers are to be removed, some initial results have already facilitated increased trade. In
particular, the RS has amended its system of sales taxes and both Entities have removed
restrictions to trade with the other Entity,
109. The Council of Ministers (CoM) has adopted the draft Framework Law on Privatization of
Enterprises and Banks, draRcd by my Office. This is an important step forward since the Law
secures the legal environment for privatization programs to be implemented by both entities- The
Law further stipulates that basic principles such as non-d.& &nination
of DPs and refugees,
transparency and public accountability need to be observed. In order to monitor that privatization
process is in compliance with the GPAP and with this Law, I have established a Privatislation
Monitoring Commission which will make recommendations and which will report to me.
110. Significant progress has been made in the RS. After nullification of the privatization lottery
a new privatization and capital market law package has been drafted with the assistance of the
TC. These laws have been accepted by the RS Cabinet and were passed by the Parliament at the
beginning of July, ahead of schedule.
Reconstruction
111. The fourth donor conference for BiU was held in Brussels on 7 and 8 May. A total of
USD1.2
billion was pledged by 30 countries and international
organizations.
My
recommendation to the donors to increase their financial effort in the RS, including the Eastern
part, was well received, and also resulted in more reconstruction projects being initiated in the
RS during the period under review.
112. Under my chairmanship, the Economic Task Forces and the sectoral Task Forces continue
to co-ordinate the &an&l
support offered by donors. The reconstruction projects already
completed in 1998 now amount to USD 130 million, with an additional USD 600 million
currently under implementation. Two thirds have been invested in the Federation, the share of
the KS being now above one quarter of the total USD 730 million. Most of the remaining, USD
60 million has been spent at the national level in projects involving both Entities, essentially in
the energy, electrical and telecommunications sectors.
113. Two thirds of this USD 730 million is spent on infrastructure repairs, transport, energy and
water supply systems. The direct share of the RS represents about USD 130 millions for these
three sectors only. Of the USD 60 million spent in the health and education sectors, 35% is going
to the JXS.
114. The finding of the infrastructure reconstruction has significantly increased in the RS in all
sectors, with exception of the housing; of the total USD 121 million spent in reconstruction of
houses and apartments, about 90% goes to the Federation. This is mainly related to the rate of
return, which is much lower in the RS than in the Federation;. The housing projects implemented

/ ...

S/1998/643
English
Page 21

or already finished
eastern part.

in 1998 represent

USD 6 million

in the western

RS and USD 2 million

in its

115. The Project Implementation
Units established in both entities by the World Bank will help
to co-ordinate
and monitor the USD 170 million Second Electric Power Reconstruction
Project
designed to restore normal and reliable power supply in the country. Additionally,
the World
Bank approved in June a new USD 7 million credit line to improve forest management, which is
part of a $20.2 miliion project co-financed by the EC, Norway and Italy.
116. The EBRD has secured a USD 20 million loan under the Telecommunications
Emergency
Reconstruction
Project. The Bank seeks additional. financing from donors (Switzerland,
Japan,
Norway,
Italy and the Netherlands)
to finance complementary
equipment and materials for an
estimated value of USD 20 million. Local operators will provide financing
for an amount of
approximately USD 10 million. The total allocated to Telecommunications Reconstruction is
therefore approximately USD 50 million.
117. LJSAlD’s Business Development Program has approved DM 20 million in loans to ptivate
sector businesses. To date, this Program has approved approximately DM 200 million in loans
to private sector busmessesin both the Federation and the RS (87% and 13% of the total,
respectively). This assistance has resulted in the creation of over 17000 jobs. To date, over 500
companies have received technical assistance on business planning, corporate organixation,
financial and quality management, marketing, and other business functions.
118. In April, the European Community approved 17 contracts worth USD 70 milKon with nonorganisations
related to the implementation of EU-funded projects designed to
facilitate the return of refugees <anddisplaced persons. These projects were part of a wider USD
150 million 1998 rctum program funded by the European Commission.

governmental

119. Nearly half of the reconstruction effort is now financed through
three main donors; the
European Community, USAID and the World Bank However, numerous governments, including
non-European countries, are g:cnerous!y supporting the process on a bilateral basis. Besides
donors, commercial companies feel increasingly confident about the future of the counq and
are increasing their involvement in the economy, with far instance the German company VW
preparing the reopening of a car production facility in Sarajevo. The overall level of foreign
investnxmt is however ‘very low.
Public Utiitie~
120. In UK field of Public Utilities, limited progress has continued. The newly established
railway Public Corporation has drafted internal rules and procedures and is &uti.ng to become
operational. It has signed an agreement with Croatian Railways. However the Federation ‘hasstill
not prepared a new law on railways which would create the Federation railway company.
Similarly the Republika Srpska has not amended its current law to bring it into line with the
Peace Aaeement. Railway traffic has not taken off mainly due to a lack of domestic demand.
Moreover, there is still no agreement signed with Croatia at the State level to allow international
traffic with BiH.

/. . .

S/1998/643

English
Page 22

12 1. The decree on the regulation of inter-Entity bus traffic was signed mid-April. Instructions
are now being considered for implementation of the decree. Meanwhile. no new inter-Entity bus
routes have been approved.
122. A protocol addressing regulation of navigation on the river Sava has been prepared and sent
to the Ministry of Civil AfIairs and Communications for consideration and further discussion
with Croatian authorities. ‘I’h~cc months after the initial proposal, a protocol has yet to be
approved.
123. Significant progress has been achieved in the field of telecommunications. A working group
including all interested parties has agreed on a draft state law to be forwarded to the Council of
Ministers. On 22 A@ a Memorandum of Understanding concerning the resumption of Interentity mail transports was signed. AS a result postal exchange between Sarajevo and Baqja Luka
has been established on a regular basis. Similarly, a draft text on a Joint Corporation for
electrical transmission is being prepared.
124. In line with the Bonn PIC conclusions, the OHR Anti-Fraud Unit was created in mid April
1998 to assist authorities in identifying illegal activities and in coordinating international efforts
in the areas of government transparency, corruption and organ&d crime. The unit has had some
notable success both in the development of an overall anti-corruption strategy as well as in
individual cases. The ‘Unit has developed productive liaisons with local governmental agencies
and international organizations to eusure a coordinated approach to all anticorruption/transparency efforts in BiH and to implement an effective local anti-corruption
system.
125. The Council of Ministers fmally decided to tackle the issue of the implementation of the
State budget. With the help of my Office, the Minister of Civil Affairs and Communications and
his deputies agree with the Entities
on a procedure to implement the budget as per the law,
starting
on 1 June 1998. For the last six months of the year, Entities will contribute to a central
bank account and salaries will be paid according to the payroll of the Law of the Council of
Ministers .
Budgetary

support to the Rcpnblika

Srpska

126. Both to boost economic recovery and as an incentive to the new Government to live up to
its pledges to implement Dayton, T.have urged the international
community to provide funds to
cover public service wage arrears. The RS Government has received budgetary assistance of
nearly DM 27 million from six donors (EXJ, USA, UK, Canada, the Netherlands and Sweden).
‘The program has covered the payment of wage arrears in the public service for seven months.
The beneficiaries included General Administration (excepting Police and Army) and Education.
The final portion of the whole budgetary support program
was disbursed
at the end of June in
the newly introduced Konvertible Marka (KM) to help reinforce public confidence in the
currency. A key condition attached to the budgetary support included accountability and
transparency of these funds, cooperation with EC CAFAO in restoring customs and excise
collection, and working with the IMF to implement an annual budget. The Government has
cooperated in a satisfactory manner and fulfilled these conditions. These developments and other
initiatives to pave the way for a market economy have enabled the RS Government to enter into
a stand-by arrangement with the IMF which would provide a total of DM 100 million to the RS
Govcrnmenf a major step fonvard.

/ ...

-

~__

S/1998/643
English
Page 23

Mine

Clearance

127. Both Entity Mine Action Ceders are now established asbodies within the Entity
Governments. This will be confirmed at a ceremony to mark the formal transfer of the UNJ%4C
to the BiH MAC in early .Tuly, thus completing the cstablisbment of all the bodies asked for in
the London PIC Conclusions on demining.
128. The results of the M&s,

Ordnance and Other Warlike

Material

Amnesty

were

encouraging.

Jn addition to a considerable quantity of these items being handed in, 2400 weapons were also
given up, even though they wcrt: not the primary focus of the amnesty. It therefore seems

worthwhile to pursue an amnesty.specifically aimed at weapons. The BiH Authorities should be
urged to enact legislation so that such an amnesty can be implemented by the Entities in
conjunction with SFOR and the UN IPTF.
129. Three demining schools are now being established at Banja L&a, Travnik and Mostar. This
marks significant progress by the Entity armies towards achieving mine lifting to recognizrd
humanitarian demining standards. This will not only bring
valuable resources to stretched
clearance progams, but will also widen the choice for donors as to where their investment
will
be most
efficiently used.
130. The Bonn PIC Conclusions called for the renunciation on the use of all la&mines. liowever
there is still no formal renunciation of the export or continued manufacture of anti-tank mines.
This lack of commitment sends a confusing message to potential donors of derninirig resources.
There
is also still no confirmation
that all mine information has been transferred to the BiH
MAC. These matters are being pursued by the Board of Donors.
13 1, The Entity Ministries of Defense have made a presentation to the SCMM on the
implementation of the Ottawa Treaty.
