A/RES/57/283 B

United Nations

Distr.: General
7 May 2003

General Assembly
Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 116

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/57/651/Add.1)]

57/283. Pattern of conferences
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December
1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 52/214 of
22 December 1997, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of
24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 56/287 of
27 June 2002 and 57/283 A of 20 December 2002,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the United
Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences2 and the reports of
the Secretary-General,3
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,4
1.
Endorses the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions contained in its report,4 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
2.

Takes note of the report of the Committee on Conferences;2

_______________
1

Consequently, resolution 57/283, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftyseventh Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/57/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 57/283 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 32 and corrigendum
(A/57/32 and Corr.1).
3
A/56/901, A/57/228 and Add.1 and 2, A/57/289 and A/C.5/56/37.
4
A/57/472.

03 33198

A/RES/57/283 B

I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.
Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat took into account the arrangements
referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A of 18 December 1998, 54/248,
55/222 and 56/242 concerning Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Id al-Fitr
and Id al-Adha, and requests all intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when
planning their meetings;
2.
Reaffirms its decision that the headquarters rule shall be adhered to by all
bodies, and decides that waivers to the headquarters rule shall be granted solely on the
basis of the calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations as recommended
by the Committee on Conferences for adoption by the General Assembly;
3.
Also reaffirms the relevant provisions established by the General Assembly in
resolution 50/11 of 2 November 1995 on multilingualism;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General, when planning the calendar of conferences
and meetings, to avoid simultaneous peak periods at the various duty stations and to avoid
scheduling meetings of related intergovernmental bodies too closely together;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any modification to the
calendar of conferences and meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the
mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other relevant General Assembly
resolutions;
6.
Reaffirms that the Advisory Committee, when deciding upon its meeting
schedule, including meetings away from Headquarters, should take into account the
programme of work of the Fifth Committee;
II
A.

Utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities

1.
Notes with deep concern that the overall utilization factor at the four duty
stations in 2001 dropped six points below the benchmark of 80 per cent, with a 14 per cent
drop in New York, which accounted for the overall decrease;
2.
Urges the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference
resources to work more closely with the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management and to consider changes to their programme of work, including adjustments
based on previous patterns for recurring agenda items, with a view to reducing
underutilization;
3.
Notes with appreciation that, as a result of the establishment of a permanent
interpretation service at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, the number of meetings at
which interpretation services have been provided increased by 23.5 per cent in 2001 and
the number of events held increased by 10 per cent;
4.
Notes with concern that the severe constraint of adequate conference facilities
at the United Nations Office at Nairobi poses a serious challenge for any further increase in
utilization;
5.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, contained in section II,
paragraph 24, of its resolution 56/242, to consider improving and modernizing the
conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi in order to accommodate
adequately major meetings and conferences and to report thereon to the General Assembly

2

A/RES/57/283 B

at the main part of its fifty-eighth session through the Advisory Committee and the
Committee on Conferences;
6.
Welcomes the efforts made during the previous year to improve the utilization
of conference services at the United Nations Office at Nairobi;
7.
Expresses regret that the written report on utilization of conference facilities
and services at the United Nations Office at Nairobi for the current period was not
submitted for consideration by the Committee on Conferences;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit the written report referred to in
paragraph 7 of the present section to the General Assembly for consideration at its fiftyseventh session, through the Committee on Conferences;
9.
Reaffirms that all meetings of Nairobi-based bodies shall take place in Nairobi,
except as otherwise authorized by the General Assembly or the Committee on Conferences
acting on its behalf;
10. Strongly discourages any invitation for hosting meetings which would violate
the headquarters rule, in particular for United Nations centres with a low utilization level;
11. Reiterates its encouragement to the Secretary-General to continue to intensify
efforts being made by the United Nations Office at Nairobi to attract more meetings to its
facilities;
12. Notes, in the report of the Secretary-General, that the percentage of requests
met for meetings with interpretation in New York by regional and other major groupings of
Member States continued to increase, from 92 per cent during the period 2000–2001 to
97 per cent during the period from July 2001 to April 2002, and that overall, for the four
duty stations, 98 per cent of the requests were met,5 and encourages the Secretariat to
maintain that trend;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, through the Committee on Conferences, on the
methodology that accurately reflects the situation of the provision of conference services to
regional and other major groupings of Member States, taking into account the concerns
raised in its resolutions 56/254 D and 56/287;
14. Reaffirms its decision in its resolution 56/242 to include all necessary resources
in the budget for the biennium 2004–2005 to provide interpretation services for meetings
of regional and other major groupings of Member States upon request by those groups, on
an ad hoc basis, in accordance with established practice, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, through the
Committee on Conferences, a report on the implementation of this decision;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide information on meetings of regional
and other major groupings of Member States not serviced by conference services in the
context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a separate detailed report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on the cost implications of providing more
predictable and adequate conference services to the meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States, for its consideration in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;

_______________
5

See A/57/228, sect. II.B.3.

3

A/RES/57/283 B

17. Further requests the Secretary-General, when preparing budget proposals for
conference services, to ensure that the level of resources proposed for temporary assistance
is commensurate with the full demand for services, estimated on the basis of current
experience;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report in writing on the
utilization rates of interpretation services and conference facilities at all duty stations;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to develop methods and indicators for
assessing the performance of conference services from a full-system standpoint, in
particular their cost-effectiveness, efficiency and productivity in carrying out their
mandates, taking into account the best practices and experiences of other bodies and
organizations that provide analogous services, including, specifically, their experience in
developing unit cost measures of full work processes, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, through the Committee on Conferences;
20. Encourages the Committee on Conferences to keep under continued review the
procedures for the participation of observers in the work of the Committee;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible options to
increase further the utilization of the conference centre at the Economic Commission for
Africa and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session through the
Committee on Conferences;
B.

Improving the performance of the Department of General Assembly Affairs
and Conference Services

1.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the
General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;
2.
Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to develop, as soon as
possible, with the advice and support of the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat, an implementation plan for the envisaged improvements, taking into account
the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to include
progress indicators in the plan;
3.
Notes the proposal to integrate the functions of the technical servicing
secretariats of the Fifth and Sixth Committees of the General Assembly into the
Department, and requests the Secretary-General to submit this proposal in the context of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005 for further consideration;
4.
Recognizes the need to develop or update existing workload standards so as to
reflect functions performed by language staff not currently included, taking into account
the best practices and experience of other bodies and organizations engaged in analogous
work and drawing on expert advice, while taking into consideration the impact of
technological innovations;
5.
Invites the Secretary-General, in the light of the complex intellectual nature of
the language services, to develop further the performance indicators in order to evaluate
the quality of the functions performed by them to the satisfaction of the Member States;
6.
Reaffirms the concepts of delegation of authority and enforcement of
accountability, which should be applied in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
7.
Stresses that the Department is responsible for the implementation of policy,
the formulation of standards and guidelines, overseeing and coordinating United Nations
conference services and the overall management of resources under the relevant budget
4

A/RES/57/283 B

section, while the United Nations Offices at Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi remain
responsible and accountable for day-to-day operational activities;
8.
Also stresses that the responsibilities and functions of the Department and
major duty stations in the budgetary and human resources areas should be clearly defined
in accordance with the relevant mandates, taking into account specificities of the various
duty stations and their functioning in the field of conference services, when enhancing
global management;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General, when implementing paragraph 8 of the present
section, to ensure a comprehensive dialogue and coordination between the Department and
the United Nations Offices at Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi, with advice from the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, as required, in accordance with its mandate, in preparing
revisions to the relevant secretariat’s documents;
10. Notes the intention to strengthen and integrate editorial support functions, and
stresses the importance of maintaining an official records editing function while
strengthening the pre-editing functions in the Department so as to improve the timeliness
of submission of documentation, as mandated by the General Assembly;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to his report,6 to report on how
the reform initiative will involve the other major duty stations, taking into account their
specificities and operational responsibilities, in the context of the present resolution;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the structural and name
changes of the Department will be consistent with the existing mandates, inter alia, the
medium-term plan, as well as ensuring the implementation of these mandates, and not lead
to any involuntary personnel departures, and that they should improve and not negatively
affect the quality and timeliness of technical support services being provided to
intergovernmental bodies and not negatively affect the quantity of production and
distribution of documents in hard copies, as requested by Member States, simultaneously
in the six official languages, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fiftyeighth session;
13. Concurs with the observation of the Advisory Committee contained in
paragraph 6 of its report,4 that a pragmatic approach should be followed in order not to
introduce unnecessary restrictions on the ability of an intergovernmental body or
conference to reach a successful conclusion;
III
Documentation- and publication-related matters
1.
Notes with deep concern the low rate of compliance with the six-week rule for
the issuance of documentation, and encourages the Secretary-General, in view of the
impact of late submissions on the timely issuance of documents, to deal with this alarming
situation;
2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that documentation is
available in accordance with the six-week rule for the distribution of documents
simultaneously in the six official languages of the General Assembly;
3.
Reiterates its deep regret concerning the failure of author departments to abide
by section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222, and in this regard requests the

_______________
6

A/57/289.

5

A/RES/57/283 B

Secretary-General to take corrective measures to ensure the full implementation of this
provision;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to ensure the
compliance of the Secretariat, organizations, bodies and organs with the request contained
in paragraph 3 of the present section, and to submit a report on violations to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
5.
Notes that the failure to abide by section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution
55/222 also connotes failure to abide by the six-week rule for the availability of
documents, as well as resolution 50/11 on multilingualism, in which the General Assembly
recalled the need to ensure the simultaneous distribution of documents in the six official
languages of the United Nations;
6.
Notes with appreciation that some progress has been made by the SecretaryGeneral to comply with some of the provisions of section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution
56/242, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to direct all departments to include,
where appropriate, the following elements in reports originating in the Secretariat:
(a)

A summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

7.
Reiterates that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the Secretariat
and expert bodies for consideration and action should have conclusions and
recommendations in bold print;
8.
Reiterates its request to the Office of Internal Oversight Services to submit its
reports in accordance with paragraph 12 of resolution 53/208 B of 18 December 1998;
9.
Regrets that, if a report is issued late, some departments of the Secretariat still
do not indicate the reasons for the delay when the report is introduced;
10. Reiterates its decision that, if a report is submitted late to conference services,
the reasons therefor should be included in a footnote to the document;
11. Notes with concern the current situation of late submission and issuance of
documents, as well as its negative impact on the functioning of intergovernmental and
expert bodies;
12. Notes that the Department will assign timing of submission of manuscripts that
takes into account the programme of work of the session at which the report is to be
considered and the time needed to produce the document simultaneously in the six official
languages at a high level of quality;
13. Also notes the intention of the Secretary-General to improve the current
situation of late submission and issuance of documents with this approach, in order to
comply more effectively with the existing rules on the issuance of documentation, and
stresses in this regard that such an approach should be aimed at improving the functioning
of the Secretariat and, at the same time, facilitating the work of Member States, and
requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session;
14. Reiterates the need to develop a responsibility and accountability system
within the Secretariat in order to ensure timely submission of documents for processing;

6

A/RES/57/283 B

15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session on the implementation of paragraph 14 of the
present section, taking into consideration section III, paragraph 10, of resolution 56/242;
16. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the
organs concerned, when they are taking action on draft resolutions and decisions, rules 78
and 120 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
17. Notes with concern the delay in the issuance of verbatim and summary records,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to
ameliorate the situation;
18. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to study the possibility of further
measures in this regard, including enhanced cooperation between the preparation of
summary records by the Department and the production of press releases by the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, bearing in mind the different nature of
summary records and press releases;
19. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure the
communication of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly to the Member States
within fifteen days of the close of each session in order to overcome regrettable delays;
20. Notes the intention of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
to increase the percentage of documents available in Arabic to 100 per cent during the
biennium 2004–2005, and in this regard reaffirms all its relevant resolutions in which it
requested the Secretary-General fully to ensure the issuance of all documents and
publications of the Commission in Arabic;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of
paragraph 20 of the present section and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session;
22. Stresses the need to maintain the distribution of hard copy documents to
Member States simultaneously in all official languages;
23. Also stresses that printing on demand should not negatively affect the quality
of services provided and the quantity of documents required by Member States;
24. Notes the proposal to improve electronic access to United Nations collections,
publications and parliamentary documents, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the
internal capacity for the provision of hard copies at the request of Member States, subject
to the relevant provisions of resolution 56/242;
25. Welcomes the elimination of pouch or courier shipments of documents to duty
stations in the light of the capability of duty stations to download and print their own
copies from the Official Document System or other United Nations databases;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to seek confirmation from Member States on
the number of hard copy document sets required by each Member State;
27. Notes the intention of the Secretary-General to engage in consultations with
universities, depository libraries and other institutions regarding the continued provision of
United Nations documentation to them;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a report on the outcome of the
consultations referred to in paragraph 27 of the present section to the General Assembly at
its fifty-eighth session;
29. Reaffirms section B of resolution 52/214, and re-emphasizes that any reduction
in the length of documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation
7

A/RES/57/283 B

or the substantive content of the documents and that the reduction should be implemented
in a flexible manner with respect to the consolidated reports;
30. Reiterates paragraph 20 of resolution 54/249 of 23 December 1999, and
requests the Secretary-General to address this issue in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;
IV
Translation- and interpretation-related matters
1.
Notes with concern that the Arabic and English Units in the Interpretation
Section at the United Nations Office at Nairobi are not yet fully staffed, and in this regard
reiterates its request to the Secretary-General contained in section IV, paragraph 9, of
resolution 56/242 to fill expeditiously the remaining vacancies, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
2.
Emphasizes the importance of multilingualism and the equality of the six
official languages of the United Nations;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2004–2005, to make proposals so as to fill the de facto gap
between the Spanish Translation Service and the other official language services with
similar workloads, without any adverse effect on the other official language services;
4.
Service;

Takes note with concern of the high vacancy rate in the Spanish Translation

5.
Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to fill
expeditiously the vacant posts in all six official language services of the United Nations
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-eighth session on the implementation of section IV, paragraph 6, of resolution
56/242;
7.
Notes with deep concern that some official documents are not translated into
all the official languages of the Organization, and reiterates its request contained in
paragraph 8 of resolution 56/242;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that efforts continue to be made to
improve the quality control of language services at all duty stations;
9.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that translation, in
principle, reflects the specificity of each language;
10. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in order to improve further
the quality of translation of documents issued in the six official languages, to ensure
continuous dialogue between translation staff and interpretation staff, among United
Nations headquarters in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi, and between translation
divisions and Member States with regard to the standardization of the terminology used;
11. Further reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to hold informational
meetings in order to brief Member States periodically on the terminology used;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct consultations, with the Member
States concerned, on the improvement of the translation services;
13. Recalls section IV, paragraph 1, of its resolution 56/242, in which it requested
the Secretary-General not to conduct further pilot projects on remote interpretation until
8

A/RES/57/283 B

technological developments so warranted, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to take into consideration the experiences of international institutions and organizations in
this area, as expressed in paragraph 102 of the report of the Secretary-General;7
V
Information technology
Emphasizes that the primary goal of the introduction of new technology should be to
enhance the quality of conference services and to ensure their timely provision;
*

*

*

Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
15 April 2003

_______________
7

A/57/228.

9
