S/2021/1090

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 December 2021
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2603
(2021), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the mandate of
the Mission every 90 days. The present report covers the period from 25 Septembe r
2021 to 27 December 2021.

II. Major developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by the commemoration of the fifth anniversary
of the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace. The weeks leading up to and following the anniversary on
24 November provided an opportunity for actors engaged in peacebuilding efforts and
for Colombian society at large to discuss the Final Agreement and its implementation.
The Government, former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants, State institutions, civil society, academia and the
international community carried out commemorative events throughout the country,
taking stock of progress, challenges and perspectives for the future.
3.
I visited Colombia on 23 and 24 November 2021 to take part in the important
cycle of activities marking the anniversary. In Bogotá, I attended commemorative
events and held meetings with the President, Ivan Duque, and officials of his
Government, leaders of the Comunes party, the heads of the transitional justice
system, leaders of civil society and victims of the armed conflict. I also travelled to
the department of Antioquia, where I visited a former territorial area for training and
reintegration in which former FARC-EP combatants in the reintegration process are
working closely with communities, as well as another municipality in which the
Government is implementing development programmes with a territorial focus
created under the Final Agreement. Throughout the visit, I conveyed a message of
recognition of historic progress, acknowledged the major challenges that remain and
encouraged Colombians to stay the course with the comprehensive implementation
of the Final Agreement in order to fulfil its promise of lasting peace.

21-19068 (E)

120122

*2119068*

S/2021/1090

4.
In October, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Karim Khan,
closed the preliminary examination on Colombia, active since 2004, citing the
progress made in the transitional justice process as an important factor. Additionally,
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and the President signed a
cooperation agreement, whereby the Government commits to continue supporting the
judiciary’s efforts, including those of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for crimes under the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court. The agreement recalls that the International Criminal Court may
reconsider its decision in case of significant changes in circumstances that might
hamper relevant proceedings and provides for constant communication between the
International Criminal Court, the Government and judicial actors. Prosecutor Khan
asked all actors to extend their support to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace , and
President Duque said that the decision reflects compliance by Colombia with
international obligations.
5.
Preparations for the 2022 congressional and presidential elections continue.
According to the National Civil Registry, 2,835 candidates (1,131 w omen) are
running for 108 seats in the Senate and 188 in the House of Representatives, to be
elected in March, including the 16 special transitional electoral districts for peace.
Regarding presidential elections, with its first round scheduled for May 202 2,
political actors continue defining alliances and candidacies, and some have included
the implementation of the Final Agreement within their platforms.
6.
Discussions are ongoing in Congress regarding draft bills to implement the Final
Agreement, including one on a dedicated judicial mechanism for the resolution of
land-related disputes, which previously failed to pass. Meanwhile, initiatives to
reform the Final Agreement have been withdrawn or failed to pass, such as those
seeking to eliminate or reform the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, reforms to the land
restitution process, and the reduction of the number of seats in Congress. Discussions
regarding the ratification of the Regional Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice in Environmental Matters in Latin America and the
Caribbean, which the Government presented to Congress, are pending.
7.
In November, the Government of the United States of America revoked its
designation of the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC)
guerrilla as a terrorist organization, recognizing its laying down of arms under the
Final Agreement, and noting this change would permit increased support for the peace
process, including for the reintegration of former combatants. At the sam e time, the
Government of the United States designated two dissident FARC -EP groups as
terrorist organizations, including their leaders who have either refused to lay down
their arms or abandoned the peace process.

III. Comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement
8.
Acknowledging the wide range of causes, drivers and effects of the conflict, the
parties devised an interconnected set of mechanisms whose ability to deliver long awaited peace dividends depends on their simultaneous and coordinated
implementation. The section below presents an overview of the current status of
different sections of the Final Agreement, whose comprehensive implementation is
required to unleash the transformative potential of the Final Agreement, including to
ensure the sustainability of reintegration and provide the necessary security
conditions to enable peace to take root.

2/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

Comprehensive rural reform
9.
Upon concluding the fifth year of implementation, some key aspects of this
section, whose full implementation is at the core of communities’ expectations, are
underway. The Government has reported cumulative investments of over $ 2.6 billion
in the development programmes with a territorial focus. Royalties from mineral and
hydrocarbon exploitation are the main funding source, through which 494 projects
have been approved. Forty-nine of them have been completed, an additional 195 are
under implementation and 250 are in contracting phase. To ensure their sustainability,
the Government has finalized 13 of the 16 stabilization roadmaps, the long-term
planning instruments that include over 32,000 initiatives submitted by more than
220,000 citizens who participated in the design of development programmes with a
territorial focus and who continue to demand that their propos als be effectively
implemented.
10. The Government reported that, of the goal of three million hectares, over 1.4
million have entered the Land Fund. Close to 250,000 hectares have been handed over
to 10,032 families. Nonetheless, in a recent report, a group of members of Congress
expressed their concern that only 1.5 per cent of the land had been allocated to
landless peasants or peasants with insufficient land, as enshrined in the Final
Agreement. In addition, they expressed concern that 58 per cent of th e 36 laws for the
implementation of the Final Agreement pending approval are related to the
comprehensive rural reform.
Political participation
11. The signing of the Final Agreement opened new spaces for political
participation, including additional guarantees for opposition parties and allowing
traditionally excluded conflict-affected regions to participate in decision-making. The
legal status of four political parties that had disappeared as a result of political violence
was recently reinstated pursuant to a ruling of the Constitutional Court, which, among
other things, calls upon Congress to remove obstacles for political parties to obtain
and maintain their legal status, as provided for in the Final Agreement.
12. Preparations are ongoing for the election of the 16 special transitional electoral
districts for peace. The Government issued a decree establishing the requirements for
candidate nominations, including a certification from the Victims’ Unit. Women’s,
peasants’ and ethnic organizations were required to present additional certifications,
triggering criticism that this could hinder participation. Electoral authorities are also
working to ensure a smooth election, including updating the voter registry and
creating temporary electoral tribunals to guarantee transparency.
13. A total of 403 candidates (202 women) registered for the upcoming elections in
the special electoral districts. In the light of persisting violence, logistical challenges
and context-specific dynamics in the 16 regions, civil society organizations, including
women’s organizations, have requested Government and State institutions to deploy
enough voting stations in rural areas and provide the necessary security so as to
guarantee full participation by communities historically affected by conflict, as
envisioned in the Final Agreement.
14. Despite progress, State oversight entities, members of the opposition and civil
society organizations continue to highlight delays in the implementation of key
measures from the section in the Final Agreement on political participation, including
a political reform and legislation on the right to peaceful protest.

21-19068

3/19

S/2021/1090

Substitution of illicit crops
15. The National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops
continues to provide essential support to nearly 100,000 families who decided to
transition to legal income-generating opportunities. As of October 2021, the
Government has reported cumulative investments of $398 million, 45,002 hectares of
illicit crops eradicated though the programme, and over 73,000 families receiving
technical assistance.
16. According to the Government, 14,725 families in the programme (one -third of
which are headed by women) have productive projects. However, despite recent
increased coverage, civil society organizations and members of Congress continue to
raise concerns regarding the slow pace of implementation of the projects.
17. Communities insist on the need to prioritize voluntary over forced eradication,
and to fully implement the Final Agreement, including security guarantees in areas
particularly affected by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations.
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition
18. The work of the three entities of the Comprehensive System continues to
advance, often amidst significant challenges. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace
reports progress in all of its cases with a view to delivering justice and reparations for
victims. To date, it has received almost 500 reports from victims and State
institutions. Over 13,000 individuals are subject to its jurisdiction (74 per cent former
FARC-EP, 25 per cent public security forces and 1 per cent non-combatant State
agents).
19. The Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing and the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace jointly recovered 46 bodies in Caquetá department, including
remains of former combatants and, possibly, of children forcibly recruited by
FARC-EP. The Unit recovered another 123 bodies in six departments, among them
women, children and a member of the military, all potential victims of different armed
groups. Civil society organizations and former combatants provided information
leading to some of these findings. The Unit has so far recovered 345 bodies, of whic h
132 have been returned to their relatives.
20. The Truth Commission, whose mandate was extended by the Constitutional
Court until August 2022, has carried out 53 meetings, in which different parties to the
conflict have acknowledged their responsibility for crimes committed during the
conflict. During the reporting period, several former FARC-EP leaders acknowledged
their responsibility and have asked for forgiveness for the murders of a catholic priest
and seven indigenous leaders. In addition, a number of former paramilitary members
have acknowledged murders, massacres, disappearances and land grabs; and some
former members of the military have acknowledged extrajudicial killings of civilians.
21. In view of the continued violence against communities and individuals
participating in the transitional justice process, the System set up a mechanism to
monitor risks and raise alerts on possible violations of their human rights. In
December, the mechanism issued its first warning reporting that the State’s eff ective
authority was weakening significantly in nearly one-tenth of Colombia’s
municipalities, and that FARC-EP dissident groups and other illegal armed groups
were strengthening.
Mechanisms for dialogue on implementation
22. Sustaining progress and addressing the challenges inherent to putting an end to
conflict and building a lasting peace depends heavily on the parties’ ability to engage

4/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

in constructive dialogue. To date, the Government and former combatants’
representatives continue making use, in varying degrees, of the institutions created to
follow up and strengthen implementation. This includes the Commission for the
Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, the National Reintegration Council (see para. 2 5) and the National
Commission on Security Guarantees (see para. 63).
23. Within the Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, the parties have continued discussing the
methodology for its future engagement with the various entities with responsibilities
for the implementation and follow-up of the Final Agreement, including on
reintegration and security guarantees. In addition, with the support of the Mission and
the guarantor countries, the parties are defining the work methodology for 2022,
including a concrete action plan required to make full use of the Commission as the
Final Agreement’s top-level forum for dialogue and problem-solving, and thereby
boost implementation.
24. The parties have also established ad hoc mechanisms to address key issues, such
as the tripartite mechanism on landmines, with ongoing joint efforts to gather
information on mine fields. In December, with support from the United Nations Mine
Action Service and the Mission, former FARC-EP combatants submitted information
to the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace on 84 possible mined areas . This
information was collected through a tripartite effort and is essential to continue
conducting humanitarian demining operations.

IV. Mission tasks
Reintegration
25. Five years after the signing of the Final Agreement, the joint efforts of former
combatants, Government authorities and host communities, with the support of the
international community, have been crucial to overcome the challenges facing the
reintegration process. During the reporting period, dialogue between the parties in the
context of the National Reintegration Council has continued regarding key issues,
including security, land and housing, all priority con cerns of former combatants. In
addition, the Government has also held meetings regarding reintegration matters with
former combatants outside the Comunes party, and has reiterated its commitment to
ensuring reintegration benefits to all accredited former c ombatants.
Access to land and housing
26. Following meetings between the National Reintegration Council and
representatives for former combatants, a working group on housing was established
and has been meeting regularly and the working group on land was reactivated. Both
forums have proven to be important information-sharing and confidence-building
mechanisms.
27. No additional plots of land were purchased for former territorial areas for
training and reintegration during the reporting period. To date, the Government has
purchased land for nine former territorial areas, and former combatants from a former
territorial area in Cauca have reached an agreement with indigenous authorities
regarding the use of land. Fourteen former territorial areas hosting some 1,300 former
combatants and their families are still pending purchase of land.
28. On 17 December, following increased threats from illegal armed groups (see
para. 53), over 40 former combatants and their families who were still residing in the
former territorial area for training and reintegration of La Macarena, Meta
21-19068

5/19

S/2021/1090

department, had to be urgently relocated by the Government, in consultation with
former combatants, to neighbouring Caquetá department, where temporary
accommodations have been provided. Several actors supported and accompanied the
relocation, including departmental and municipal authorities, the Office of the
Ombudsman, as well as the Mission and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). On the day of the transfer, alleged members of an illegal armed group fired
at the convoy transporting former combatants and incinerated one vehicle.
Nevertheless, all residents arrived at the new location unharmed. Expedited solutions
are also required for the concerted relocation of another three former territorial areas
facing insecurity in Cauca and Putumayo departments, where plots for their relocation
have yet to be identified.
29. Regarding housing, dialogue continues between the Government and former
combatants about access to subsidies, designs and materials, as well as former
combatants’ participation, in three out of five former territorial areas for training and
reintegration that have completed technical assessments to build housing. In contrast,
dialogue has been suspended in the remaining two due to disagreements regarding the
scope of subsidies to build houses and requests by former combatants for a more
comprehensive housing programme. To date, no permanent houses have been built in
former territorial areas.
30. As for housing for former combatants outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has
carried out eight urban fairs to provide information on existing housing subsidies.
Former combatants have pointed out that obstacles to access such subsidies persist,
especially in relation to access to credit.
Productive projects
31. Five years into the implementation of the Final Agreement, almost 59 per cent
of accredited former combatants participate in productive projects. To date, 107
collective projects have been approved, comprising 3,687 former combatants (1,030
women) and 3,560 individual projects, involving 4,285 former combatants (981
women). During the reporting period, the National Reintegration Council ap proved
eight new collective productive projects for 213 former combatants (64 women) and
the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization approved an additional 370
individual projects, in which 436 former combatants (100 women) take part.
32. As the number of former combatants who participate in productive projects
steadily increases, ensuring the sustainability of these initiatives –including through
access to land– has become the focus of discussions at the National Reintegration
Council. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, Comunes, UNDP, the
International Organization for Migration and the Mission have been working on a
road map on this matter, which has yet to be considered by the National Reintegration
Council.
33. Currently, 64 per cent of women former combatants participate in productive
projects. However, their active and meaningful participation in economic
reintegration continues to face challenges related to the lack of dedicated technical
assistance, difficulties to establish business plans and an overload of domestic and
family care tasks.
34. In the context of the commemoration of the fifth anniversary, fairs featuring
former combatants’ productive projects, as well as initiatives from victims and
beneficiaries of crop substitution programmes, were held in six cities, including
Bogotá, where I attended an impressive exhibition. The exhibition included over 200
projects in areas such as textiles, tourism and agriculture, including a federation of
37 coffee-producing initiatives.
6/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

35. In November, after almost four months of delays in the delivery of provisions
to former territorial areas for training and reintegration, the Government, the
contractor and former combatants reached agreements on distribution lists, leading to
the resumption of food delivery in almost all former territorial areas.
Former combatants outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration,
including in new reintegration areas
36. The geography of the reintegration process has changed over these five y ears,
with some 10,500 former combatants currently conducting their reintegration outside
former territorial areas for training and reintegration, in 584 of Colombia’s more than
1,100 municipalities. At least a third of them are involved in collective rein tegration
initiatives in approximately 75 new reintegration areas, with an increasing number
living in urban areas. So far, 50 collective productive projects are implemented
outside former territorial areas; four additional ones were approved during the
reporting period.
37. Insecurity continues to affect the reintegration process, particularly outside
former territorial areas for training and reintegration. Twenty -six former combatants
associated with cooperatives have been killed and another 11 have been victims of
homicide attempts, especially in Antioquia, Cauca and Nariño departments. During
the reporting period, the deterioration of the security situation in Chocó department
resulted in the relocation of leaders of a cooperative and of the Comunes part y,
disrupting their economic and political reintegration. Killings and threats against
former combatants in the new reintegration area in Argelia, Cauca department, have
forced them to leave the area and their productive initiatives.
Health
38. Health visits to former territorial areas for training and reintegration have been
carried out as planned and included vaccination campaigns against the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization,
291 former combatants (86 women) have tested positive for COVID-19, nine of whom
have died (all men). In December the National Reintegration Council approved the
continuation of health services for all former territorial areas for 2022. While
permanent health care services will be reduced in some areas, health visits will
increase.
39. The working group on health and its committee monitoring the implementation
of the CaPAZcidades programme benefiting former combatants living with
disabilities, have been meeting regularly. The definition of an action plan to provide
these former combatants with prothesis and support to access rehabilitation
programmes, is pending. To date, 98 per cent of the 1,222 former combatants with
disabilities have received certification in order to acc ess services.
Reintegration policies and institutions
40. While there has been progress at the technical level regarding the definition of
the scope and functioning of the National Reintegration System, it has yet to be
presented to the National Reintegration Council.
41. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, as at October
2021, 62 per cent of the objectives defined by the national policy on reintegration had
been met. Arguing inconsistencies, former combatants have requested greater access
to information regarding the reporting on the policy’s implementation.
42. The Working Group on Gender of the National Reintegration Council continued
to promote the implementation of the 18 gender actions of the national reintegr ation
21-19068

7/19

S/2021/1090

policy, including through field visits to Caquetá, Cauca and Nariño departments. Gaps
remain at the local level in terms of knowledge, ownership and resources for gender sensitive reintegration efforts.
Role of regional authorities and community-based reintegration
43. Two new departmental reintegration working groups were established in
Magdalena and Norte de Santander departments, for a total of 20 such mechanisms
nationwide. The working groups bring together departmental authorities, the Agency
for Reintegration and Normalization, former combatants and the Mission, and have
played a key role in supporting the reintegration process at the regional level. As a
positive example, the Office of the Governor of Antioquia funded housing for the 12
former combatants who remained in Ituango, following the relocation of the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration to Mutatá in 2020.
44. Implementation of the joint community-based reintegration strategy in 35
municipalities has begun, fostering joint development initiatives between host
communities, former FARC-EP members and their families in areas where
reintegration is underway.
Political reintegration
45. Comunes senators and representatives have actively promoted over 70 dr aft bills
presented by the party both individually and in coalition with other parties in
Congress since July. The proposed legislation is related to the implementation of the
Final Agreement and to other social and economic measures. The party has remaine d
active within the peace commissions in both chambers, including in field visits to
discuss the status of peace implementation with local communities.
46. In November, several former combatants were elected to local administrative
boards. Similarly, in December, nine Comunes party members (including one woman
former combatant), out of the 89 candidates, were elected to municipal youth
councils.
47. In preparation for the upcoming legislative elections in March 2022, Comunes
endorsed 41 candidates, including 18 women and 25 former combatants. Comunes
representatives have reported challenges when trying to open bank accounts, as well
as security concerns and stigmatization.
Security guarantees
Regional dynamics of violence
48. Despite initial reductions in conflict-related violence across the country after
the signing of the Final Agreement, five years into its implementation, regions
historically affected by the armed conflict are seeing an upsurge in crimes that
represent the main obstacle to the materialization of the Final Agreement’s promises.
The absence of an effective State presence in parts of the territory in some regions,
such as Argelia in the department of Cauca or Buenaventura in the department of
Valle del Cauca, has led to intensified disputes between illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations for social, territorial and strategic control, further aggravating
violence against civilians, hindering governance and altering the lives of entire
communities.
49. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs registered 34 events of forced mass displacement, affecting over 11,800
persons in 10 departments (Antioquia, Arauca, Cauca, Córdoba, Chocó, Guaviare,
Nariño, Norte de Santander, Putumayo and Valle del Cauca ). In 2021, some 72,600
persons have been displaced and 65,200 forcibly confined, of which 41 per cent are
8/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

indigenous and 29 per cent are Afro-Colombians. In addition, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) documented seven largescale killings resulting in 29 victims, bringing the total for 2021 to 56 large -scale
killings and 222 victims.
50. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, attacks against human rights
defenders and former combatants, large-scale killings, mass displacements and
confinements have been concentrated largely in 30 municipalities in 12 of Colombia’s
32 departments, mostly linked to violence caused by illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations. All but three of these municipalities are included in the
development programmes with a territorial focus and are covered by the special
transitional electoral districts.
51. The arrest in October of “Otoniel”, the top leader of the Clan del Golfo (also
known as Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia), was a significant development
during the reporting period; this group is responsible for much of the violence
affecting various regions.
Security and protection for former combatants
52. Five years after the signing of the Final Agreement, violence against former
combatants remains the single greatest threat to their transition into civilian life. To
date, 303 former combatants, including 10 women, have been killed. In addition, 79
former combatants (four women) have been victims of attemp ted homicides, and 25
are reported as missing (all men). During the reporting period, 10 former combatants
were killed, including one woman, María Muñoz, an indigenous former combatant
from Cauca, who was the widow of an Afro-Colombian former combatant, Yorbis
Carabalí, killed last June.
53. Killings of former combatants have decreased by 27 per cent, from 74 in 2020
to 54 in 2021. Nevertheless, the Mission has observed an increasing trend of threats
by illegal armed groups targeting former combatants involved in collective initiatives
in former territorial areas for training and reintegration and in new reintegration areas,
affecting their productive projects and cooperatives. In November, in the former
territorial area of La Macarena, Meta department, alleged members of a FARC-EP
dissident group threatened bodyguards of the National Protection Unit, incinerated
five of their vehicles and demanded that the bodyguards and the over 100 former
combatants residing in the reintegration area abandon it immediately. In December,
two soldiers from the preventive deployment assigned to provide security to this
reintegration area were killed by alleged members of the same dissident group.
Precautionary measures issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
54. The precautionary measures ordered by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have
proven key to boosting implementation of security guarantees, leading to an increased
protection of former combatants, including through additional funds for the
Subdirectorate of the National Protection Unit and an accelerated review and approval
of pending protection requests. In November, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
ordered additional specific measures for the Government, including to develop an
action plan to assist surviving family members of killed former combatants.
55. Also during the reporting period, pursuant to orders from the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the Office of the Presidential Counsellor on Stabilization and
Consolidation developed an evacuation strategy for former combatants and their
families in Cauca, Nariño and Valle del Cauca departments. Nonetheless, challenges
persist in the coordination of relevant State entities.

21-19068

9/19

S/2021/1090

56. In November, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace held a hearing to follow up on
orders addressed to the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation
and the Director of the National Protection Unit in 2020. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace expressed concerns regarding the persisting attacks against former combatants
and the lack of a sustainable security strategy. To address this situation, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace ordered the Presidential Counsellor to revise the Strategic Plan
on Security and Protection, approved in March, in order to include the observations
presented by former combatants. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace also ordered the
National Protection Unit to present a report on budget allocations to ensure
implementation of new protection measures, to resolve the 101 pending protection
requests and to hire 101 new bodyguards by 31 December 2021.
57. The National Protection Unit continued making progress. Since January 2021,
100 per cent of pending requests have been assessed and 837 have been approved,
including 125 for women and 66 collective protection measures. As at 30 November,
560 of the 686 additional bodyguards ordered by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in
2020 had been hired. In order to adapt protection measures to women’s specific needs,
the National Protection Unit hired specialized personnel and provided training on
gender-sensitive risk analysis.
Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney General
58. Efforts to curb impunity remain essential for the overall success of the
provisions on security guarantees provisions of the Final Agreement. According to
the Special Investigations Unit, criminal organizations and illegal armed groups are
responsible for 78 per cent of attacks against former combatants. During the reporting
period, the Unit reported four new convictions, for a total of 49 convictions in the 352
cases it is investigating. Four convictions are against those who ordered the attacks.
In addition, 53 cases are in the trial phase, 27 are under investigation and 179 arrest
warrants have been issued. An additional 212 arrest warrants are pending execution,
including 66 against those who ordered the attacks.
Security for Comunes and other political parties
59. During the reporting period, incidents of threats and violence have been
registered in several regions against representatives of political parties across the
spectrum, including against members of municipal councils. The Government has set
up a series of prevention and protection strategies to guarantee safe elections, such as
the Democracy and Agora II plans. However, these strategies are not linked up with
the Comprehensive Security System for the Exercise of Politics, stipulated in the
Final Agreement, whose High-level Unit has not been convened.
Attacks against social leaders, human rights defenders and
conflict-affected communities
60. During the reporting period, OHCHR received information about the killings of
34 human rights defenders (7 verified and 27 under verification). Of these, five
victims were women, one was Afro-Colombian, one was a member of the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community and six were indigenous persons.
In 2021, 196 killings were reported to OHCHR, including 28 women, 47 indigenous
persons, 8 Afro-Colombians and three members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community. Of these cases, 75 were verified, 38 are under
verification and 83 were inconclusive or not verifiable.
61. On 28 November, elections were held to select more than 63,000 members of
local administrative boards. While no major security incidents were reported on

10/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

election day, two candidates were killed before the elections, and the president -elect
of one board was killed a week after the elections.
62. The Intersectoral Commission of Guarantees for Women Leader s and Human
Rights Defenders, comprised of 17 government entities, met in November.
Participants highlighted the importance of implementing prevention and
non-stigmatization measures at the local level, as well as ensuring that local
institutions actively contribute to addressing cases of attacks against women leaders
and human rights defenders.
National Commission on Security Guarantees
63. Only technical meetings concerning the internal regulation of the National
Commission on Security Guarantees were held during the reporting period. With one third of the time frame envisioned for the implementation of the Final Agreement and
despite urgent security challenges across the country, the public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their support networks has not been
adopted.
Early warning system of the Office of the Ombudsman
64. During the reporting period, the Office of the Ombudsman issued seven early
warnings in 13 municipalities in Cesar, Chocó, Norte de Santander, Santander and
Valle del Cauca departments related to security risks facing social leaders, human
rights defenders, communities and former combatants, among others. The Office of
the Ombudsman and the Intersectoral Commission for Rapid Respon se to Early
Warnings chaired by the Ministry of Interior are working on mechanisms aimed to
enhance the fulfilment of recommendations provided in the early warnings.
Comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories
65. The Ministry of Interior and two national-level civil society organizations
prioritized in the two pilots for implementing the programme are defining collective
protection measures in view of the security risks facing them. In addition, 15 peace
promoters were certified in Meta while the certification of peace promoters in Bolívar,
Córdoba, Nariño, Norte de Santander and Putumayo departments is still pending.
There has been limited progress in other components of the programme aimed at
strengthening human rights organizations’ access to justice and rural and collective
protection, including due to budgetary constraints.
Restorative sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
66. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has continued to advance in its various cases,
including through the issuance in 2021 of indictments and other important rulings in
Case 01, on hostage-taking, other severe deprivations of liberty and other concurrent
crimes committed by the FARC-EP, and Case 03, on killings and forced
disappearances presented as casualties in combat by State agents. The first restorative
sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace are expected to be issued in 2022.
67. In preparation for the implementation of the Mission’s mandate relat ed to the
verification of the restorative sentences to be issued by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, the Mission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have agreed on the
composition, objectives and functions of the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
devised for that purpose. The Mechanism will ensure coordination between the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Mission and will help overcome difficulties in
the fulfilment by sentenced persons of the terms of their sentences and in the efforts
by State authorities to guarantee the necessary conditions for their fulfilment. The
21-19068

11/19

S/2021/1090

Mission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace established a working group to
operationalize the Mechanism, including the practical conditions needed for the
implementation of restorative sentences by relevant authorities, such as security and
funding. Importantly, the Government has reaffirmed its commitment to providing the
necessary support and resources and is collaborating with the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace in this regard.
68. The Mission has also held meetings with other stakeholders, including the
Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, which
presented its proposed route for the follow-up of tasks, works and activities with
restorative content to be funded by the Government. The Mission is also engaging
with former combatants’ representatives, lawyers of members of the public security
forces and the Office of the Inspector-General, among others, to discuss progress and
challenges in preparation for the implementation of restorative sentences. Moreover,
the Mission is working with relevant United Nations entities to enhance
complementarity on matters regarding victims and the strengthening of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, including on gender mainstreaming throughout its procedures.
69. During the reporting period, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace received written
observations from victims and the Inspector-General in response to the
acknowledgment of responsibility by former members of the FARC-EP Secretariat
within Case 01, on hostage-taking and other severe deprivations of liberty and other
concurrent crimes committed by FARC-EP. Over 200 victims have also expressed
their observations on the Case during several hearings.
70. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace recently ruled in line with the observations
by the Inspector General to requalify the actions by FARC-EP of imposing forced
labour on victims of kidnapping under the crime against humanity of enslavement.
Consequently, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is requiring that the former
commanders indicted in January 2021 specifically recognize this crime. In its
decision, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace stated that the conducts were grave but
isolated, and do not constitute an independent pattern of criminality. The indicted
individuals have rejected this new legal qualification and formally challenged the
decision. While reaffirming their responsibility for the actions previously established
by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the former commanders argue that FARC-EP
was not an organization involved in enslavement and that the decision infringed their
right to due process.
71. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace was designed as a comprehensive judicial
mechanism of incentives for parties to the conflict to contribute to upholding victims’
rights. As such, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace assesses whether individuals under
its jurisdiction are complying with their obligations towards victims. During the
reporting period, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace determined for the first time that
four individuals were not eligible to receive restorative sentences as a result of their
lack of acknowledgement of responsibility. One of them is a former member of
Congress investigated in Case 01, and the other three are former colonels investigated
in Case 03, on extrajudicial killings by State agents. If convicted by trial, they could
face up to 20 years in prison, as provided for in the Final Agreement.
72. In December, in Case 03, 22 of the 26 individuals indicted for crimes against
humanity and war crimes (including one former general, two former colonels and one
civilian third party) acknowledged their responsibility before the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace ordered to start a dialogue process
between victims and the individuals indicted in preparation for the public hearing of
acknowledgment of responsibility and with a view to jointly identify proposals for
“tasks, works and activities with reparatory and restorative content,” which are to be
carried out by the indicted as part of their restorative sentences.
12/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

73. During the reporting period, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace heard the
individual versions of over 70 members of the public s ecurity forces in four cases,
including one general and two former generals. In Case 06, regarding the
victimization of members of the Patriotic Union party by State agents, a retired police
general and former director of national intelligence, refused to provide his version.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has reiterated the obligation of individuals under
its jurisdiction to contribute to justice in order to maintain benefits.
74. In Case 05, on the situation of northern Cauca department and southern Valle
del Cauca department, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace held its first hearing with
victims about sexual and gender-based violence committed by members of the former
FARC-EP and the public security forces. Around 60 women, nine men and several
members of organizations representing women and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex persons expressed their views and mentioned challenges regarding the
inclusion of the gender approach in the cases opened by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, and concerns over security of victims providing testimonies. During the
hearing, the Office of the Inspector-General and victims’ organizations insisted on
their request for the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to open a specific case on the
matter. Also in Case 05, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace approved a coordination
protocol with the special indigenous jurisdictions of northern Cauca department to
jointly call 36 indigenous former combatants appearing in the case to provide their
voluntary versions.

V. Cross-cutting considerations
Gender
75. The Government has reported to date that 9 of the 51 gender indicators of the
Framework Plan for Implementation of the Final Agreement have been completed and
the other 42 are in progress. However, women’s organizations and the Special Forum
on Gender have expressed concerns regarding limited funding to advance the gender
provisions of the Final Agreement, noting that progress on these provisions is slower
compared to the overall implementation of the Final Agre ement.
76. Women and girls in Colombia continue to face multiple forms of violence,
including sexual violence and femicide. The latest bulletin on gender-based violence
from the Office of the Ombudsman, which covers the period from January to
30 October 2021, informed about 64 cases of femicide and 76 attempts of femicide,
mainly in Caquetá, Cauca, Chocó, Córdoba, Norte de Santander and Santander
departments, where disputes between illegal armed groups have had a severe impact
on women and girls.
77. In events commemorating the International Day for the Elimination of Violence
Against Women, women demanded an end to the violence and respect for their rights.
In the Bajo Cauca region of Antioquia department, for example, the women’s
organization Ruta Pacífica mobilized more than 3,500 women calling upon illegal
armed groups to halt violence and requesting prevention measures.
78. The Mission, in coordination with women’s organizations, women former
combatants and local governments, organized several events for the prevention of
violence against women. Acknowledging the tireless work of the regional network of
women human rights defenders of Nariño department, the Governor of the department
formally recognized the network in November, enabling it with access to resources
and participation in relevant programmes that could boost the impact of its efforts.
79. In November, the offices of the Inspector General and the Ombudsman
presented a report on the implementation of the gender provisions in the Final
21-19068

13/19

S/2021/1090

Agreement. The entities expressed concerns about violence against women former
combatants and human rights defenders, and stigma against lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex leaders, and called for specific measures by relevant
institutions to respond to these issues, including the implementation of the national
security strategy for women former combatants and measures for partners of former
combatants killed.
Ethnic affairs
80. In November, the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples created by the Final
Agreement issued its first report assessing the status of ethnic-related provisions
during the first five years of implementation of the Final Agreement, noting very
limited progress. To foster much-needed improvement, the High-level Forum called
for permanent dialogue with the Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and for better
coordination and dialogue between ethnic peoples and entities responsible for the
implementation of the Final Agreement’s ethnic provisions.
81. The insecurity facing ethnic communities, especially on the Pacific coast,
continues to worsen. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in 2021, 69 per cent of the victims of confinemen ts were indigenous and
16 per cent were Afro-Colombians, while 41 per cent of victims of forced
displacement were Afro-Colombian and 15 per cent were indigenous.
82. During the reporting period, two indigenous former combatants were killed in
Cauca department. In Nariño department, Afro-Colombian communities and members
of the Awa indigenous community were affected by antipersonnel mines, threats,
homicides of their leaders and forced displacements. Additionally, forced recruitment
is disproportionately affecting ethnic communities. The association of indigenous
reservations of northern Cauca department has warned about the increase of
recruitment, allegedly from a FARC-EP dissident group.
83. While tailored measures for the reintegration of indigenous and A fro-Colombian
former combatants remain limited, ethnic authorities are supporting the process,
among others through the inclusion of former FARC-EP members into their
communities. This is the case of the Afro-Colombian community of the Curbaradó
River in Chocó, which in November allowed 66 former combatants (20 women) to
use 100 hectares of their collective territory to implement productive projects.
Children
84. The working group on children of the National Reintegration Council continued
its assessment of the implementation of the programme “A Different Path of Life”,
established for the reintegration of children formerly associated with the FARC -EP.
The assessment has allowed the working group to update the status of beneficiaries.
To date, of the 124 participants initially included, 117 remain in the programme, 7 of
whom have been identified as absent and the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization is currently searching for their whereabouts. Another 5 have been
killed and 2 others have been imprisoned. In total, 110 adolescents have been
recognized as victims, 77 have already received reparations and 33 are still pending
receipt of their disbursement from the Government.
85. Economic reintegration remains challenging as 73 participants have not
received the resources for productive projects, owing to delayed assessments by the
Victims’ Unit and lack of information available to potential beneficiaries on the status
of their reparations. Coordination issues between the working group and the
Ministries of Health and Education have been hampering follow-up on such areas.

14/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

86. The working group is also tracing 288 former combatants who were recognized
between 2020 and 2021 as children at the moment of accreditation, to include them
in the programme. To date, 13 are deceased (including nine confirmed homicides),
three have been imprisoned and 21 have been identified as absent. From this group,
at least 181 individuals have been recognized as victims and 127 have received
reparations. To date, the number of combatants recognized as children at the moment
of accreditation is 412.
87. According to the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, approximately
7,500 children of former combatants live in or outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration. A comprehensive response in line with the best interests of
the child to address cases of legal guardianship and to support some 400 children
whose parents have been killed remains pending. At least seven child -friendly spaces
in former territorial areas lack proper equipment and clarity about education and care
methodologies.
Youth
88. This year has been a defining moment for the participation of young Colombian
men and women in social and political matters. In December, close to 1.3 million out
of nearly 12 million potential voters between 14 and 28 years of age cast their first ever vote to elect 10,837 members of municipal youth councils, including from youth
organizations, political parties and independent candidacies. These bodies will have
an advisory role to local governments in devising youth-related policies and
programmes and could play a key role in channelling young people’s needs and
concerns.
89. In November, over 1,600 young leaders from across the country gathered in
Santa Marta for the XII National Youth Festival, the largest youth -led event in the
country. Topics discussed included the status of implementation of the Final
Agreement and environmental preservation.

VI. Coordination with the United Nations country team
90. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, the United Nations country team has
constantly worked alongside the parties, Colombian institutions and the Mission to
support peace implementation efforts, including on matters of reintegration, security
guarantees, transitional justice, rural reform and crop substitution.
91. With nearly 40 quick-impact projects, the United Nations country team and the
Mission are supporting income generating ventures for former combatants in new
reintegration areas and in support of community-based reintegration. The United
Nations country team is also supporting over 3,000 former combatants through more
than 70 entrepreneurial projects. Pre-feasibility studies were carried out by the United
Nations country team to identify the technical and environmental viability for the
construction of permanent settlements in eight former territorial areas for training and
reintegration where 1,129 people (509 women) reside. The studies have helped
identify some of the challenges facing housing construction in these areas.
92. The United Nations country team continued to promote the solution to the
problem of illicit crops and the implementation of the comprehensive rural reform.
During the reporting period, the United Nations country team supported the
Government’s programme to give land use rights to families as an alternative to illicit
crops and in exchange for environmental conservation efforts. Support for the
selection of families resulted in more than 1,600 families joining the programme. The

21-19068

15/19

S/2021/1090

United Nations country team also supported the formalization of 1,391 plots intended
for peasants, of which 47 percent were granted to rural women.
93. Regarding transitional justice, more than 5,000 children and youth between 7
and 28 years old from across the country participated in a national consultation led
by the Truth Commission, with support from the United Nations. Their opinions will
inform the strategies of dissemination of the Commission’s final report. The United
Nations country team also facilitated the participation of about 1,000 people in the
regional search plans of the Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing.
94. During the reporting period, the United Nations multi-partner trust fund for
sustaining peace in Colombia allocated $4.8 million for three projects to support the
marketing of products from crop substitution and former combatants’ entrepreneurial
initiatives.

VII. Developments related to the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
95. As confrontations between the public security forces and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN) continue in various regions, the Government continues to
reiterate that, for any rapprochement to take place, this guerrilla group must cease
kidnapping, release hostages and cease other violent actions such as the forced
recruitment of children, the installation of antipersonnel mines and drug trafficking.
ELN insists that it does not accept the conditions and asks that they be addressed at a
negotiating table.
96. Clashes between ELN and State forces, as well as with other illegal armed
groups, are heavily affecting civilians in departments such as Chocó and Valle del
Cauca, where thousands of people have been forcibly displaced and confined. Local
communities in these and other regions, such as Arauca, Catatumbo and Magdalena
Medio are strongly urging the parties to resume peace talks and adopt urgent measures
to alleviate the serious humanitarian crisis facing them.
97. In September, the Government reported that the commander of the ELN Western
Front, known as “Fabian”, died at a medical centre after being wounded in a military
operation in the department of Chocó. In November, ELN handed over the body of
Tulio Mosquera, the former mayor of Alto Baudó, Chocó de partment, to a
humanitarian mission created by the Red Cross and the Catholic Church.
Mr. Mosquera had been kidnapped in 2019.

VIII. Mission structures
Mission support
98. As at 30 November 2021, the percentage of Professional and Field Service
female staff on fixed-term, continuing and permanent contracts was 44 per cent. For
other categories, women represented 61 per cent of United Nations Volunteers; 34 per
cent of international observers; and 67 per cent of consultants and individual
contractors. Overall, 50 per cent of all civilian personnel are women.
Safety and security
99. During the reporting period, there were 31 incidents affecting the United
Nations system, mainly in Bogotá and Arauca, Cesar and La Guajira departments.
The most frequent events were armed incidents, including an attempted robbery in La
Guajira affecting a joint mission between a United Nations agency, a Government
entity and an non-governmental organization where no injuries were reported. The
16/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

Department of Safety and Security registered movement restrictions owing to events
in Arauca, Chocó and Magdalena departments, including as a result of protests and
activities of illegal armed groups, without major impact on United Nations operations.
Conduct and discipline
100. During the reporting period, two allegations of fraudulent acts were reported to
the Mission. Efforts are ongoing to ensure full compliance with training on preventing
fraud and corruption at the United Nations. Additionally, risk assessments of
misconduct were conducted at the Mission’s headquarters and in three regional
offices.
101. Regarding the alleged case of sexual assault mentioned in the previous report,
an investigation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services is ongoing. No new
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were reported.
102. In November, the Mission launched a training on the “United to respect” toolkit
to discuss the zero-tolerance policy on harassment, including sexual harassment,
discrimination and abuse of authority.

IX. Observations
103. The recent commemorations marking the five-year anniversary of Colombia’s
Final Peace Agreement celebrated its landmark nature, as well as the historic progress
that is taking root through the determined efforts of so many Colombians. At the same
time, formidable challenges remain. Yet with every step forward, Colombia is proving
the value of investing in peace while providing an example that violent conflicts can
be ended through dialogue and that societies can heal the wounds of war and bring
about development opportunities to those most in need.
104. Countless lives have undoubtedly been saved by the end of the conflict with the
former FARC-EP. And I am heartened by the dividends of peace that I witnessed
during my visit to Colombia. Where progress is strongest, this is often a testament to
the ability of the parties to work jointly towards a common goal, and I hope they will
reinforce their dialogue and cooperation. I am encouraged by the efforts of
Government and State institutions and by their reiterated commitment to
peacebuilding. However, I am also concerned about the obstacles and the imminent
threats facing the consolidation of peace described in the prese nt report, especially
the persisting violence and presence of illegal armed groups in areas prioritized for
the implementation of the Final Agreement. While it is not too late to reverse this
trend, it will require far more sustained and effective actions. Should these levels of
violence persist in regions where the Final Agreement was expected to bring about
long-awaited transformations, this historic window of opportunity may gradually
close.
105. One of the most common concerns I heard from Colombians wh o actively
support the peace process was the prospect that its ambitious goals, to not only end
this conflict but to overcome the deep-rooted factors underlying the cycles of violence
in Colombia, would not be fully met. This would be a missed opportunity. I therefore
reiterate my call upon the Government and relevant State entities to spare no effort in
comprehensively implementing the Final Agreement. Reinforced progress in all
sections, including pending provisions on security guarantees, and an increase d
presence of the State are required to unleash the Final Agreement’s transformative
potential and enable civilian institutions to effectively provide long -awaited goods
and services throughout the country.

21-19068

17/19

S/2021/1090

106. Among the most important elements of the Final Agreement are those creating
the conditions for the transition into civilian life of over 13,000 former members of
the western hemisphere’s largest and oldest guerrilla who laid down their arms and
remain committed to peace. During my visit, this commitment was reaffirmed by
former leaders of the FARC-EP, as well as by women and men who were part of the
organization’s rank-and-file members and who spoke to me of their hopes and
concerns. It is of immense value that former combatants participate in, and c ontribute
to, Colombian democracy, from exercising their right to vote to participating in the
political process. With support from the Government, the private sector and the
international community, hundreds of productive initiatives are currently underwa y,
led by men and women who laid down their arms betting on a second chance. As they
strive to become self-sufficient under challenging conditions, it is paramount that they
are safe and that their efforts have the necessary support to guarantee their
sustainability, including deeper transformations contained in other sections of the
Final Agreement.
107. I visited a fascinating memorial space in the centre of Bogotá that was created
as a result of the Final Agreement, called Fragmentos, its floor is made from metal
forged from the weapons laid down by former FARC-EP members and hammered into
form by women victims of the armed conflict. While I was there, I heard the
testimonies of a diverse group of victims. This deeply moving encounter was a
powerful reminder that victims are at the heart of the peace process. Their strength
and generosity must be met with genuine commitment by all parties to the conflict to
contribute to the truth and acknowledge their responsibilities, as well as to bring
reparations for the damages caused. The Final Agreement created an innovative
transitional justice system which is delivering encouraging results that will be a
foundation for lasting peace and reconciliation. I renew my call for full cooperation
and respect for the transitional justice system, especially as it enters a new, crucial
phase, one for which the Security Council has entrusted the Mission with important
responsibilities.
108. Even during the darkest years of the conflict, Colombia’s vibrant civil society
kept the flame of peace alive. It is no surprise, therefore, that grassroots, human rights,
youth, women and ethnic movements and organizations, among others, remain active
protagonists in peacebuilding efforts. I commend their efforts, and especially those
of Colombian women who continue to work tirelessly to consolidate peace, and of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities who, even in the face of tremendous
hardship, work for the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The Final Agreement’s
unprecedented gender provisions and its ethnic chapter, including regarding security
guarantees, must be fully implemented to address the specific impact that the conflict
had on Colombian women and ethnic communities, and to enable their safe and
meaningful participation, which is an essential condition for lasting and inclusive
peace. I also welcome the election of the first youth councils in the country and
encourage authorities to extend their full support to the newly elected representatives
so that they can conduct their crucial work.
109. Given the devastating human toll of more than five decades of conflict between
the State and the former FARC-EP, it is a moral obligation to guarantee the success
of Colombia’s hard-won peace. As the process enters a new stage and the country
prepares for elections in 2022, I trust that all Colombians and the country’s political
leaders can recognize, once and for all, that achieving lasting peace can no longer be
a source of disagreement. Colombians will remain at the forefront of the peace
process and I am honoured that the parties continue to trust the United Nations to
accompany their efforts, as we stand alongside them and Colombian society to
continue working towards this most noble goal.

18/19

21-19068

S/2021/1090

21-19068

19/19
