S/PV.7642

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7642nd meeting

Thursday, 10 March 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Minami
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-06553 (E)
*1606553*

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of India, Pakistan and Rwanda to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Atul
Khare, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to very warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give
him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the important steps
being taken and the measures being put in place to end
the exploitation and abuse of vulnerable people by the
United Nations personnel sent to protect them.
For many people caught up in poverty and conflict
around the world, the United Nations represents their
final hope for a better future. When sexual exploitation
and abuse are perpetrated against these individuals
by the United Nations personnel authorized to protect
them, it further victimizes and violates them and
inflicts untold harm on already fragile communities. It
undermines the trust between the United Nations and its
beneficiaries, betrays the values and principles that the
United Nations purports to advance, and tarnishes the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the United Nations as a whole. The impact is
not limited to the location of the abuse, but reflects
on the efforts of tens of thousands of peacekeepers
and civilian staff working tirelessly to save lives and
protect people around the world in difficult and often
dangerous conditions.
In June 2015, I, like the Council, was deeply
dismayed by allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
of children by foreign military forces in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations response to
those allegations. In that context, I appointed a highlevel external independent review panel on sexual
2/27

10/03/2016

exploitation and abuse by international peacekeeping
forces in the Central African Republic. The panel was
led by Justice Marie Deschamps, with two other eminent
persons. In mid-December 2015, the Panel submitted its
report, which depicted a United Nations that uncovered
the abuses but failed to respond meaningfully and with
the speed, care or sensitivity required.
A number of the panel’s recommendations are
already being implemented, while those that have
far-reaching implications or that require action by
legislative bodies, Member States and partners are
being considered. Given the importance of addressing
the systemic weaknesses that the panel’s report exposes,
I have appointed a Special Coordinator, Ms. Jane
Holl Lute. Ms. Lute will support me in reviewing
and advancing the implementation of the panel’s
recommendations and in strengthening our response to
such abuse.
Let me turn to my latest annual report to the General
Assembly on special measures on protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse (A/70/729). The report shows an
increase in the number of new allegations in 2015, with
a total of 99 for the United Nations system. Sixty-nine
of those allegations were lodged against United Nations
personnel serving in peace operations. That reflects
an increase in allegations within United Nations
peacekeeping operations, with multiple allegations
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and increases in allegations from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. Further allegations have continued to
come to light this year.
In the face of that disturbing trend across a number
of our peacekeeping operations, it is imperative that
our collective response be more effective. My report
proposes strong new initiatives in three key areas: first,
ending impunity; secondly, helping and supporting
victims; and thirdly, strengthening accountability,
including through action by Member States.
First and foremost, to end impunity, greater
transparency is critical. This year for the first time,
my report names the countries of alleged perpetrators.
Country-specific information is publicly available on
the website of the Conduct and Discipline Unit of the
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Department of Field Support. I intend to expand that
information to cover all outstanding allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse, including the status of
referrals for criminal accountability. That will hold
accountable and enable the United Nations and Member
States to address every allegation of sexual exploitation
or abuse in a thorough and timely manner through
proper investigation and just punishment.
Secondly, the victims, many of whom are
children, need our protection and support. We are
finalizing the establishment of a trust fund that will
provide them with the medical, psychosocial and legal
services that they need. I have asked Member States
to approve the transfer to the trust fund of payments
that will be withheld in substantiated cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse. I encourage Member States to
make voluntary contributions to the fund. I have also
urged all troop- and police-contributing countries to
designate paternity focal points. We will follow up
vigorously to ensure that children who are born as a
result of these terrible abuses receive the support they
need. Member States must also consider how they will
respond to claims from victims who pursue legal action
to seek redress.
Thirdly, accountability demands the conduct
of solid investigations that can withstand judicial
scrutiny in disciplinary and criminal proceedings.
That will require developing uniformly high standards
of investigation. It will entail building the capacities
of immediate response teams to gather and preserve
evidence. All investigations should be concluded
within six months at most, with the most urgent cases
concluded within three months. I urge Member States
to adopt this standard.
I also urge Member States to cooperate with the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in the conduct of
investigations. I am strongly committed to monitoring
accountability for violations. Where appropriate, that
will include taking action up to and including the
repatriation of commanders or of whole contingents.
We have already put that into practice in repatriating
troops serving in the Central African Republic, owing
to alleged sexual exploitation and abuse. When I
requested the resignation of my Special Representative
for MINUSCA in August 2015, I further signalled that
the Organization would hold itself accountable for such
violations. I will also consider ending the deployment
of uniformed personnel from specific Member States if

S/PV.7642

there is prima facie evidence of widespread or systemic
exploitation and abuse.
Accountability demands that Member States live
up to their responsibility to bring to justice those
who have committed crimes while serving with the
United Nations. We expect them to impose sanctions
commensurate with the seriousness of the offence. I
have asked Member States to establish on-site court
martial proceedings and to ensure that domestic
legislation applies to sex crimes committed by their
nationals while they are serving within United Nations
peace operations. I have also called for the collection of
samples of the DNA of alleged offenders.
We also continue to emphasize prevention.
Significantly, this year for the first time, we will be
able to vet all uniformed personnel for previous
allegations of misconduct while in the service of the
United Nations. We are increasing our support for
predeployment training by Member States. We will
also consider imposing new rules to curtail the social
activities of peacekeeping contingents, including
by designating certain geographical areas as out-ofbounds.
(spoke in French)
Those efforts constitute an important step forward
towards ending such crimes and the terrible suffering
they inflict on their victims. We can ensure the
implementation of the principle of accountability, and
in particular criminal accountability, only if the troopand police-contributing countries quickly and carefully
investigate such allegations and if the responsible
parties are duly punished. The United Nations is firmly
determined to work with Member States to ensure
that national judiciary proceedings make it possible to
implement the principle of accountability and to fight
impunity.
(spoke in English)
This is a global issue. It is not confined to any
one region, mission or nation. I am determined that
the United Nations must lead by example. Sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
demand nothing less than decisive and bold action.
I am committed to working with Member States to
confront that criminal conduct and to justify the trust
of the people we serve to ensure that this Organization
remains a beacon of hope for the most vulnerable.

16-065533/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his important briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing today, for the
important report upon which it is based (A/70/729), and
for his determined leadership in tackling what he has
rightly called a cancer in our system. We know that he
has faced considerable push-back against his efforts to
bring to light these horrific abuses and to ensure that
those responsible are held accountable, and we thank
him for holding firm.
Let me begin by reading out a quote,
“The Security Council is deeply concerned
with the allegations of sexual misconduct by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel... The Security
Council... recognizes the shared responsibility of
the Secretary-General and all Member States to
take every measure within their purview to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse by all categories of
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions
to enforce United Nations standards of conduct in
that regard.
The Security Council reiterates the importance
of ensuring that sexual exploitation and abuse are
properly investigated and appropriately punished.”
(S/PV.5191, p.7)
Those words were spoken in this Chamber nearly
11 years ago, in May 2005, by the Security Council
President at the time. She was speaking on behalf of the
Council at its first-ever meeting on the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
peacekeepers. Like today’s, that meeting was convened
following the release of a report commissioned by the
Secretary-General at that time, Kofi Annan, in order
to lay out a strategy for eliminating the scourge of
such abuses in peacekeeping operations. The report
(see A/59/710), as many of us here know, followed a
series of disturbing allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse in 2004, not unlike those that have surfaced
since last year.
Yet as we all know, despite the commitment made
by the Council over a decade ago to address this
problem, the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers persists. According to the report
released by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last week,
4/27

10/03/2016

69 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were
levied against uniformed and civilian personnel serving
in peacekeeping missions last year. That represents
a 20 per cent increase in reported violations from
the previous year. More than half of the allegations
concerning peacekeeping operations involve the rape
or sexual abuse of children. And those are just the
cases we know about. As Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, who took over as Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) last August, has said, the cases reported
are likely to be just the tip of the iceberg.
We have long known that one of the most effective
ways to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse is to
send a clear message that perpetrators will be held
accountable, so it is deeply alarming that, according
to the Secretary-General’s report, out of 69 allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse in 2015, in only 17
instances were investigations completed by January 31
2016 — 17 out of 69 — and in only one of those cases
did a country report to the United Nations that it had
punished a perpetrator in response to a substantiated
allegation. The perpetrator in that case was found to
have engaged in a sexually exploitative relationship. As
punishment, he was suspended for nine whole days.
Some have argued that this discussion has no place
in the Security Council, implying that they do not think
that sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers have
an impact on international peace and security. They are
mistaken. In addition to being a heinous abuse, sexual
exploitation and abuse erode the discipline of military
and police units and undermine the confidence of
local communities in peacekeepers, both of which are
critical to fulfilling Security Council mandates. More
broadly, when those entrusted with being protectors
become perpetrators, it undermines the credibility
of peacekeeping missions everywhere, as well as
the legitimacy of the United Nations writ large. And
along with that, it undermines our ability to address
effectively the serious threats of our time.
I have listened really hard to those who think that
the Council has no role to play in overseeing discussions
about what we do next to curb sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers, but I have to say that I honestly
do not understand the argument. I do not. It is the
Council that sends peacekeepers into conflict areas
because we believe that their presence is essential to
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

promoting international peace and security. We deem
it our responsibility as a Council to oversee every part
of their missions — how many soldiers and police
officers to send, what their mandate is, when they can
use force — and we give them clear mandates to protect
civilians.
So let me pose my question to the skeptics this way.
When Governments attack civilians, it is our job; when
armed groups and non-State actors attack civilians,
it is our job; when terrorists attack civilians, it is our
job. So why in the world, when the United Nations own
peacekeepers are the ones attacking civilians — when
peacekeepers commit the sickening of crime of raping
children — is it someone else’s job? Can anyone explain
that? Why is that the exception? The Security Council
cannot have responsibility for protecting civilians
against all threats from all forces except those whom
we directly oversee.
As we all know, a crucial part of accountability is
transparency. The United Nations, its Member States
and the Security Council need to know when soldiers
and police officers are accused of abusing the privilege
of wearing the blue helmet. We need to know whether
those allegations are being adequately investigated and,
where appropriate, punished. And victims and their
communities need to know that justice is being served.
Let us imagine if it was a member of our own family.
Yet the opaqueness of the existing system has made it
virtually impossible for any of us to know these things.
All to often, we do not know whether investigations
have been opened, and even when we know that
investigations are ongoing we do not know whether
they are being carried out promptly, thoroughly or
impartially.
Without basic facts, it is impossible to enforce a
zero-tolerance policy. It is no coincidence that we
have had a zero-tolerance policy for a long time, and
yet sexual exploitation and abuse allegations have
risen. That is not a coincidence. There is not sufficient
accountability to our own policy. Louis Brandeis, one
of the most eloquent justices who ever served on the
United States Supreme Court, once said that “[s]unlight
is said to be the best of disinfectants”. Yet allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers are too
often allowed to remain in the darkness, where the rot
they cause continues to spread, to the detriment of the
entire enterprise of peacekeeping.

S/PV.7642

That is why it is so important that the SecretaryGeneral’s report brings to light, for the first time,
the nationality of the personnel who face credible
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, and it is
why we commend the United Nations for starting to post
on its website new allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, including the date on which the report
was received, information about the nationality of the
accused, and whether the alleged victims are minors. It
is through such reporting that we know that, in the first
three months of this year, 26 additional allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse have been reported. That
is a horrifying number.
We can and must do more to shine a bright light
on this enduring problem. A place to start would be
providing additional information on the status of
investigations. For example, while we know that the
majority of investigations into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse from 2015 are pending, we do
not know when those investigations were opened. This
data is crucial for gauging whether countries are acting
in a timely manner.
Some countries have adamantly opposed this push
for greater transparency, in particular the practice of
identifying the nationality of peacekeepers credibly
alleged to have committed such abuses. They claim that
it unfairly singles out troop- and police-contributing
countries that are putting their personnel at risk in
some of the most difficult environments around the
world. We commend the service of those troop- and
police-contributing countries. Let me be very clear.
The vast majority of the 91,000 troops and 13,000 police
officers in United Nations peacekeeping missions serve
honourably and with courage, putting their lives on
the line every day to protect people in countries very
far from their own. They neither commit sexual abuse
nor do they turn a blind eye to it. And most troopcontributing countries are serious about holding to
account soldiers and police officers from their forces
who would perpetrate such abuses, recognizing that
impunity for sexual exploitation and abuse undermines
the effectiveness of their troop contingents as a whole,
whether they are serving in a United Nations mission or
any other mission.
Yet the fact that so many — the vast
majority — serve so honourably is all the more reason
why troop- and police-contributing countries should
want to bring these cases to light, investigate them, and
hold accountable those who have committed abuses.

16-065535/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Those serving honourably are the ones who have the
greatest incentive to prevent the sickening acts of a
few from tarnishing the noble service of so many.
When peacekeepers commit sexual exploitation and
abuse with impunity, the fault lies not only with the
peacekeepers who commit those deplorable acts, the
commanders who look the other way or the countries
that fail to conduct proper investigations. The blame
rests on all of us, including the countries that fail to
adequately train peacekeepers to prevent and root
out these problems, the Member States that fail to
press troop- and police-contributing countries to hold
perpetrators accountable, and the United Nations
institutions that fail to report on the magnitude of
the problem or repatriate units when countries prove
unable or unwilling to investigate credible allegations
of abuse. This is an all-systems failure.
Let me just give just one example. According
to the United Nations, there were seven separate
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by peacekeepers from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in a single mission, MINUSCA. One allegation
was reported in January, one in February, four in August
and one more in September. The majority of the alleged
victims of the abuses were kids. As the allegations
continued to add up, members of the Council, including
the United States, pushed for the repatriation of the
unit. In the meantime, more and more victims continued
to come forward. In January of this year there were
three more credible allegations of sexual violence and
abuse against the same unit, followed by five more in
February. Think about that: eight credible allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse reported against a single
group of peacekeepers in just two months — in seven of
those instances the alleged victims were children. How
could we let that happen? All of us. How could we let
that happen?
In late February, the entire contingent from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was repatriated — the
first time the United Nations had ever repatriated an
entire contingent for sexual exploitation and abuse.
It was the right thing to do. It sends a clear message
to all countries that there will be consequences for
failing to address this serious problem. But it should
never have taken so long. The Security Council was
told the contingent would be repatriated, but the
repatriation was delayed for operational reasons. That
is unacceptable. The experience should force us all to
ask: What if those soldiers had been sent home sooner?
6/27

10/03/2016

How many kids could have been spared suffering
unspeakable violations that no child should ever have
to endure, and that they will have to carry with them for
the rest of their lives?
We have to do better by these victims. That means
not only securing justice, but also ensuring that they
receive the care they need and deserve in the aftermath
of such crimes, both in the short term and in the long
term. The Secretary-General has proposed a trust fund
to support special services for victims that will withold
payments from repatriated individuals and direct the
funds to victims. We should move swiftly together to
create that fund.
In conclusion, let me share the story of one of
those alleged victims, a 14-year-old girl who lives in
Bambari, in the Central African Republic. She recently
told a human rights organization that, in December
2015, she was walking along a path near a peacekeeper
base when she was accosted by an armed soldier whose
uniform she recognized as one worn by peacekeepers
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. She said,
“He slapped me in the face and made me continue
to walk on the path. Then he ripped off my clothes
and used them to tie my hands behind my back.
He threw me on the ground, placed his gun to the
side and got on top of me to rape me. When he was
done, he just left. I had to put my clothes on, and I
went home.”
In 2005, the author of the Secretary-General’s
first report (see A/59/710) on this problem, Prince
Zeid, who of course is now the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, warned the Council
here in the Chamber that sexual exploitation and abuse
“would carry with it the most serious consequences
for the future of peacekeeping if we were to prove
ourselves incapable of solving [the] problem.”
(S/PV.5191, p. 4)
The same holds true to this day, and the profound
consequences of failing to solve this problem — for
peacekeeping missions, for the United Nations and
for so many individuals like that 14-year-old girl in
Bambari — continue to add up. We knew how to fix
the problem then, and we know how to fix the problem
now. We cannot wait any longer. The United Nations
has presented a Security Council draft resolution to
take our responsibility to address this grave issue as
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

an immediate step. We urge all Council members to
support it.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.
Since their inception, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have played a significant role in maintaining
international peace and security. To date, hundreds
of thousands of peacekeepers, from more than 120
countries, have participated in 69 peacekeeping
missions. More than 3,000 peacekeepers made the
ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty. They deserve to
be inscribed in our memories forever.
While United Nations peacekeepers have made
an enormous contribution, a handful of them are
suspected of having commmitted sexual exploitation
and abuse in some countries. Such acts have seriously
undermined the reputation of peacekeeping operations,
runs counter to the purpose of those operations and
seriously tarnishes the overall image of the United
Nations. China supports the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat in pursuit of a zero-tolerance policy
for peacekeepers involved in sexual exploitation and
abuse. And we support the international community in
adopting counter-measures.
First, the international community should pay great
attention to the problem and combat it resolutely. The
parties concerned should attach great importance to the
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers,
in the interest of safeguarding the reputation and
credibility of the United Nations and guaranteeting
the healthy development of peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council and other organs, including the
Secretariat, troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
the States concerned, should strengthen cooperation,
fully implement the zero-tolerance policy, resolutely
combat sexual exploitation and abuse, never condone
such acts, bring perpetrators to account and deliver
justice to victims.
Secondly, the international community should
adopt an integrated policy that combines punishment
and prevention. Merely pursuing prosecution after the
fact cannot fundamentally resolve the problem. The
parties concerned should attach importance to boosting
prevention efforts and seek to eradicate the underlying
causes of sexual exploitation and abuse. It is important
to analyse the various conditions that give rise to

S/PV.7642

sexual exploitation and abuse. At every key link in the
deployment of peacekeeping operations, comprehensive
measures should be taken to prevent and respond to
such acts. There is also a need to raise awareness among
peacekeepers about the need to uphold discipline and
respect the law, as well as to strengthen administration
and management to ensure that sexual exploitation and
abuse constitutes a red line that must never be crossed.
Thirdly, there is a need to improve management
and raise standards. The Secretariat bears important
responsibility for improving and strengthening the
deployment of peacekeeping operations. It must further
deepen the reform of peacekeeping operations and, by
formulating norms and guidelines for peacekeepers,
comprehensively upgrade deployment standards and the
management of peacekeeping operations, strengthen
communication with affected countries and TCCs with
a view to ensuring that every peacekeeper deployed
in a mission area adheres to ethical standards, strictly
follows the law, maintains discipline and respects local
populations.
Fourthly, capacity-building for TCCs must be
strengthened. TCCs bear the primary responsibility
for the acts of the peacekeepers they deploy. They
must strengthen predeployment training to ensure that
peacekeepers are well disciplined and able to carry
out their mandates. The parties concerned must also
pay attention to the actual difficulties facing TCCs,
especially those from the developing world. They must
also scale up assistance in the area of peacekeeping
and comprehensively boost capacity-building in those
countries. The international community needs to
strengthen its cooperation with TCCs through bilateral,
multilateral and regional organizations and provide
them with technical assistance, such as training for
personnel, and comprehensively upgrade the quality of
their personnel at the level of management, as well as
the overall capacity of peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
to the Secretary-General for his urgency in bringing this
issue to the Security Council and for his briefing today.
For nearly 70 years, the pale blue helmets of United
Nations peacekeepers have been synonymous with
the work of the United Nations. In the 16 missions
ongoing today, and in the 54 that came before, each
and every peacekeeper presents the human face of
the Organization and the principles we stand for. In
upholding those principles, many have paid the ultimate

16-065537/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

price. At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the
3,444 peacekeepers who lost their lives since 1948,
including 104 from my own country. We all know why
their sacrifice was needed. Peacekeeping, by definition,
can be dangerous. It is the preservation of international
security — not in word, but in deed. In the midst of
conflict and chaos, peacekeepers bring safety and hope
to those most in need, to those in the darkest moments
of their lives.
To fulfil that crucial role, peacekeepers need the
trust of those they seek to protect. When a girl looks
up to a Blue Helmet, she should do so not in fear, but
in hope. Every time that a peacekeeper fails to live up
to our principles or fails to uphold the integrity and
decency that is expected of the United Nations, that
trust is undermined.
Today we have heard about the worst abuse of trust
imaginable — the sickening actions of a small number
of individuals now threaten the reputation of the entire
United Nations. Such actions are a horrific betrayal
of the faith placed in the United Nations by the very
people in need of protection, people who have already
suffered the trauma of conflicts. Those crimes truly are
a cancer in our system.
The stories that have emerged from the Central
African Republic are harrowing. We cannot shy away
from them. We cannot hide behind an acronym. This
is not “SEA”. It is abuse. It is exploitation. It is women
and girls being raped and manipulated for sex. For too
long that has existed in the shadows, in rumours and
speculation, concealed by incompetence and, yes, by
conspiracy. Today we have brought overdue light to
this darkness, we now need to prove that we will never
let it happen again. We all have a role to play in that.
We cannot pretend that this is a matter just for other
countries. When our collective reputation is threatened,
collective action is needed.
Ahead of their deployments to South Sudan and
Somalia, all troops from the United Kingdom will be
vetted rigorously and receive robust predeployment
training covering sexual exploitation and abuse. I hope
all troop contributing countries will do the same.
The United Nations system must also bear its share
of responsibility. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
decisiveness in withdrawing units facing credible
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
support his prerogative to name and shame countries
that contribute those units, and we fully support the
8/27

10/03/2016

appointment of Jane Holl Lute as Special Coordinator
on the United Nations response to this terrible scourge.
But this is just the start. The coming months will
need to see bold United Nations reforms. Those must
include designing a system for reporting allegations
that is trusted by host communities. When allegations
are proven, the United Nations must act quickly and
decisively, and well within the Secretary-General’s
suggested six-month deadline.
The United Kingdom has committed funds to assist
the United Nations and the Special Coordinator in these
efforts this year. Some of that money will be spent
rebuilding much-needed trust in communities hosting
peacekeepers. I hope that other Member States will join
us in committing financial support too.
The world is watching us today. Let us be clear:
this cannot continue; this must not continue. The report
(A/70/729) of the Secretary-General is a wake-up call
that simply cannot be ignored. It is a call for all of us
to do everything in our power to protect those in our
collective care. The reputation of peacekeepers, of
the Security Council and of the United Nations is at
stake. The Council has a clear responsibility to ensure
accountability and to take action. I hope we can adopt
the Security Council draft resolution under negotiation
in the coming days. That will be a valuable step forward,
but it cannot be our last.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on issues of discipline
and behaviour in peacekeeping operations.
We attach great importance to the work on the
problem of the commission of violations, including
sexual abuse by members of United Nations
peacekeeping contingents, as well as United Nations
staff members. We believe that the United Nations and
its Member States must take all possible measures to
prevent and fully put an end to such actions.
No less disturbing is the information regarding
the flagrant cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by foreign non-United Nations troops
deployed in conflict regions with the consent of the
Security Council. Those contingents, like the Blue
Helmets, should bring peace and security to those
States. We categorically reject the provision of any
privileges to those forces over the staff of United Nations
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7642

missions. There must be a single set of standards for all
in combating that evil.

specific perpetrators, determine their guilt and have
them stand trial.

Problems related to discipline in United Nations
operations on the ground are not new. For many years,
it has been discussed in the General Assembly in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
in the Fifth and Sixth Committees. Preventive and
proactive measures are also included in resolutions
regularly adopted by the General Assembly, under the
heading of “Criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on missions”. Very often, with
active participation by the General Assembly, the
practice of preliminary training and induction courses
for staff has been introduced, which is implemented
by States together with peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. Those measures are already
yielding tangible results.

A separate important task is taking steps to prevent
such crimes and ensuring appropriate training and
vetting of military and civilian personnel deployed in
peacekeeping operations. The main burden there in
cases related to troops and police is borne by troopcontributing countries. In the case of civilian personnel,
the responsibility lies with the Secretariat. In that
regard, we see no grounds for mentorship of Member
States by the Secretariat. Among its ranks, there can
also be people who are equally guilty.

We believe that the involvement of all Member
States in the process of establishing measures will
determine the effectiveness of their implementation in
practice. The key role lies with the troop-contributing
countries of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which possess comprehensive information on the
reasons we are unable to reduce and eliminate those
shameful statistics.
Although we continue to believe that issues
of peacekeeping discipline are not related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Russian delegation showed great understanding from
the very beginning for the United States initiative to
strengthen the message of the unacceptability of sexual
abuse by United Nations contingents under the aegis
of the Security Council. At the same time, the draft
resolution that has been circulated is far from ideal.
It proposes a selective approach by excluding from
the proposed measures both United Nations civilian
personnel and non-United Nations personnel.
At the same time, as a result of ongoing negotiations
in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping on that very
topic, it would simply be wrong to set the Council
against the General Assembly. While in no way do we
minimize the seriousness of the sexual exploitation and
abuse that we are discussing today, we would like to
note that the collective responsibility for such actions
proposed by the Secretary-General and a number of
States raises questions. From our point of view, the
focus should be on efforts made in good faith to find

At the same time, unfortunately, there remains the
question of what to do with foreign contingents that
have Security Council mandates to conduct operations
to facilitate the resolution of conflict situations with the
expectation that the operations will be carried out in
good faith. We believe that cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse by such forces should be thoroughly
investigated by contributing countries and those found
guilty must be brought to justice. There can be no
impunity here. Otherwise, the Security Council will
sooner or later have to consider the issue of withdrawing
such authority from them.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country reiterates its categorical
condemnation of sexual exploitation and abuse. Egypt
also reiterates that it is important that Member States
take the necessary measures to combat these crimes
and eliminate them completely. The necessary efforts
to help victims should be made. Egypt and all Member
States are committed to respecting the zero-tolerance
policy with regard to these crimes. I would like to
highlight several items of importance in that regard.
First, the United Nations body responsible for
the examination of issues of conduct and discipline
within peacekeeping operations, including cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse, is the General Assembly,
whether through the Fifth Committee or the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. That is
demonstrated by the fact that the report (A/70/729) of
the Secretary-General presented to the Council today
was initially submitted to the General Assembly,
which is the competent body in this area. The General
Assembly, which represents all the States Members
of the United Nations, including troop-contributing
countries, is undoubtedly the body that is the most apt
to examine cases of sexual exploitation and abuse from

16-065539/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

a broader angle that takes into consideration the various
primary actors.
Secondly, any investigation of cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse within peacekeeping operations
must include the examination of all the different missions
mandated by the Security Council. Moreover, such
investigation should treat all United Nations personnel
in the same manner without any discrimination
whatsoever, because fair and equal treatment within the
context of cases of sexual exploitation and abuse sends
a strong message to all those who would be tempted to
commit such a crime, and ensures that the victims will
not refrain from reporting perpetrators because of their
nationality, affiliation or the organizations to which
they are connected.
Thirdly, Egypt believes that cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse should not be used as a tool to
attack troop-contributing countries or their reputation,
or to undermine the significant sacrifice they are
undertaking to re-establish peace and security for
civilians. Cases of sexual exploitation are individual,
isolated cases. They represent a handful of incidents
in comparison to the over 100,000 troops deployed.
Moreover, these cases are not representative of the
conduct of troop-contributing countries. My delegation
is therefore categorically opposed to a policy of
collective punishment against forces that are making
the ultimate sacrifice in order to implement a mandate
under very difficult conditions.
Fourthly, the best way to combat these crimes is to
have Member States conduct investigations straightway
into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Moreover, the Secretary-General must be informed of
the results of such investigations as soon as possible.
Furthermore, it is essential to ensure that United
Nations camps are separated from civilian populations.
Also, contingents should be rotated and provided with
adequate living conditions.
Of course, we thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment and for having presented his vision
of combating cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
to the Security Council. However, at the same time,
Member States should have been given an opportunity
and sufficient time to discuss this very important topic
within the framework of the General Assembly.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the initiative of organizing this meeting,
10/27

10/03/2016

which has afforded us an opportunity to hear a briefing
by the Secretary-General on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
staff members. It follows the publication of his report
(A/70/729) of 16 February 2016 on the special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, which has enabled us to better understand
the scale and reality of this scourge.
In addition to harming the image and credibility of
the Organization, these acts unfortunately overshadow
the praiseworthy efforts and the heroic work
accomplished by tens of thousands of soldiers for peace,
sometimes at the cost of their lives. That is why Senegal
reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy and expresses its deep concern
with regard to the increase in the number of new cases
of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, which
rose from 80 in 2014 to 99 in 2015. Furthermore, my
delegation deplores the fact that the percentage of
allegations that concern sexual acts against minors or
non-consensual sexual relations with adults has again
increased, rising from 35 per cent in 2014 to 55 per cent
in 2015.
This extremely unfortunate situation, which the
Secretary-General has just described to us, makes
all the more necessary our unceasing bold efforts to
prevent and punish sexual exploitation and abuse of
vulnerable populations by individuals mandated to
protect them. It goes without saying that the troopand police-contributing countries have the primary
responsibility of investigating allegations against their
uniformed personnel and, if necessary, of initiating
criminal proceedings and informing the United Nations
in a timely way of the progress and results of those
investigations.
Faced with this scourge, we must bolster our action
by giving pride of place to a constructive, preventive,
responsible and decisive approach. We must also bring
those responsible for cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse to justice. However, with regard to the measures
we adopt, we will have to ensure that innocent
individuals do not fall victim to collective punishment
for the crimes of individuals, even as we ensure the
respect of the dignity and rights of the victims.
Senegal,
as
a
significant
troopand
police-contributing country, would like to reiterate its
commitment to take all the necessary measures to fully
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

assume the responsibilities incumbent upon it in this
area. This commitment reflects the ideal that underpins
our work in the field of peacekeeping, one of the key
principles of which is clearly underscored in the 2016
plan of action of the Chief of Staff of the Senegalese
armed forces, elaborated in the framework of training
military personnel in the rights and protection of
children:
“The Senegalese armed forces, both within and
outside our borders, have the duty not be perpetrators
of abuse. Rather, they must be the protectors of
vulnerable groups: women and children.”
In that regard, I am pleased to recall that for Senegal
the protection of civilians in the theatres of deployment
of our troops constitutes the very essence of their
presence. That is why the Senegalese armed forces are
resolutely committed to incorporating the law of armed
conflict into their training, planning and conducting
of operations. The objective is to enable the men and
women engaged in peacekeeping operations on the
ground at all levels to better understand and especially
to ensure respect for their obligations in the area of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
To that end, Senegal, thanks to its continued
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the non-governmental organization
Save the Children, has been able to organize
several seminars and training sessions, including
on international humanitarian law and respect for
children’s rights. We have also established, at the
level of the Chief of Staff of the Army, a committee
on the rights and protection of children, which is
responsible for the implementation and coordination
of training activities for military forces on the law
and the protection of children before, during and after
conflicts. In that regard, strict disciplinary measures
have been stipulated for the perpetrators of violations
of international humanitarian law, particularly in cases
of violence, abuse or rape. Such measures include, inter
alia, imprisonment, repatriation, discharge from the
army or the gendarmerie, and trial before civilian or
military tribunals. That underscores the importance
my country attaches to the training and appropriate
predeployment preparation of our troops.
I therefore call on our bilateral, regional and
multilateral partners to accompany and support troopcontributing countries in their efforts to prevent sexual

S/PV.7642

violations and abuse, particularly in terms of training
and predeployment preparation.
In conclusion, I wish to distinctly reaffirm that
Senegal, mindful of respect for human rights and the
protection of civilians in times of conflict, remains
determined to ensure that its army, which is well known
for its professionalism and republican character, strictly
upholds those principles in its theatres of operation.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation wishes
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in the United
Nations system, including measures undertaken to
strengthen the Organization’s response, as outlined
in his report (A/70/729) to the General Assembly. The
presence of the Secretary-General today demonstrates
his clear commitment to addressing that challenge,
which threatens to cast a long, dark shadow on the
Organization’s reputation. We welcome many of the
messages he outlined to confront sexual exploitation
and abuse and, as he has rightly said, to ensure that
the United Nations becomes the vehicle of hope for the
most vulnerable.
We also take note of the findings and
recommendations on the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse contained in various reports and reviews,
most recently the report of the high-level external
independent review panel on sexual exploitation
and abuse by international peacekeeping forces in
the Central African Republic. We were particularly
concerned over the findings of fragmentation of
responsibility within the United Nations system and
view the troubling lack of coordination as a major gap
that needs to be addressed. In that regard, we welcome
the appointment of Ms. Jane Holl Lute as Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to exploitation and abuse and look forward to continued
updates on the recommendations and implementations.
We believe that sexual exploitation and abuse
cannot be tackled in isolation. It requires the collective
and concerted commitment and political will of all
Members of the United Nations and the international
community. We support the intention to address the
sexual exploitation and abuse issue in a broader and
more systematic manner across the United Nations
system. In that connection, we note the Security
Council’s draft resolution, initiated by the United States
delegation, and we will work constructively on it.

16-0655311/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Malaysia also reaffirms the central role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which has been mandated by the wider membership to
deliberate on all issues relating to United Nations peace
operations. It is important that our parallel efforts be
complementary with our shared aim to eliminate the
sexual exploitation and abuse, seek accountability and
alleviate the harm caused to vulnerable people.
Accountability for perpetrators of sexual
exploitation and abuse cannot be achieved under
a shroud of secrecy. Therefore, we are supportive
of the Secretary-General’s measures to increase
transparency in the accountability process. However,
we reiterate that Member States, particularly the troopand police-contributing countries, have the primary
responsibility to hold their personnel accountable
for sexual exploitation and abuse. In order to do so,
information and credible evidence regarding allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse must be channelled
by the United Nations in a timely manner to Member
States for subsequent action.
Malaysia believes that improving investigation
procedures for sexual exploitation and abuse
allegations increases the accountability process.
Therefore, we are supportive of such initiatives,
including the establishment of immediate response
teams at peacekeeping missions to gather and preserve
evidence and the adoption of a six-month time line for
the completion of their investigations.
We reaffirm that Malaysia enforces a strict zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse for
our peacekeeping troops. All Malaysian peacekeepers
undergo compulsory predeployment training in which
specific modules and briefings are conducted to raise
awareness of acts that constitute sexual exploitation
and abuse and the consequences of committing such
acts. We also have national laws in place to ensure the
prosecution and punishment of Malaysian peacekeeping
personnel for serious misconduct, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. We hope that the strong
measures announced by the Secretary-General to
strengthen accountability for sexual exploitation and
abuse, including imposing sanctions against those
who commit acts of misconduct and who fail to take
actions against them, will create a deterrent effect and
galvanize prevention efforts at the highest level.
We also note the decision of the Secretary-General
to repatriate contingents where there is a demonstrated
12/27

10/03/2016

pattern of abuse or non-response to allegations of
misconduct, which we view as a measure of last resort.
At the same time, we call on the Secretary-General
to issue clear criteria and guidelines in making such
decisions and to engage constructively with police- and
troop-contributing countries on that issue.
We must not forget that our discussion today
was triggered by heinous acts against children by
international peacekeepers, both United Nations and
non-United Nations, in the Central African Republic.
The series of sexual exploitation and abuse cases
involving children and the failure to provide timely
follow-up assistance to the victims underscores the
continued need to raise awareness on and mainstream
child protection in peacekeeping operations. We urge
mission leadership to instil a culture of child protection
in peacekeeping missions and stress the important role
that child protection advisers can play in preventing
and responding to allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse against children. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism established under the Security Council’s
children and armed conflict framework should be
utilized to collect and analyse information on sexual
exploitation and abuse allegations involving child
victims in order to ensure that necessary follow-up
actions can be provided.
Knowledge is the best defence and the provision
of training for peacekeeping personnel cannot be
overstated as a means of prevention. Therefore, we
also advocate mandatory predeployment training
on child protection, in addition to training on sexual
exploitation and abuse prevention for all United Nations
peacekeepers, and we support the Secretary-General’s
initiative for troop- and police-contributing countries
to issue certificates of compliance.
There is a tendency to discuss sexual exploitation
and abuse in the abstract, in terms of numbers and
percentages that keep us detached from the reality of
sexual exploitation and abuse cases. In comprehensively
addressing the issue, let us remember that these are real
people — mothers, daughters, fathers and sons — who
suffer the anguish and harm of sexual exploitation and
abuse. The international community must ensure that
they receive the necessary attention, including medical
and psychological assistance. They must be our priority
in pursuing accountability.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming my delegation’s
readiness to work closely with Council members and
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

other partners and stakeholders, especially the troopand police-contributing countries, as well as the
Secretariat, to address our common aims. The pledge
taken by all United Nations peacekeepers, entitled “We
are United Nations peacekeepers”, recognizes the Blue
Helmets as the embodiment of the aspirations of all
the people of the world for peace. The expectations of
the international community and the local populations
who they are sent to protect are extremely high. That
is why cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and the
subsequent failure to take action by the international
community are very painful to confront. However, only
when we are honest about our own shortcomings can
we genuinely work to overcome them. Only then can we
live up to the lofty ideals we seek to uphold.
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, my delegation
would like to extend its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, which stressed three points:
ending impunity, protection and support for victims,
and ensuring accountability.
It is regrettable that allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers persist. According to the
Secretary-General’s report (A/70/729) released last
week, 69 allegations were reported in 2015. Bearing
in mind that peacekeepers are deployed to protect
people and that they are sometimes the last hope of
people suffering in conflicts, sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers is absolutely unacceptable.
It is also unacceptable that sexual exploitaiton and
abuse has significantly damaged the credibility of the
United Nations. Japan therefore strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy and believes
that effective measures must be taken until there are no
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Japan supports the Secretary-General’s decision to
repatriate contingents where there is a demonstrated
pattern of misconduct. The main aim of that measure
is not to point fingers at the contingents but to urge
troop- and police-contributing countries to take action.
We need to realize that investigating the allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse is primarily the
responsibility of the troop- and police-contributing
countries, and they have to take appropriate actions
with regard to the allegations and hold those personnel
accountable for sexual exploitation and abuse. By
doing so, troop- and police-contributing countries can
demonstrate their commitment to the zero-tolerance
policy and preserve the honour of the vast majority of
peacekeepers who are fulfilling their tasks seriously.

S/PV.7642

Japan has supported and will support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts in tackling sexual exploitation and
abuse through concrete contributions. One contribution
is providing financial support for the online training
of all categories of peacekeepers. Without sufficient
training, no field personnel can maintain a high standard
of conduct and discipline. With Japan’s support,
peacekeepers will be trained under the United Nations
e-learning programme on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse, which is to be operational in
May this year. We are convinced that this programme
will be a firm step towards the eradication of sexual
explotiation and abuse.
Another concrete contribution that Japan is
considering is in the area of support for victims. As the
Secretary-General has recommended, it is necessary to
secure specialized assistance to the victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse. At the second peacekeeping
summit, held last September, Japan already expressed
its commitment to providing support for a remedial
action programme for victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We welcome the initiative of the United
Nations to establish a trust fund to support victims, and
we stand ready to consider the proposal.
Let me conclude by saying that all of
us — the Secretariat, the Security Council and all
Member States — have to cooperate in tackling such
shameful misconduct by taking concrete measures for
the sake of both victims and peacekeepers. Japan will
continue to support the efforts of the Secretary-General
in this area. Japan also hopes that the Council will adopt
this draft resolution as soon as possible.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
efforts and measures to combat sexual abuse within
the United Nations. France welcomes his determination
and exemplary mobilization to take all the necessary
measures to prevent and fight sexual exploitation and
abuse in the United Nations.
Sexual abuse committed by Blue Helmets, both
military and police, but also by United Nations civilian
personnel and international forces that do not operate
in the United Nations command, is unacceptable. That
is why France supports the Security Council draft
resolution on sexual abuse under consideration. It is
also why France supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral aimed at further strengthening the zerotolerance policy through concrete proposals. A number

16-0655313/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of them have already been implemented; others are still
being considered in other forums. These exchanges,
this momentum, are positive and are encouraging with
regard to the future of peacekeeping operations.
The zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual
abuse must apply at all levels. First, at the level of
the United Nations, it must apply on the ground. In
peacekeeping operations, several operational measures
will make it possible to change the daily lives of the
local population: the repatriation of units suspected of
sexual abuse, the appointment of focal points within
peacekeeping operations to prevent sexual abuse, and
efforts to improve support for victims. All these steps
will contribute to changing the culture and reality of
peacekeeping operations.
However, zero tolerance does not concern only
the Blue Helmets. Unfortunately, among the civilian
personnel of the United Nations programmes and
agencies there have also been cases of sexual abuse,
including by those who tend to the needs of the most
vulnerable — refugees and displaced persons. That is
why France calls for stepped-up vigilance and efforts to
increase, through adapted infrastructure and means, the
protection of these populations, often marked by extreme
poverty and extreme weakness and are traumatized by
the violence of conflict. We owe special protection to
women and chilren, who are the first targets of various
acts of abuse, violence and exploitation in camps and
sites for refugees and displaced persons.
Zero tolerance must begin with its application at the
level of the United Nations, but zero tolerance applies
at the national level as well. It is the responsibility of
every State to take the necessary steps to prevent sexual
abuse and also to bring to justice those suspected of
such abuse. That is what we do in France.
With regard to prevention, our security forces in
France are systematically vetted regarding their history
in terms of respect for human rights, in keeping with
the policy required by the United Nations. Our security
forces are also systematically trained on the protection
of human rights and the fight against sexual abuse
before deployment. France intends to strengthen its
training and prevention system within the framework
of its security forces. France is also pleased to
announce that it will contribute to the financing of
the office of the Special Coordinator on improving
the United Nations response to sexual exploitation and
14/27

10/03/2016

abuse,special Ms. Jane Holl Lute. We warmly welcome
her appointment.
Regarding the fight against impunity, France
deploys, as requested by the Secretary-General,
national investigation officers within its contingents in
order to respond rapidly to allegations. Furthermore, as
soon as allegations were reported in the Central African
Republic, French justice opened judicial proceedings to
shed full light on the situation. Justice must be carried
out if these allegations are confirmed, in a way mindful
of the fundamental principles of the law and with
respect for the independence of the judiciary.
Zero tolerance must also be applied at the regional
level. Regional organizations are not, unfortunately,
spared allegations of sexual abuse. That is why it is
essential to act at this level as well, especially as those
organizations are often key partners of the United
Nations in peacekeeping operations. Thus we call on
the African Union — which incudes countries that
contribute troops to the United Nations and through its
own missions acts both both upstream and downstream
of the Blue Helmets — to strengthen its cooperation
with the United Nations in these matters.
This public debate marks a movement for
peacekeeping operations from which there is no
turning back. They can no longer close their eyes and
remain silent about sexual abuse. Today the Concil
speaks publicly in order to break the silence and the
stigmatization that burdens the victims so as to send
them a message of hope.
Lastly, I would like to end on a note of encouragement
and thanks for the tens of thousands of soldiers and
police officers, from the United Nations or elsewhere,
who are not implicated in the allegations and who put
their lives on the line in order to save others. They
should know that we do not wish to stigmatize them for
the actions of others; on the contrary, we want to assure
them that they can continue to do their work with the
effectiveness it needs.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
convening of today’s meeting and are grateful for the
stance taken by the Secretary-General in his report on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse (A/70/729), issued in February, given
its overriding importance for the issues of credibility
and moral support of our peacekeeping operations.
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As the report says, such actions contradict and
undermine the spirit of the United Nations and the
very purpose for which its missions are created, which
is to protect the populations of countries in extremely
fragile situations and the poverty produced by conflict.
Added to the suffering created in a context of war and
instability is the fact that people are endangered by the
possibility that the personnel sent to alleviate those
situations are taking advantage of the circumstances
to commit this kind of crime, which only results in
greater despair among those affected, especially the
most vulnerable, such as women and children, and to
rejection of the presence of international peacekeeping
missions.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela considers
that acts of sexual exploitation and abuse in a context
of armed conflict represent more than just a discipline
issue; they are a shameful phenomenon that may violate
international humanitarian and human rights laws. In
that regard, we emphasize that Venezuela categorically
condemns any incident of sexual abuse or exploitation
committed by personnel from any foreign contingent,
whether military, police or civilian, deployed in
peacekeeping operations or special political missions,
as well as by personnel from our Organization who are
not considered to be deployed in such operations.
We are aware of the various categories of
operations on the ground under United Nations
mandates, particularly those of the Security Council,
the various types of personnel who carry out functions
within them — civilian, military or police deployed or
not deployed — and the differences among those who
have responsibility when it comes to taking measures
to punish such crimes. However, we believe that,
despite such differences and bureaucratic complexities,
what is fundamental here is that we are talking about
unacceptable and intolerable acts that compromise and
damage the legitimacy and work of our Organization.
The United Nations must set an example of
consistency and firmness and a high level of moral
commitment when it comes to the importance of
preventing the perpetration such acts, particularly
regarding accountability, by United Nations personnel
and those outside the Organization but authorized by
it, whatever their country of origin or professional
category. In that context, Venezuela supports the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy for acts of
sexual violence committed in peacekeeping operations
or any military mission that has the Security Council’s

S/PV.7642

mandate or support. We should ensure follow-up
and accountability even in cases where they are the
responsibility of countries contributing troops or other
personnel.
It is also important to emphasize that according
to the figures in the report, of the 99 alleged cases in
various operations, 30 involved personnel considered
not to be deployed; 38 involved military personnel; 16,
police officers and 15, civilian personnel considered as
deployed in peacekeeping operations. Overall, 38 per
cent of the total represents military personnel and
61.2 per cent, other categories. Those numbers should
tell the United Nations, and the Security Council
specifically, that any binding action that could be taken
should involve sanctions and action to combat impunity
for all categories of personnel, whether civilian,
military, volunteers, police or support staff, regardless
of their nationality.
This is an essential responsibility for our
Organization. We agree with the Secretary-General
that transparency and accountability are fundamental
to the ability of the United Nations to demonstrate
its collective adherence to a policy of zero tolerance,
maintain the international community’s trust, ensure
justice for the victims and achieve the purposes
of peacekeeping operations. It is also important to
ensure that any investigation or punishment is guided
by the principles of objectivity, non-selectivity and
impartiality. No country should receive privileged
treatment, and there should be no difference between
North and South, considering that countries of the
southern hemisphere tend to be stigmatized. We believe
this subject should not be politicized.
In our view, it is crucial to improve these mechanisms
and to ensure that frequent dialogues are held with
troop- and police-contributing countries, with the goal
of discussing the topic and improving the coordination
of action for a greater impact on prevention and the
fight against impunity. In that regard, we reiterate that
it is vital to fully implement article 44 of the Charter
of the United Nations, which requires that troopcontributing countries be invited to participate in the
decision-making process concerning the deployment of
personnel in peacekeeping operations. In practice, that
has never really been implemented.
While we therefore welcome the discussion of
this sensitive issue in the Council, it is essential that
we ensure close coordination on it with the General

16-0655315/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Assembly, particularly through the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, the body in charge of
formulating comprehensive policies pertaining to the
operations of such missions so as to avoid duplication
of functions and to ensure that institutional efforts
are not scattered around the Organization. In its 2015
report (A/69/19), the Special Committee emphasized
that the same standards of personal conduct must be
applied without exception to all categories of United
Nations personnel. That is a principle that should be
implemented in order to improve the Organization’s
credibility.
Another issue where improvements could be made is
in the area of strengthening mechanisms to help victims,
who in many cases have to deal with stigmatization and
ostracism from their family members or communities
and can sometimes be the target of retaliation by the
perpetrators. That involves having the necessary
resources for ensuring that victims are safe and receive
proper medical and psychological care.
In conclusion, Venezuela would like to reiterate
its commitment to strengthening the institutional,
administrative and judicial mechanisms we need to deal
with such cases, especially cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse, committed by any personnel linked to
operations authorized by the United Nations. In that
regard, we have received and are discussing the text of
the draft resolution proposed to the Security Council,
and we hope it will take into consideration the views
expressed today by the members of the Council.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. We also appreciate the
leadership of the United States in that regard. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his strong
and unambiguous stance on the issue discussed today.
Ukraine is convinced of the enormous importance
of addressing the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse
in a just, effective and timely manner. It is extremely
disturbing that, despite measures taken to enforce
the zero-tolerance policy, in the past year alone 69
allegations of serious misconduct in peacekeeping
missions were reported. Even more appalling is the
fact that allegations involving the most serious forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse — sexual exploitation
of and sexual acts with minors — continue to constitute
more than 50 per cent of all those reported.
The protection of civilians is a clear, overarching
objective for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
16/27

10/03/2016

It often involves issues directly related to the protection
of civilians, including protecting them from conflictrelated sexual violence and trafficking.
In that regard, it is even more striking that reports of
alleged sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers,
often involving those who are vulnerable and whom the
United Nations has been called upon to protect, have
continued to surface for years. We believe that the
Security Council should send a strong message with
regard to that problem. Ukraine welcomes the recent
report (A/70/729) of the Secretary-General on special
measures on protection from sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse and his efforts to prevent such incidents. We
support planned activities on prevention, enforcement
and remedial action, including support to victims, as
outlined in the report of the Secretary General, and we
fully agree his recommendations.
We also appreciate the focus on that issue in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/682) on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We
welcome the appointment of Jane Holl Lute as Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to sexual exploitation and abuse.
Apart from protecting the local population from
sexual exploitation and abuse, it is also of particular
importance that the United Nations policy in that area
be focused on prioritizing the security and well-being
of victims, including by maintaining confidentiality
during investigations, helping to minimize trauma
and facilitating access to immediate care and medical
and psychological support. Among the important
components of the relevant preventive policy, special
attention must also be paid to vetting all peacekeeping
personnel, along with respective predeployment
training. In that regard, we welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to require certificates of
compliance, and we express full support for the United
Nations human rights screening policy.
As an active troop- and police-contributing country,
Ukraine is paying a great deal of attention to the issue
that we are discussing today. In order to send well-trained
and properly prepared peacekeepers to serve in United
Nations peacekeeping operations throughout the world,
our special peacekeeping training centre at our national
police academy and our training and research centre
on international peacekeeping activity at the National
Defence Academy of Ukraine are up and running. Both
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of those institutions provide the necessary training
for military and police personnel in accordance with
United Nations requirements, including on the subject
of the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that context, Ukraine re-affirms its determination
to strictly implement a zero-tolerance policy among
its peacekeepers. We fully recognize our two-fold
responsibility, as a member elected to the Council and
as an active peacekeeping nation, to strengthen the
fight against sexual exploitation and abuse and create
a system of accountability for the perpetrators of such
acts. Concrete and effective preventive measures must
be instituted. A much more aggressive approach to
ensuring justice has to be pursued. Accountability must
be real and public.
For those reasons, we support the draft resolution
put forward by the United States.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Spain would like to express its enormous
gratitude for the outstanding work that our Blue Helmets
are carrying out. We believe that it is appropriate, on
the day after of having just returned from a Security
Council trip during which we were able observe the
work of the Blue Helmets on the ground, to once again
recall the admirable work that they are carrying out in
what are certainly difficult conditions. Nevertheless,
there are issues, such as the ones that we are discussing
today, that are clearly tarnishing the image and the work
of the United Nations. Our collective responsibility is
therefore to put a definitive end to their reoccurrence.
But the responsibility of the Security Council is not
limited only to peacekeeping operations, but to all
operations that have been authorized by the Council.
I do not think it is a matter of pointing fingers at one
country or one troop-contributor for having committed
acts that I qualify as horrendous. The essence of this
discussion is for us to establish a collective response by
members of the Council. For that reason, the delegation
of Spain would like to focus on three essential aspects
to improve the situation: first, prevention; secondly,
investigation; and, thirdly accountability.
With regard to prevention, I believe that it is
absolutely fundamental for troop-contributing countries
to maximally tighten the procedures involved for
training their military personnel. If Blue Helmets are
properly trained by the troop-contributing countries,
we will have achieved significant progress. On that
account, I would like to highlight the importance that

S/PV.7642

we attach to troop-contributing countries certifying
to the United Nations that those training courses have
actually taken place and meet what must be high-quality
and excellent standards. That certification needs to be
renewed and reviewed on a very frequent basis. For if
we really want to be efficient in the fight against sexual
violence, we must confront the root causes, and those
causes lead us to the sad conclusion that, unfortunately,
they have a very specific impact in the case of women
and children.
Perhaps a significant preventive measure to achieve
substantial progress would be to double the percentage
of women in peacekeeping operations. That will be a
measure that will have a significant impact. I recall that
that measure is included in resolution 2242 (2015). Its
impact will be positive not only in general terms, but
also because the victims, most of whom are women, in
the context of peacekeeping operations will feel more
free and less afraid to report possible abuses that have
been committed.
Secondly, on investigation, it is necessary
to implement urgent measures aimed at carrying
out investigations of received allegations within a
maximum time frame of six months. A time frame of
six months seems reasonable to me. But if within six
months the troop-contributing country has not shed
light on facts, I believe that the Security Council and
the United Nations system should establish an inquiry
mechanism that should be set up at a maximum of nine
months from the time that the crime in question was
committed.
Thirdly, on accountability, this concerns the
Security Council and all troop- and police- contributing
countries, because we must to put in place the measures
necessary to ensure that the perpetrators are judged and
punished.
Spain warmly welcomes the measures set out
in the Secretary-General’s latest report (A/70/729),
in particular those pertaining to the repatriation of a
whole contingent if the elements I have mentioned fail
and the troop-contributing country does not cooperate
with the United Nations in line with the agreements
established by the Organization. For those countries
whose armed forces have been mentioned in the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s reports with regard
to cases of children in armed conflict or sexual violence
in conflicts, I sincerely urge them to cooperate with

16-0655317/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/03/2016

the Organization so that all those crimes do not remain
unpunished.

level attention directed to this issue, including by the
Secretary- General himself, over the past year.

In conclusion, I would like to say that there are
civilians who are targets of abuse and sexual violence
by some individuals who are supposed to be there to
protect them. For those victims, I believe that the least
they expect of us, which they deserve, is that we protect
them adequately and, if abuses occur, the Security
Council spares no effort in shedding light on such
cases as quickly as possible. I therefore think that the
adoption of a draft resolution on this specific issue is
urgent, needed and totally appropriate.

We are not lacking a clear problem definition, or
policies and standards. What we are lacking appears
to be the political will to implement and enforce these
standards. Too often, a blind eye is turned to allegations
and no action is taken to hold those responsible
to account. We need to create a genuine culture
of zero tolerance — a culture where there is clear
accountability, both for abuse and for its prevention,
reporting and prosecution; a culture where the fear of
reputational damage from acknowledging allegations
does not override the responsibility to respond
effectively; a culture where the real stigma lies not with
the allegations themselves, but in failing to adequately
report and respond.

Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his helpful briefing and engagement on this
important issue. We also welcome his report (A/70/729)
and its recommendations, and the appointment of Jane
Holl Lute Special Coordinator.
Let me begin by acknowledging the vital work
carried out by peacekeepers serving with missions
mandated by the Council, and by paying testament to
the courage and commitment they display in carrying
out their role in trying and dangerous circumstances.
As mentioned, Council membes saw this directly in
recent days on their visit to West Africa. But today
we must be frank in also acknowledging that our
systems for preventing, monitoring and responding to
instances of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel are failing. This
failure is inflicting a terrible cost on the people that
our peacekeepers are responsible for protecting. The
reputation and effectiveness of the Organization are
being damaged.
These allegations represent more than isolated,
individual instances of wrong doing, and they are
not restricted to one or two missions. They represent
a systemic failure that all of us — the Secretariat,
contributing countries and Council members — have
a responsibility to fix. Continuing to muddle through
with our current business-as-usual approach is simply
not an option.
Zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse has
been our mantra for the past decade, and yet despite this,
and despite the many policies, standards and procedures
that have been put in place to address this since Prince
Zeid’s landmark report (see A/59/710), we continue to
see new allegations emerge against peacekeepers and to
learn of new victims of crimes that are, at times, of an
horrific nature. This is despite the considerable high18/27

New Zealand understands that there are no quick
and easy solutions and that there are many practical and
operational challenges. We can address this problem
only if all concerned — the Council, the wider United
Nations system and troop- and police-contributing
countries — work together collaboratively to find
solustions. At the heart of our response must be the
victims of abuse and their right to respect, support
and accountability. An effective response to serious
crimes and human rights violations will also go some
way towards restoring the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the communities they are
sent to protect.
Council members have been working on a draft
resolution to address these shortcomings. New Zealand
thanks the United States for its initiative. The Security
Council can support action in several key areas.
First, we must support the Secretary-General’s
commitment to repatriating those contingents that
demonstrate a widespread or systematic pattern of
sexual exploitation or abuse or a consistent failure to
adequately follow up on allegations.
Secondly, we must remove the obstacles around
making complaints and ensure better management of
all complaints received. Processes for dealing with
victims need to be centrally coordinated and managed
more carefully and confidentially.
Thirdly, victims need to receive the support,
assistance and responses that they deserve. Many
aspects of the approach in the 2008 United Nations
Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse should simply
be baseline work for any United Nations mission.
Fourthly, the United Nations needs to get more
serious about systems and resources for vetting
peacekeepers. The current policy is limited to screening
senior leadership only, and the United Nations needs to
invest much more in order to go further than that.
Fifthly, we need a better process and division of roles
on investigative duties. No national legal system would
build in a 10-day delay to begin investigation, as set
for the United Nations if a troop- or police-contributing
country is unable to investigate.
Finally, we believe that it is beyond question
that the Council has both a right and an obligation to
engage on this issue. New Zealand fully respects the
competence and role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee,
but we strongly disagree with the suggestion that the
Council is not responsible for the consequences of the
mandates it approves or for the actions of the personnel
it deploys. The draft resolution we have is primarily
about implementing and enforcing the standards that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the General Assembly have agreed or acknowledged
already.
We can and must provide for more effective
responses to sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping. We owe it to the victims, to
ourselves, to the peacekeepers who have given their
lives, and to the values on which the Organization was
founded.
Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s meeting and the
Secretary-General for his substantive briefing.
Uruguay, as both a member of the Security Council
and a troop-contributing country with a long history
of involvement in various peacekeeping operations,
attaches great importance to combating cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse and, as such, is highly committed
to the United Nations zero-tolerance policy in such
cases. Whoever commits sexual exploitation and abuse
is acting in a way that it is to be condemned in every
sense. But from a penal perspective, it is an aggravating
factor because the perpetrator is exploiting the trust of
those who require protection and is in clear violation of
the mandate under which he is deployed. I emphasize

S/PV.7642

that in these cases, Uruguay is a troop-contributing
country has been moving tirelessly forward in this
field by increasing prevention through predeployment
training, adequate control on the ground and the right
leadership at all levels.
There is not a single case of sexual exploitation
and abuse that has not been duly and speedily resolved
when a Uruguayan has been involved, complying
thereby with due process with maximum guarantees
for accused and accuser alike, applying appropriate
measures to those found guilty of committing such
acts. The accountability of the perpetrators and support
for the victims are ensured in legal provisions adopted
by the Uruguayan Government, thereby confirming
its commitment to human rights and the dignity of
the victims. Without claiming to be exhaustive, let
me mention certain measures designed by Uruguay to
advance the fight against sexual exploitation and abuse.
All members of national contingents must pass
a predeployment course, designed by professionals
outside the armed forces and with the participation
of the United Nations country office with respect
to human rights, international humanitarian law,
sexual exploitation and abuse policy, gender policy
and child protection policy. All members must sign a
predeployment affidavit in which they acknowledge
that they have been instructed in the aforementioned
topics and accepti responsibilities arising from the
breach thereof, authorizing the payroll deduction of
disciplinary repatriation and associated costs.
Uruguay has communicated to the United Nations
and the authorities of peacekeeping missions in which
Uruguayan contingents contact details of a focal point
in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, where people
implicated in possible cases of exploitation sexual abuse
committed by Uruguayan troops — including paternity
cases — or their legal representatives can seek advice
concerning procedures avilable to them for exercising
their rights under Uruguayan law. Uruguay’s Ministry
of National Defence has put in place a protocol to provide
the broadest possible guarantees in the procedures to
be followed from the identification of a possible case
of sexual exploitation and abuse to its resolution. It
includes the requisite measures to be taken with regard to
perpetrators and the support to be offered to the victims.
We are in the process of developing a mechanism to
facilitate victims’ access to the justice system, with a
view to ensuring their rights and substantiating their
allegations. Many of the complementary measures we

16-0655319/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

have adopted in connection with the responsibility of
each troop deployed to a peacekeeping operation have
also contributed to ensuring that we were able to collect
DNA samples from the accused.
As I mentioned earlier, the commitment of Uruguay
with regard to cases of sexual exploitation and abuse is
based on respect for human rights and the dignity of
victims. That is the main reason that we should continue
work until there is never another case. However, I do not
want to fail to mention the systemic damage that such
cases cause for United Nations peacekeeping efforts,
whether to peacekeeping operations or other operations
authorized by the Security Council operations. Uruguay
is seriously concerned about the negative impact of
such cases on the credibility and image of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the negative impact in terms of
the ability to fulfil mission mandates.
Above all, however, we are especially concerned
that, while there is a wide range of behaviours that
comprise a case of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving military, police or civilian personnel, the
fact is that those responsible cross an unacceptable
line, which in many instances may involve violations
of human rights but in all cases involve an assault on
the dignity of victims. Unfortunately, such cases end
up tarnishing and affecting the heroic and responsible
work of the more than 100,000 peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the various missions, some of whom lose
their lives in the field in pursuit of their the mandates.
Let me conclude by saying that, notwithstanding
the fact that the Security Council is addressing
this issue today — and rightly and in a timely
manner — Uruguay stresses the importance of other
bodies of the General Assembly, such as the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth
Committee, holding similar discussions. Given the
seriousness and sensitivity of the issuse before us, there
is nothing incompatible about having more than one
body addreess the matter, and there should be no fear
of duplicating effort. In that regard, Uruguay hopes
that the negotiations that are taking place in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations will come to
a successful conclusion, in particular in relation to the
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Angola.
We thank the Secretary-General for presenting to
the Security Council his report (A/70/229) on special
20/27

10/03/2016

measures on protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse, which provides an analysis and strategies to
counter this outrageous phenomenon in the United
Nations system. We welcome the holding of this
debate, which affords the members of the Council
an opportunity to renew their political support to the
Secretary-General in implementing the zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers, as well as our resolve in condemning
such actions.
The report of the Secretary-General refers to
an increase in the number of alleged cases in 2015,
following a decrease in 2014, involving a relatively
high proportion of minors and non-consensual relations
involving adults — with cases in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic reaching a peak. Angola
strongly condemns violence against civilians, in
particular sexually related violence — against women,
girls and boys — by United Nations peacekeepers.
We therefore fully support the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy and welcome the continuous
commitment and strengthening of measures aimed at
accountability based on the principles of transparency
and impartiality. We are encouraged by his renewed
commitment to ensure that reported allegations are
fully and promptly investigated, in cooperation with
troop-contributing countries, to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable.
In that regard, we deem predeployment training as
an essential tool to avoid misconduct and ensure that
troops strictly respect the Organization’s standards of
conduct. It is important to systematically include the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence and its
follow-up in the relevant country-specific resolutions
and the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions. Furthermore, increasing the number of women
in peacekeeping operations and police units can help
combat stigma and threats of reprisal, which impede
victims from reporting. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s plan to develop a community-based complaint
reception mechanism — a measure that I am sure will
help to address the fear among victims that we see today.
We also suppor the proposal that troop-contributing
countries enter into bilateral agreements with the
Office of Internal Oversight Services to authorize it
to investigate alleged cases by members of military
contingents, either independently or in cooperation
with national investigation officers. Other measures,
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

such as better-calibrated rotation schedules, adequate
provision of welfare programmes and better standards
of living for troops and the regular payment of salaries
to uniformed personnel, are sensible measures capable
of addressing the need for a reduction in such cases.
We have just returned from a Council mission to
Mali, where we saw a peacekeeping mission deployed
under the most challenging circumstances. We pay
special tribute to those heroic peacekeepers, not just in
Mali but in other theatres, in very special circumstances,
who unfortunately see their work being tarnished by
the actions of a few. We should act on this issue very
vigorously.
We took good note of the recommendations by the
external independent panel to review the United Natins
response, and especially of the Secretary-General’s clear
and forward-looking proposals to strengthen measures
to prevent and protect and to enforce accountability,
management and remedial action in response to sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Finally, we have taken note of the draft resolution
presented by the United States. We are ready to continue
work on it in a constructive spirit in order to achieve a
Council document that is the good product we would
like to see put in place.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: First I would like to
thank the President for taking the initiative to organize
a debate on this very important subject, which has a lot
to do with our reputation and future work. The open
discussion on this shameful issue will create a sense
of urgency with regard to and raise awareness of the
need to take immediate action based on the principles
of accountability and transparency.
This issue has not only humbled me; it has left me
feeling very regretful and ashamed as the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. I am sure that the
message that the Council has conveyed strongly and
unambiguously will help to strengthen my commitment
as well as that of the senior advisors of the United
Nations engaged in this area. Again, I feel deeply
sorry for the victims, in particular those minors whose
human rights and dignity have been abused. I apologize
for not having taken more thorough care on this matter.
I thank the Council for presenting clear guidelines and

S/PV.7642

directions to the Secretariat, myself and the world. The
United Nations is very committed.
As Ambassador Samantha Power has so eloquently,
passionately and emotionally stated, this matter greatly
affects our reputation. Why were we unable to address
this issue much, much earlier? Only a few people are
responsible for the problem. There is a saying that a
small mudfish can make an otherwise clean stream
dirty. We must eliminate thse practices. We must get
rid of those mudfish, and I am very much committed to
working with the Council on this matter. At the same
time, despite the shamefulness of the issue, we must
honour the integrity, sacrifice and hard work of the tens
of thousands of peacekeepers and police officers who
are working under very difficult and often dangerous
circumstances. We have lost a lot of peacekeepers. We
really have to honour them. Their reputation, integrity
and honour should not be tarnished by this small number
of people. I am really commiting myself on this matter.
During my term as Secretary-General, which began
in 2007, the issue of ending violence against women has
been one of my top priorities. Council members may
remember that I launched the Unite to End Violence
against Women campaign in 2008. Then, in 2009,
knowing that the mentality of men must be changed, I
established the Network of Men Leaders. I reached out
to a great number of men leaders in Governments and
the business community, and religious leaders. We have
been working to eliminate these practices.
However, we see now that we have been neglecting
our own in-house concerns. This has happened
in-house, and we have to take greater responsibility for
this matter. I appointed the first Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and I have a Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. And I
have appointed most recently Jane Holl Lute. Appointing
special representatives or responsible persons may
be helpful, but I need the support of everybody — all
Member States, the Secretariat, and people working in
the field. We all must work together.
As I have presented in my report (A/70/729), I
think this matter should be addressed comprehensively.
First and foremost, we have to do much more to end
this violence and help the victims. I appreciate the
willingness of Member States to provide financial and
other material support to a trust fund. At the same
time, I am also grateful that Member States agree to
my proposal to withhold the salaries of those that have

16-0655321/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

committed violence and to transfer those salaries to a
trust fund. That is a a small effort, but I do need the
strong support of Member States.
Measures to ensure accountability should be
formulated, strengthened and implemented. Without an
accountability process firmly established in mindsets
as well as in our system, I regret to say that we will see
this kind of crime continue. In that regard, I am making
sure that our investigations of currently pending cases
are expedited. From 2010 through 2015, we received
407 cases of alleged abuse. Eighty per cent of them
have been concluded. As of the end of 2015, we still had
54 cases pending. I believe that a large number of those
54 cases were reported in 2015. We have concluded
all investigations up through 2012. We still have three
cases from 2013 and three cases pending from 2014.
We will make sure to expedite the investigations as
much as possible. Out of 407 cases, we have concluded
353. However, 48 cases remain . I will make sure that
investigations are expedited. Although I suggested
a six-month investigation period, we will shorten the
process further.
Once allegations have been reported or a report
has been received, we will take interim measures. For
example, the persons involved may be suspended from
the mission or confined to the barracks, or assigned to
another mission, which will then have to confine that
person within the mission. And of course, salaries will
be withheld as much as possible.
Now, during the course of discussions some
Member States have stated — and of course I agree
with them — that the honour and reputation of troopcontributing countries should be respected. We have
tried to do that by not disclosing the names of countries
until most recently. However, we have realized that this
is not very helpful. That is why last year we returned
the personnel of certain Member States, whose names
have already been publicized, and established a conduct
and discipline website where we are making all the
names of the countries and cases available at all times
to Member States and the international community.
There may always be a question about whether
naming and shaming is a good policy or not at this time.
Sometimes we need to make it known to the public so
that they will also be motivated to improve their way
of conducting their business. In that regard, as most
speakers today have explained and expressed, it is
extremely important for troop-contributing countries
22/27

10/03/2016

to offer firm and strong predeployment education and
training on the importance of respecting human rights,
particularly gender empowerment and balance. Without
the strong engagement and commitment of the Member
States, it will be extremely difficult for the Secretariat
to manage these cases alone.
As Secretary-General for the past many years,
I have directly confronted many Heads of State, face
to face, and told them: “You cannot go on like this”.
Some Heads of State have made excuses, saying that
the alleged crime was not committed by their people.
I am talking about national crimes of sexual violance,
not United Nations-related. They say that the crimes
are committed by rebels. “But Mr. President,” I reply,
“Are you not the leader of a sovereign State? Whoever
commits these crimes within your territorial boundaries
is your responsibility. You have to be accountable.” I
have gone face to face in my fights with Heads of State.
I again commit myself to confronting any country
that continues to permit such crimes. Particularly at the
United Nations, we have to clean house; only then can I
go out to Member States worldwide to eradicate sexual
violence against women. That is my strong commitment,
and I really count on the strong engagement and support
of Member States. I truly appreciate the fact that the
Security Council has raised this issue.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his clarification.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I know I
had the floor at length earlier, so I will try to be as
brief as possible. Like the Secretary-General, because
of the gravity of what we are discussing here and the
insufficiency of what we have mustered up to this point
as an international community, I think it is worth coming
back to some of the points of convergence around the
table, as well as the few points of divergence, which I
do not think we should paper over.
First, in response to something my Egyptian
colleagues mentioned with respect to the number of
cases, I just want to seek clarification because, at least
as interpreted, there was an initial reference to several
dozen cases, but later to only a handful of cases. I want
to state for the record that it is more than several dozen
cases, and certainly far more than a handful. We had
more than 69 allegations in 2015; we have already had
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7642

26 people come forward to report cases in 2016. But we
have no idea how pervasive this problem is. We have
no idea. I think that everyone believes that one case is
one too many, but I think we need to be very careful
given the details outlined the Secretary-General’s
report (A/70/729). We need at least to all mobilize
around the extent of the problem that has managed
to be documented. I suspect that if there were better
reporting in more places, unfortunately we would
likely see more allegations being brought forward.
But that is a supposition. Let us at least have a shared
understanding of the facts that have been presented by
the Secretary-General.

horrific crimes. The United States is part of the General
Assembly. We would welcome constructive action by
the General Assembly, but the General Assembly has
had 11 years since our last open security meeting on
this topic (see S/PV.5191) to take more aggressive and
constructive steps that might have made more of a dent
in this problem. What we in the General Assembly have
done has not yet worked. The facts are the facts; the
allegations are the allegations; the record of inaction
in the capitals is by and large a record that shames us
all, including those of us who have very strong bilateral
relationships with a lot of the countries concerned. We
have not been as aggressive as we needed to be.

Secondly, like a number of Council members that
have made this point, we totally agree that there cannot
be collective guilt or national stigmatization. I think
that is extremely important, and all of us have tried
to make that point in our statements. But that is why
individual responsibility and accountability, as well as
individual punishment if warranted, are so important.
And it is not happening, by and large. I shall come back
to the Secretary-General’s statistics in a second, but the
definition of insanity is to do the same thing over and
over again — or not do the same thing over and over
again — and expect a different result. The system that
has been in place has not had the desired effect, in two
respects.

What is hard about hearing the jurisdictional
argument again and again about how this issue belongs
somewhere else is that in, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, Egypt has consistently
refused to support language welcoming or taking
note of the Secretary-General’s report. Somewhere,
these steps have to be taken and the Security Council
has waited a long time for those steps to be taken
and for the kind of consensus we need in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to give the
Secretary-General the support he needs and to be more
aggressive, commensurate with the gravity of this set
of crimes. Again, if it were happening to our kids, we
would not be having jurisdictional fights like this. We
would not even think that it does not belong here, and
yet — because it is somebody else’s kids — we want to
push this off somewhere else, where we know there will
be a stalemate and gridlock and we will find ourselves
in the same world in which we have been. And that is a
world that is not working for these victims.

Allegations keep being brought forward, with a lot
of documentation — photographs of babies whose DNA
has been tested, and so on. This is happening; this is a
phenomenon. Moreover, the individual perpetrators of
these crimes are not being punished back in their home
countries. I particularly appreciated the SecretaryGeneral’s extemporaneous comments in that regard.
Absolutely, the United Nations and the individuals who
serve it have to do much more, but we do not have court
martial processes or courtrooms in this building, so the
Member States have to support the Secretary-General.
He can do everything he sets out to do in the report,
which he and those who work for the United Nations
must do, but he needs us. What he does is totally
necessary and not at all sufficient. We have got to make
changes. We cannot just say the same things we have
been saying for a decade and expect the outcomes to be
different — that there is going to be less sexual abuse
or more accountability in capitals.
Thirdly, the representative of Egypt said that the
General Assembly is the competent body to deal with
what my friend and colleague rightly denounced as these

Fourthly, and this is related, several countries have
again implied that the Security Council should stand
down. I have to repeat, as a matter of logic — and
maybe I am just not smart enough to follow all the
jurisdictional hijinks that go on here at the United
Nations — that in areas where peacekeepers are
deployed, we, the Security Council, are responsible and
try to take action when armies rape women and kids.
We, the Security Council, see ourselves as responsible
when non-State actors and militias rape women and
kids, or men, for that matter. Again, we see ourselves as
responsible when terrorists, who pose a grave threat to
international peace and security, rape women and kids.
How is it possible that we can argue that when our own
peacekeepers, the people we have sent into the field,
rape women and children, the Security Council does

16-0655323/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

not have responsibility? How can we say that? This is
our problem, our responsibility.
Fifthly, the Secretary-General described cases
closed. I would like to thank him once again for his
leadership and the personal responsibility he has taken
in insisting that we move beyond getting reports from
the field that say that cases are closed, to a world of
transparent and thorough investigations. We do not
know why those cases were closed. Was it because
people waited a year to go back and actually try to talk to
a victim? Was it because the evidence had disappeared?
Was it because the peacekeepers who were alleged
to have committed the crimes were deployed out?
Knowing what we know, and having tried to unpack a
little of what happens in those investigations, I would
be very careful about equating closed cases with just
and thorough investigations.
Finally, my last point reinforces something that
the Secretary-General, and I believe everyone in the
Chamber, has said, which is that the peacekeepers, as
the President also said, are serving in some of the worst
circumstances imaginable. When they go back to their
home countries, those men and women will find that
their families will barely know where they have been,
in places that none of their families or neighbours will
ever have visited, and that they will have no parades, no
celebration of the service that they have given overseas.
It is an awesome sacrifice that the troops, police and
civilians who serve in these missions are making, and
the risks are off the charts.
The United States is not a big troop- or
police-contributor to United Nations peacekeeping,
and that gives us a lot of humility when we discuss
this subject in the Council. When I look around this
table I have even more respect, whether I am looking
at Egypt or China or Senegal or Uruguay, which send
thousands of peacekeepers into these environments. We
salute them. That is why during his time as President
Mr. Obama has devoted more time and energy than
any other American President to trying to support
peacekeeping. It is so important, and so thankless. We
should do more to honour that service, and I think that
is a great point of convergence around this table. These
people are saving thousands of lives — hundreds of
thousands, probably — every day, if we think about
what the situations would be like without them.
We must also be clear as to who the victims are
as we talk about that is happening in the field. They
24/27

10/03/2016

are not the United Nations troops and police, most of
whom, as everyone has said, with such distinction and
bravery. They are the men, women and, far too often,
the children who are the victims of rape, sexual abuse
and other violations of human rights, committed by the
very people who were sent to protect them. Those are
the victims. We cannot forget that fact as we debate
about what to do. We cannot forget who the victims
are or how we would act if we actually knew those
victims — if they were not numbers or abstractions but
people we knew, people we were related to, people we
cared about.
The President: The representative of Egypt has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have
listened very attentively today to the SecretaryGeneral’s statement and to the words of our friend
the representative of the United States. I would like to
clarify some points, since evidently my statement did
not come across clearly to the Security Council in the
way I would have wished.
First, my delegation’s insistence on respecting
the mandate of the General Assembly in investigating
matters related to sexual exploitation and abuse is
based on our belief in the importance of tackling such
cases and eliminating them, enhancing accountability
and the partnerships between the Secretariat, the troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and other Member States.
No body whose membership is by definition limited
can impose commitments on TCCs without consulting
them and enabling them to conduct investigations,
specify accountability and punish the perpetrators of
such crimes.
On the other hand, I am in full agreement with
the other members of the Council that the majority
of peacekeeping operations are doing heroic work
and making enormous sacrifices, and that intensifies
our objection to a policy of collective punishment of
such forces, including proposals to return or repatriate
entire contingents as a result of one mistake made by
one person or member of a unit. Accountability must
be limited to those actually involved in crimes, and
no one else, or we open the door to arbitrary measures
that are not subject to objective considerations. That is
on top of the fact that there have seen numerous cases
in which troops from outside the United Nations have
participated in sexually abusive activities that have not
been put before the Security Council to enable it to take
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the necessary punitive measures. That issue must be
dealt with if we are serious about tackling such crimes
in all their aspects and in a way that preserves human
dignity everywhere, and not selectively.
With regard to the reference to Egypt’s position on
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
our reservations were due to our rejection of the
concept of field trials, because they are detrimental
to considerations of sovereignty. That is the position
of most of the TCCs. We asked for extra time for
consultations, and we are prepared to look further into
the best ways of finding appropriate and fair solutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to express our views on a topic of
great importance to all of us. We feel that the views of
the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) can enrich this
debate and lead to informed decisions.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s resolve
in pursuing a zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation by peacekeepers. Pakistan, as a major
TCC, fully supports zero tolerance towards sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. Those deputed
to defend must not be allowed to take advantage of the
vulnerable with impunity. We take our responsibility
as a TCC extremely seriously. We are fully conscious
of the need for punitive actions against perpetrators of
such heinous acts, which tarnish both the image of the
United Nations as well as of the TCC itself, in addition
to tainting the good work of peacekeeping in general.
We have taken strict action against perpetrators in
substantiated cases.
While we agree that one case is one too many
and that there is no justification whatsoever for
such callous behaviour, the report (A/70/729) of the
Secretary-General itself identifies factors that may
have led to an increase in such cases, including the
hurried re-hatting of troops, the lack of predeployment
training on standards of conduct, the excessive length
of deployment of contingents, the living conditions of
troops, including lack of welfare and communications
facilities to stay in touch with their loved ones, and
camps in proximity to, or not properly separated from,
local populations, et cetera. Let me make a few points
on the report and the process that we have and need to
follow from here on.

S/PV.7642

There should be no ambiguity in the minds of
anyone that as a TCC we are committed to getting
rid of this scourge. We all pay lip service to trilateral
cooperation. It is important to consult TCCs in
the process of developing effective guidelines and
mechanisms to stem this scourge. Collective punitive
action is against the concept of justice and fair play
and merits careful review. In principle, the Member
States and its contingents cannot, and should not, be
held responsible for the criminality of an individual.
Distinctions between accusation and conviction are
important and must be maintained. The focus of the
narrative currently seems to be on allegations. Overly
intrusive and prescriptive calls on Member States to
review their criminal procedures and legislation should
be avoided.
Recommendations related to the compensation
of victims and the establishment of mechanisms for
providing medical and legal assistance are appreciated.
However, the establishment of a trust fund should be
well thought through and implemented prudently.
Preventive steps must be taken along with remedial
measures, while addressing the issues of better planning
and deployment, the rotation of troops and providing
them with better facilities would have a positive impact.
Last but not least, we firmly believe that the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General
Assembly (C-34), which, incidentally, is compiling its
report at this very moment, is the forum in which to
discuss issues relating to the conduct and discipline
of peacekeepers. Recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report need to be discussed and analysed
in the C-34 in a transparent and inclusive manner.
The logic for that was very eloquently stated by the
Permanent Representative of Egypt just now.
Our troops are deployed in dangerous and violent
situations, shedding their blood for the common cause
of promoting international peace and security. Their
contributions should not be sullied by the acts of a few.
Any action by this body that could lead to a generic
blaming of peacekeepers is bound to negatively impact
the morale of the troops on the ground. That, we feel,
should be avoided.
Let me, in conclusion, reiterate our commitment
with regard to the fact that sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers cannot, and should not, be allowed to
continue.

16-0655325/27

S/PV.7642

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/03/2016

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.

Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for providing us an opportunity to express our views on
what are extraordinarily disturbing issues.

Mr. Sana (Rwanda): It is with conviction that I
share with the Security Council Rwanda’s stance and
commitment to ending sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We take note of the recommendations contained in
his report (A/70/729) to the General Assembly on the
sexual exploitation and abuse. We hope that all Member
States, in particular all troop-contributing countries,
will have an opportunity to share their views in that
regard. We also take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General for his efforts to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse.

We share the Secretary-General’s distress, so
passionately articulated in his oral briefing and in his
report (A/70/729) to the General Assembly. I will be
very brief. As a country that has provided peacekeepers
to 48 of the 68 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and as a country with the largest cumulative
number of troops being contributed to the United
Nations, we are deeply disturbed by this increasing
phenomenon. We have contributed our troops because
we see peacekeeping as the shining example of the
international community’s commitment to collective
security. Therefore, to us, it is very worrisome that the
protectors are now being widely perceived as predators.
We in India have a policy of zero tolerance. In
our approach, there is no hesitation or reluctance. It
would be immoral if it had been so. Aberrations have
taken place in United Nations peacekeeping, and they
are abhorrent and repugnant. That is particularly so
given the confidence that has been reposed in the Blue
Helmets and in the Organization.
The malaise that we are confronting is not one
merely of enforcing compliance, but of setting norms.
What we are venturing into is putting emphasis on
values of universal application. The approach and
the cures that have been mentioned require a format
that is more broad-based and more inclusive than
merely addressing the issue as a matter of peace and
security. What we need to do is to send a message that
we are together in addressing it, not a feeling that we
are addressing it as a command issue. Regaining our
collective reputation as exemplars of universal idealism
is too important a matter to be confined to a few. It
requires the participation of all, not the least the troopcontributing countries. That may be difficult. And it
may be frustrating and slow. But as the medium is the
message, then the message we ought to convey can be
only through a more inclusive format. Anything less
will, in our view, not convey the same message.
We will continue to support the effort to implement
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy. We will
continue to work with other Member States in this
endeavour, and the Secretary-General will have our full
cooperation in the effort.
26/27

Rwanda is more than committed to ensuring that
as we deliver on our responsibility to protect we protect
with the utmost integrity the lives of those we have
been tasked to safeguard. The Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, an outcome of the International
Conference on the Protection of Civilians held last
year, has touched on this important issue by advancing
the steps that must be taken to achieve a zero-tolerance
policy, while at the same time underscoring the need
to report on all human rights abuses. We believe that
all sexual violence and abuse is unacceptable. Our
military and judicial policies are a strong testament of
our commitment to ending such abhorrent actions. Let
me be clear: even one case, in our view, is unacceptable,
and should not be tolerated. The protectors should not
be perpetrators. There is no justification whatsoever for
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. Any allegation
should be reported and investigated, with legal action
taken against the alleged perpetrators.
Combating sexual exploitation and abuse begins
long before peacekeepers arrive in the mission area.
Discipline and a code of conduct anchored in our culture
and within national jurisdictions is paramount in
preventing, fighting and eradicating sexual exploitation
and abuse, which in the end undermines the credibility
of peacekeepers, who are doing a tremendous job in
different missions, including making the ultimate
sacrifice.
My country has an absolute-zero tolerance for
sexual exploitation and abuse. We ensure that our
troops and police receive thorough training, which
covers sexual exploitation and abuse, for which
16-06553

10/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

we also use United Nations manuals as additional
reference. In terms of our judiciary, the Rwandan penal
code punishes all those found guilty of the crime,
including peacekeepers operating internationally. My
Government has also committed to combating sexual
exploitation and abuse, including by deploying a legal
adviser and an investigator in each battalion of our
contingents deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions since 2011.
In the case of Rwanda, as mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General, three inquiries have been
undertaken into inappropriate relationships between
adult women and Rwandan police officers formerly
serving in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. That allegation represents a serious violation
of our Government policies. Investigations have been
ongoing and strong administrative measures have been
taken as we await their completion.
As Member States, we must continue to report,
prosecute and punish those who have been convicted of
taking advantage of the most vulnerable, the women and
children entangled in today’s conflicts. The victims are
our mothers, our sisters and our daughters. This effort
should also apply to those operating as non-United
Nations personnel working under a Security Council
mandate. It should also be expected that national and
regional entities deployed outside the United Nations
mandate are held to the same standard as United Nations
personnel, including independent investigations with
the outcomes brought to the attention of the appropriate
bodies for action. Transparency, objectivity and

S/PV.7642

accountability should characterize the Secretariat’s
work in addressing this issue.
In addition to the obligation incumbent upon the
troop-contributing countries, there is a great need for
regular interaction between the Secretariat and TCCs
when it comes to investigations. Therefore, updates
from both sides are necessary before reports are
released. Most often, the Secretariat does not consult
Member States. Yet there are cases that have been
investigated and legal action taken, but are not included
in the reports. At the same time, non-policy violations
should not divert attention from, or dilute responsibility
for, the numerous unresolved cases of rape and child
abuse by peacekeeping forces. We therefore call upon
the United Nations and troop-contributing countries
to remain focused on accountability for this heinous
crime.
In conclusion, let me say that the time to take
immediate and effective action is now. We must
all, individually and collectively, do what is in our
means to enforce the zero-tolerance policy for sexual
exploitation and abuse, while also working towards
eradicating the existence of sexual exploitation and
abuse in peacekeeping operations. As we continue to
work within our capacities to strengthen all measures
related to sexual exploitation and abuse, we must
also hold other stakeholders accountable. By working
collectively and with transparency we can eliminate
past wrongdoing and refocus our efforts on upholding
the infinite act of great courage undertaken by our
peacekeepers time and time again.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

16-0655327/27
