A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/243*
10 October 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 112
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/922/Add.2)]
51/243.

Gratis personnel provided by Governments
and other entities

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on gratis personnel
provided by Governments and other entities1 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2
Expressing serious concern at the impact on the geographical balance in
some parts of the Secretariat of the presence of gratis personnel, in
particular in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
Recognizing that the use of gratis personnel, other than those
performing supplementary activities, should be on an exceptional and temporary
basis and for specialized functions only,
1.
Emphasizes that gratis personnel are not a substitute for staff to
be recruited against authorized posts for the implementation of mandated
programmes and activities;
2.
Reaffirms that the programme of work and mandates approved by
Member States must be financed in the manner determined by the General
Assembly, based upon proposals of the Secretary-General;
3.
reasons;

Decides that gratis personnel should not be sought for financial

* Reissued for technical reasons.
1

A/51/688 and Corr.1 and Add.1-3.

2

A/51/813.

97-77515

/...

A/RES/51/243
Page 2

4.
Decides also that the Secretary-General can accept type II gratis
personnel3 only in the following circumstances:
(a)
After the approval of a budget, to provide expertise not available
within the Organization for very specialized functions, as identified by the
Secretary-General, and for a limited and specified period of time;
(b)
To provide temporary and urgent assistance in the case of new
and/or expanded mandates of the Organization, pending a decision by the
General Assembly on the level of resources required to implement those
mandates;
5.
Decides further, in this regard, that the relevant budget
resolutions and procedures relating to unforeseen and extraordinary
expenditures, peacekeeping operations and tribunals will govern the acceptance
of the gratis personnel referred to in paragraph 4 above;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to report on a quarterly basis to
the General Assembly, through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, for appropriate action, on the acceptance of the gratis
personnel referred to in paragraph 4 above, with a view to ensuring compliance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
7.
Emphasizes that the relevant General Assembly resolutions and
financial regulations and rules should be fully respected when accepting
gratis personnel in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution;
8.
Emphasizes also that it is necessary that fully substantiated and
comprehensive proposals on the total requirements from all sources of funding
be presented so as to enable the General Assembly to decide on the level of
resources required to implement fully all mandated programmes and activities,
and requests the Secretary-General to present all future budgets and budget
outlines in that manner, in accordance with Assembly resolution 41/213 of
19 December 1986;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to phase out expeditiously type II
gratis personnel who fall outside the scope of paragraph 4 above and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at the main part of its fifty-second regular
session;
10.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to it at the main
part of its fifty-second regular session, through the Advisory Committee, for
appropriate action, on the methodology to be applied to, and the level of,
administrative support costs and, in the interim, to maintain the status quo
in this regard;
11.
Further requests the Secretary-General to revise the draft
guidelines set out in his reports on gratis personnel in accordance with the
provisions of the present resolution and taking into account the following
principles, and to submit them to the General Assembly, through the Advisory
Committee, for its approval at the main part of its fifty-second regular
session:
(a)
Gratis personnel should be subject to the criteria laid down in
Article 100 and in paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 101 of the Charter of the
United Nations;

3

See A/51/688 and Corr.1, paras. 24-40.
/...

A/RES/51/243
Page 3

(b)
In the performance of their duties, gratis personnel should have
the same obligations and responsibilities as are applicable to staff members;
(c)
Gratis personnel should carry out their functions in accordance
with all applicable regulations, rules and procedures of the Organization;
(d)
The selection process for gratis personnel should be transparent
and conducted on as wide a geographical basis as possible, and, if there is a
need for gratis personnel as provided for in the present resolution, all
Member States should be informed;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to report annually on the use of
gratis personnel, indicating, inter alia, their nationality, the duration of
their service and the functions performed;
13.
Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the
consideration by the General Assembly of the question of gratis personnel
provided by Governments and other entities, to report on the impact of the
implementation of paragraphs 4 (b) and 9 above and to submit proposals in this
regard to the Assembly at the main part of its fifty-second regular session,
through the Advisory Committee, for appropriate action;
14.
Decides to consider the question at the main part of its fiftysecond regular session.
107th plenary meeting
15 September 1997
