A /68/PV.98

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

98th plenary meeting

Monday, 16 June 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 53 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/68/426/Add.1)
The President: I request the Rapporteur of the
Committee, Mr. Michal Komada of Slovakia, to
introduce the report of the Committee.
Mr. Komada (Slovakia), Rapporteur of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee): I have the honour to introduce
to the General Assembly the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) submitted under agenda item 53, entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”, as
contained in document A/68/426/Add.1. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations held its
substantive session between 24 February and 21 March,
when it reviewed its work and considered new proposals.
By adopting the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 6 of the report, and entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all aspects”, the General Assembly would endorse the
proposals and recommendations contained in paragraph
17 to 315 of the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations issued in document A/68/19.

The Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of this draft resolution.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Before we begin to take action on
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee, I
should like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take a decision in the same manner as
was done in the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee, unless notified to otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee in paragraph 6 of its
report. The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
68/277).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 53?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-43076 (E)

*1443076*

A/68/PV.98

Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/68/L.43/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item
13, at its 36th and 37th plenary meetings, on 25 October
2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of Uganda
to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.43/Rev.1.
Mrs. Ssempa (Uganda): I have the honour
to introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, the draft resolution contained in document
A/68/L.43/Rev.1, under agenda item 63 (b), entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.

16/06/2014

peace in Africa should be channelled towards the
sustainable development of Africa and the human and
institutional capacity-building of African countries
and organizations, particularly in the priority areas
identified at the continental level. In that regard, we
welcome the joint visit of the Secretary-General and
the President of the World Bank to the countries of the
Great Lakes region of Africa from 22 to 25 May 2013
and the financial pledge announced by the World Bank
during that visit in support of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
We also welcome the joint visit of the SecretaryGeneral, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, the President of the World Bank, the
President of the African Development Bank and the
European Union Commissioner for Development to
the Sahel region from 4 to 7 November 2013, during
which financial pledges were made to support the
implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. We call for the fulfilment of the
pledges made during both visits.

The draft resolution stresses, inter alia, that
the responsibility for peace and security in Africa,
including the capacity to address the root causes of
conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner,
lies primarily with African countries, while recognizing
the need for the provision of support by the international
community and the United Nations, taking into account
the responsibilities of the Organization in that regard,
according to the Charter of the United Nations.

The achievement of durable peace and sustainable
development in countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations, in particular, requires national Governments
and international partners to continue to develop
coordinated approaches tailored to the peacebuilding
needs and challenges faced by those countries. The draft
resolution also urges continued support for measures
to address the challenges of poverty eradication,
hunger, job creation and sustainable development in
Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved
market access, support for the private sector and
entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on
official development assistance and increased flows of
foreign direct investment and transfer of technology on
mutually agreed terms.

We welcome the progress made by African
countries, the African Union and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development. We
call for intensified efforts and a coordinated approach
among national Governments, the African Union,
subregional organizations, the United Nations system
and partners in addressing those challenges, with a
view to achieving further progress towards the goal of
a conflict-free Africa.

We recognize the need for African countries to make
continued efforts to create enabling environments for
inclusive growth in support of sustainable development
and for the international community to make ongoing
efforts to increase the flow of new and additional
resources for financing for development from all
sources, public, private, domestic and foreign. We
welcome the various important initiatives established
between African countries and their development
partners.

The Group conveys its appreciation to all
delegations for their constructive contributions to the
draft resolution. We also thank all the Member States
that have co-sponsored the draft resolution.

The draft resolution recognizes that international
and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate
2/6

14-43076

16/06/2014

In conclusion, the Group of 77 and China looks
forward to the draft resolution being adopted by
consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/68/L.43/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those representatives listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/68/L.43/Rev.1:
Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and
Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.43/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/68/L.43/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 68/278).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Approval of the appointment of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/904)
The President: By its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, the General Assembly decided to
create the post of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
In paragraph 2 of his note, the Secretary-General,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 48/141 of

A/68/PV.98

20 December 1993, proposes to appoint Prince Zeid
Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein of Jordan as United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for a term of
office of four years, beginning on 1 September 2014
and ending on 31 August 2018.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes
to approve the proposal of the Secretary-General to
appoint Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein of Jordan
as United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for a term of office of four years, beginning on
1 September 2014 and ending on 31 August 2018?
It was so decided.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): On behalf of the African
Group, I warmly welcome the appointment of Prince
Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein as United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for a term of four
years, commencing on 1 September 2014. We sincerely
congratulate the Prince on that great achievement.
Similarly, the African Group commends Ms. Pillay
for the great contribution that she has made to the
pursuit, protection and promotion of human rights in
the past six years. Through her efforts, the protection of
human rights received renewed impetus over the years.
The African Group wishes to underscore the
importance of human rights in the political, social and
cultural life of every person. Societies will scarcely
thrive and prosper where human rights are unprotected
and their enjoyment capricious. That is precisely why
Africa has made concerted efforts over the years and
encouraged the protection and promotion of human
rights for all at both the national and the international
levels.
The African Group is cognizant of the vast
experience that Prince Zeid brings to the portfolio.
His outstanding achievements in the service of his
country, the United Nations and other international
bodies, as well as his contribution to the pursuit of
justice for victims of human rights violations, make
him eminently suitable to effectively execute his
responsibilities as the chief global advocate for the
protection and promotion of human rights. I wish to
assure Prince Zeid of Africa’s cooperation in his new
assignment and of our expectation that he will give
priority to the strengthening of national capacities to
respect and protect human rights.

14-430763/6

A/68/PV.98

On behalf of the African Group and in my national
capacity, I again congratulate the Prince and wish him
success in this new professional endeavour.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): On behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States, I am honoured to
welcome the Secretary-General’s nomination of His
Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein of
Jordan as the new United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
We believe that Prince Zeid will fulfil his
responsibilities as High Commissioner with the
extraordinary skill, profound integrity and sound
judgement he has displayed during his tenure as the
Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations. Given the complex issues related to human
rights that confront us today, the international
community will greatly benefit from his leadership,
sense of justice, deep knowledge of issues of international
justice and experience in the multilateral arena. The
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights is a critical part of the United Nations
system and is mandated to uphold commitments to
universal ideals of human dignity. In that light, we look
forward to working with Prince Zeid in the future, and
we offer our Group’s full support to the Office of the
High Commissioner.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
Ms. Navanethem Pillay for her contributions during her
tenure as High Commissioner for Human Rights. On
behalf of the Asia-Pacific Group, we would like to offer
her our best wishes for her future endeavours.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States (GRULAC)
in expressing our sincere congratulations to His
Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
on his appointment as the new United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The members of GRULAC consider the protection
and promotion of universal human rights to be
extremely important, and recognize the central role
of the United Nations in achieving international
cooperation in this area. Promoting and protecting all
human rights universally is one of the fundamental
pillars of the Organization’s work. The Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights is a key player
in the work of fulfilling the mandates agreed on by the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council, a

4/6

16/06/2014

task in which we are certain His Royal Highness will
play a major part.
The countries of our region have been
actively involved in negotiations, discussions and
decision-making on the issue of the enjoyment of all
human rights for all peoples and individuals. In our
area, we promote the right to peace, development and
the self-determination of peoples, the rights of migrants
and indigenous peoples, and the right to gender equality.
We fight against any kind of discrimination. We would
like to assure Prince Zeid that he can count on the full
cooperation of every member of GRULAC.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Today I have the
real honour of addressing the General Assembly on
behalf of the Group of Western European and Other
States. On behalf of the Group, I would like to offer our
warm congratulations to His Royal Highness Prince
Zeid on his appointment to this important office.
The promotion and protection of human rights are
a core part of the role of the Organization and one of
its founding principles, as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. We are therefore pleased that its work
on human rights will be led by somebody with the
level of commitment, passion and experience of Prince
Zeid. He brings to the role an in-depth knowledge of
the United Nations system, experience working in the
field and a commitment to gender equality and criminal
justice. We look forward to working with him and
assure him of our full support.
We would also like to express our Group’s great
appreciation for the work of Ms. Navanethem Pillay and
her tireless efforts over the past six years to highlight
injustices and provide a voice for the vulnerable. On
behalf of the Western European and Other States Group,
I wish both the current and future High Commissioners
success in working to realize the full and effective
enjoyment of human rights for everyone around the
world.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): The
European Union welcomes the approval of the
appointment by the General Assembly of His Royal
Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein of Jordan as
the next United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, following the Secretary-General’s nomination.
We are convinced that Prince Zeid’s proven track record
in the promotion and protection of human rights and
14-43076

16/06/2014

the fight against impunity, as well as his exceptional
diplomatic experience, will be an invaluable asset to the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. It
is therefore with the greatest respect and support that
we acknowledge the appointment of Prince Zeid as the
new High Commissioner.
The European Union is a strong supporter of the
Office of the High Commissioner and its independence
and integrity, as well as of the Human Rights Council.
We look forward to open and constructive cooperation
with Prince Zeid and his Office in pursuing our common
goal of advancing the universality and indivisibility of
all human rights all over the world, and in making the
principles enshrined in the 1948 Universal Declaration
of Human Rights a reality.
The European Union would also like to pay a warm
tribute to the outstanding work done by Ms. Navanethem
Pillay as High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Ms. Pillay’s personal commitment and strong leadership
have made an invaluable contribution to consolidating
the Office of the High Commissioner as an independent
body defending and upholding human rights across the
globe, for all people and without discrimination or
distinction of any kind or for any reason.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): While
associating myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of
the Group of Western European and Other States, in
my capacity as representative of the host country of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, I would like to offer my hearty
congratulations to Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
on his appointment as High Commissioner for Human
Rights. Switzerland will be very happy to welcome
Prince Zeid and his delightful family to Geneva, and
I wish him every success, as well as courage and
determination, in his important task of protecting and
promoting human rights.
On a lighter note, I know that Prince Zeid is a big
fan of Swiss cheese fondue, and that he will be starting
the job in the autumn, which is the best season for
cheese and fondue.
At the same time, and perhaps rather more seriously,
I would also like to sincerely thank Ms. Navanethem
Pillay for her untiring and exemplary commitment to
human rights and the victims of violations of human
rights. In my view, she has defended human rights as a
South African lion defends its cubs.

A/68/PV.98

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
For a second, when you announced the nomination,
Mr. President, and no one clapped, I thought I was off
the hook. My supportive wife, who is seated behind me,
told me to enjoy this moment and to soak it all up. “After
all”, she said, “you are among friends whom you have
known for a very long time. But when you start this
job”, she added, “you may not have them for very long”.
The confidence our spouses have in us is limitless, and
so human rights must surely begin in the family home.
With your permission, Sir, I will say a few words
in Arabic.
(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, I would like to thank all the
members of the General Assembly, the heads of the
regional groups and His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral. I thank them all for all the support and trust
they have shown this afternoon. I highly appreciate
the confidence they are placing in me by appointing
me to this position, especially as I am the first High
Commissioner from the Asian continent and from the
Muslim and Arab worlds. Needless to say, this reflects
the commitment of the international community
to this important dossier and to advancing it on that
continent and other regions of the world, taking into
account the independence and mandate of the Office
of the High Commissioner, as established by resolution
48/141 in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
subsequent conventions, the 1993 Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1).
It is in that framework that I have the honour this
month to join the highly qualified staff of the Office
of the High Commissioner, who have been carrying
out such good work wherever they are, whether in the
field, in Geneva under the supervision of Assistant
Secretary-General Ms. Flavia Pansieri, or in New York
under the supervision of Assistant Secretary-General
Ivan Šimonović.
The human rights dossier is replete with
responsibilities and crucial challenges. Dealing with it
requires wisdom and a high level of coordination and
communication with the different Governments, civil
society and all the United Nations agencies.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Ms. Navi Pillay for her courageous endeavours. I

14-430765/6

A/68/PV.98

am honoured to be her successor and to build on her
noteworthy achievements.
To conclude, I would like to address my special
thanks to His Highness King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein, who has been supporting me throughout the
years I have spent in his service and the service of the
Government and people of Jordan in this international
arena.

6/6

16/06/2014

The President: I thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights elect for his statement.
I would let him know that he is back on the hook.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (i)
of agenda item 116 and agenda item 116 as a whole?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

14-43076
