United Nations

S/PV.6100

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6100th meeting
Wednesday, 25 March 2009, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27993 (E)

*0927993*

S/PV.6100

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Australia,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, the Czech Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Jordan, the Republic of Korea, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Morocco, Norway, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Qatar, South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
23 March 2009 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2009/153 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Wednesday, 25 March 2009, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the

2

provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 March 2009 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, in which he requests to be
invited, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Paul Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations. At this
meeting, the Security Council will hear a briefing by
Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Pascoe: Two months after unilateral
ceasefires were declared in Gaza, we face a worrying
situation of impasse and uncertainty. Despite
international engagement and support, very little
concrete progress has been made on key issues outlined
in Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). They
include the establishment of a proper ceasefire regime
in Gaza, unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance,
opening of the crossings, prevention of illicit
trafficking
in
arms
and
ammunition,
and
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
Turning now to the more detailed part of the
briefing, let me begin with Palestinian political

09-27993

S/PV.6100

developments. Palestinian Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad announced on 7 March his intention to resign
at the end of the month, in order to bolster efforts to
form a national conciliation government. President
Mahmoud Abbas asked the Prime Minister to remain in
office until the reconciliation dialogue was brought to a
conclusion.
Between 10 and 19 March, Palestinian factions,
as well as independents, assembled in Cairo under
Egyptian auspices, with the goal of reaching agreement
prior to the League of Arab States summit meeting to
be held in Doha on 30 March. Egyptian officials report
progress on certain aspects of the issues under
discussion,
namely
the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization (PLO), elections, government, security
and reconciliation. However, the talks adjourned
without an agreement and are expected to reconvene on
1 April. We reiterate our support for this process, as
called for in resolution 1860 (2009).
Egypt hosted the International Conference on the
Palestinian Economy and Gaza Reconstruction in
Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March. The Secretary-General
joined representatives from some 80 countries and
multilateral organizations in responding to the
Palestinian Authority’s Gaza Early Recovery and
Reconstruction Plan. Donors generously pledged some
$4.5 billion for humanitarian and economic relief.
As he outlined at the Conference in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Prime Minister Fayyad has initiated three
large-scale interventions for Gaza’s recovery process,
aimed at rebuilding houses, agricultural development
and private sector recovery. The United Nations
supports the Palestinian Authority’s relief and recovery
efforts and continues to implement projects under the
flash appeal, while simultaneously trying to restart
projects dormant for many months prior to the military
operation due to lack of material allowed in by Israel.
Discussions continue on convening the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in the near future. Key challenges
to be addressed include the need for increased budget
support for the Palestinian Authority, more clarity on
how to channel the funds pledged in Sharm el-Sheikh
for Gaza’s recovery and on the need to address the
overall framework for economic growth in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
However, the intolerable situation at Gaza’s
crossings remains the key impediment to bringing help
and hope to the people of Gaza. From 15 February to

09-27993

21 March, a total of 3,633 truckloads — a weekly
average of 727 — entered Gaza through the various
crossing points from Israel and through Rafah.
Roughly 85 per cent of all imports consisted of
foodstuffs and medical supplies, whereas construction
materials, spare parts and other industrial goods
remained almost totally banned. While there has been
an increase in the amount of goods getting into Gaza,
and the Israeli Cabinet announced on 22 March that
foodstuffs from relevant sources would be allowed into
Gaza without restriction, the quality and quantity of
imports are insufficient compared to needs. For that
reason, the United Nations reiterates its call on Israel
to abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian law and to open the crossings for
emergency supplies and reconstruction materials,
without which there will be no way to rebuild Gaza.
The quantity of industrial fuel and cooking gas is
also insufficient, as only about 70 per cent and 25 per
cent, respectively, of the weekly needs enter Gaza. A
total ban remains in place on the import of petrol and
diesel, except for small quantities delivered to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
According to the International Monetary Fund,
the continued restriction on the entry of cash and the
inability of many, including Palestinian Authority
employees, to withdraw salaries from the banks affect
the livelihoods of approximately half a million Gazans.
UNRWA and other international partners are unable to
distribute cash assistance and to settle payments for
social hardship cases.
We continue to be concerned that, despite
Egyptian efforts, no ceasefire regime is in place. In
addition, there has been no breakthrough in efforts to
secure the release of Corporal Shalit and several
hundred
Palestinian
prisoners,
despite
the
intensification of efforts. Following an Israeli
announcement on 17 March that agreement had not
been reached, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) arrested
10 Hamas leaders in the West Bank, including a former
deputy prime minister of the Palestinian Authority. The
Israeli Cabinet announced on 22 March its intention to
remove privileges not mandated by legal requirements
or treaty obligations from Hamas and Islamic Jihad
prisoners.
In the absence of a ceasefire, violence continues.
During the reporting period, more than 100 rockets and

3

S/PV.6100

mortars were fired into Israel from Gaza. Those
attacks, targeting civilian areas, are irresponsible and
must cease. In addition, there were 12 Israeli air
strikes, killing five Palestinians and injuring 30. We
call for an end to all acts of violence and for respect of
international humanitarian law by all parties.

A new Israeli Government has yet to be formed
following the elections for the Knesset last month.
President Peres commissioned Likud party leader
Binyamin Netanyahu to try to form a Government on
20 February, and Mr. Netanyahu remains engaged in
intensive consultations with several parties to that end.

Four United Nations Mine Action Teams continue
working in Gaza to remove and deactivate unexploded
ordinance. One UNRWA and one municipal school
have been cleared, along with the UNRWA warehouse
at the Karni crossing. There has been no development
regarding the return or identification of a new location
of the ordinance, including several unexploded bombs
that went missing in February 2009.

We continue to follow with concern negative
actions on the ground in the West Bank, where
insufficient steps are being taken to lift the weight of
the occupation and to implement commitments. The
rejection by the Israeli Ministry of the Interior of a
planning scheme submitted by residents of the Silwan
neighbourhood in East Jerusalem has given rise to
concerns that it could pave the way for the demolition
and building of a municipal park in a sensitive area of
the city populated by more than 1,000 Palestinians.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities also
served dozens of new orders for demolition and
eviction, as well as against structures located in Area C
of the West Bank which, if implemented, could affect
hundreds of Palestinian residents throughout East
Jerusalem. We call on the Government of Israel to stop
house demolitions in East Jerusalem and generally to
refrain from unilateral actions that may prejudge final
status issues.

We are concerned by recent actions of the
de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza purporting to assert
control over the Palestinian Authority Department of
External Medical Treatment. If not reversed without
delay, that step could prevent referrals from Gaza of
patients needing urgent or complex medical care not
available there.
The members of the Board of Inquiry into
incidents in Gaza, established by the SecretaryGeneral, have returned from the region and the Board
is now working on its report. As the Council is aware,
the Board was tasked to review and investigate a
number of specific incidents that occurred in the Gaza
Strip between 27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009,
in which death or injuries occurred or damage was
done at United Nations premises. The Board will
submit its report to the Secretary-General when he
returns to New York in early April.
During the reporting period, a number of
allegations emerged from Israel Defense Forces
soldiers that they engaged in improper conduct towards
civilians during Operation Cast Lead. On 19 March,
the IDF Military Advocate General instructed the
military police to probe those allegations.
Special Coordinator Serry is in Gaza today, and
his consultations with business leaders and civil
society representatives have underscored the desperate
need for a new approach to Gaza based on a ceasefire,
open crossings, rejuvenation of the private sector and
Palestinian reconciliation. Without those, the many
unresolved issues, combined with the absence of an
active negotiations track and continued suffering, could
portend a quick return to violence.

4

In the affected areas of the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, it is extremely difficult for Palestinians
to obtain building permits. Quartet Representative
Tony Blair drew attention last week to the fact that,
without changes in the current system applied to areas
of the West Bank under full Israeli military and
administrative control, Palestinians will be prevented
from improving their standard of living and from
developing their land.
Also in Jerusalem, on 21 March, Israeli security
forces disrupted a Palestinian celebration marking East
Jerusalem as a capital of Arab culture. Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem remain closed by Israeli
order, and the construction of illegal settlements
continues in Jerusalem and throughout the West Bank.
No action has been taken to remove outposts.
Settlement activity, including in the highly sensitive
E-1 area, continues to deprive Palestinians of land for
development and agriculture and to create facts on the
ground that severely prejudice final status issues.
The Ministry of Defence also approved
construction plans for a settlement near Hebron. Let
me reiterate before this Council that Israel’s

09-27993

S/PV.6100

obligations under the Road Map are clear. Settlement
activity, including so-called natural growth, must be
frozen and outposts must be removed.
Elsewhere in the West Bank, the more than
600 obstacles to movement continue to make normal
social and economic interactions impossible for the
Palestinian residents there. Construction of the barrier
continued in the occupied Palestinian territory away
from the Green Line, contrary to the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice.
In the context of Palestinian Road Map
obligations, Palestinian security forces remain highly
visible in urban centres in the West Bank, prevent
militants from conducting activities or displaying
illegal weapons and continue their efforts to ensure law
and order. However, no major operations or new
deployments have taken place since reconciliation talks
began in Cairo, and more than a hundred Hamas
prisoners were released from Palestinian Authority jails
as a goodwill gesture in the context of the
reconciliation talks.
There have been some gradual improvements
regarding cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian security forces, including the recent return
of hundreds of rifles confiscated in 2002 and an easing
of the closure regime in and around Nablus.
Nevertheless, the IDF continues to raid West Bank
towns and villages on a daily basis, citing security
concerns. According to United Nations statistics, IDF
operations in the West Bank have more than doubled in
frequency since the end of the Gaza crisis, with nearly
two hundred carried out during the reporting period.
Also during the reporting period, two Israeli
policemen were killed by Palestinians in an attack in
the Jordan Valley and two other policemen were
injured in another attack in West Jerusalem. On
21 March, Israeli police reported that a large bomb had
been found and defused in the car park of a shopping
mall in Haifa. Two Palestinians were killed by Israeli
security forces, and 82 were injured. Most injuries
occurred during protests against the barrier and against
settlement expansion. During the reporting period, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
recorded 26 incidents involving Israeli settlers
targeting Palestinians, which resulted in seven injuries.
Twenty-eight people were reportedly wounded in Israel
on 24 March during clashes between police and

09-27993

demonstrators marching in the vicinity of the town of
Umm al-Fahm.
The Secretary-General looks forward to attending
the summit of the League of Arab States on 30 March
and offers his encouragement for Arab unity in support
of Palestinian unity under President Abbas and the
central importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. In that
respect, we take note that Saudi Arabia hosted a
meeting with Syria, Egypt and Kuwait in Riyadh on
11 March aimed at strengthening ties within the Arab
world and that participants agreed to support the
Palestinian reconciliation process under way. The
Secretary-General continues to support the holding of
an international conference in Moscow in the near
future.
During the reporting period, senior United States
officials visited Damascus, and Syrian President Assad
has indicated his country’s readiness to renew indirect
negotiations with a new Israeli Government. On the
ground, settlement activity in the occupied Syrian
Golan continued, although the situation was otherwise
quiet. We continue to stress the importance and
potential of Israeli-Syrian negotiations and hope that it
will be possible in the year ahead to further that track,
alongside a reinvigorated Israeli-Palestinian track.
I now turn to Lebanon. Mindful that the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon briefed the Council on
10 March on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), I should just like to touch on a
few issues.
On 23 March 2009, the relative calm that had
prevailed in Lebanon for several weeks was interrupted
when Kamal Medhat, Deputy PLO Representative in
Lebanon and a high-ranking Fatah member, was killed
by a roadside bomb outside the entrance to Saida’s
Mieh Mieh camp. In the explosion, three of Medhat’s
bodyguards were also killed and two other persons
were severely injured. Palestinian as well as Lebanese
political leaders have reached out to Palestinian faction
leaders in the camps in an attempt to mitigate potential
tensions on the ground. The Secretary-General has
condemned that terrorist attack. He expressed his hope
that the perpetrators of that crime will be promptly
brought to justice and noted that such actions must not
be allowed to endanger the climate of calm that
currently prevails in Lebanon.
Campaigning for the 7 June elections has started,
leading to increased political rhetoric among the

5

S/PV.6100

country’s numerous political groups. Parties have yet
to announce their electoral lists, but consultations on
candidates are under way. Candidates have until
7 April to register.
A fifth session of the national dialogue, bringing
together Lebanon’s 14 main political leaders, took
place on 2 March under the aegis of President Sleiman.
Participants agreed to develop proposals for a national
defence strategy. It was also agreed at the dialogue that
all parties will work to ensure that the elections are
conducted in a calm and peaceful atmosphere. A
further session of the dialogue is planned for 28 April.
A ceremony took place on 9 March to mark the
start of reconstruction in the Nahr el-Bared camp.
Securing adequate funding to complete the work
remains an issue of major importance.
On 16 March, the Lebanese embassy in Syria was
inaugurated. The Lebanese Ambassador to Syria will
take up his post in mid-April. On 24 March, Lebanese
President Sleiman accepted the credentials of the
newly appointed Syrian Ambassador to Lebanon.
Those appointments come at a timely juncture and are
welcome developments that fulfil one of the key
provisions of Security Council resolution 1680 (2006).
The overall situation during the month in the area
of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon has been generally quiet. Progress on the
project of visibly marking the Blue Line continued to
be made this month, with four additional points having
been agreed for marking. Israeli air violations
continued on an almost daily basis during the reporting
period.
It is important that the Quartet and the
international community act with unity of purpose to
help stabilize Gaza and reinvigorate the peace process.
We need to have both Israeli and Palestinian
Governments that are clearly committed to the twoState solution. We need a continuation of negotiations,
the implementation of commitments on the ground and
a strategy for de-escalating tensions and addressing the
urgent humanitarian needs in Gaza.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

6

Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your new
post as Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations and wish you every
success. I also congratulate you and your sisterly
country on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. We are fully confident
of your ability to wisely guide the Council’s work. I
also thank the Permanent Representative of Japan for
his skilled and outstanding leadership of the Council
last month. In addition, I wish to express our
appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing.
Since the Council’s most recent open debate on
this item (see S/PV.6061), following the monthly
briefing in December 2008, we have witnessed a
dramatic deterioration on all fronts in the situation on
the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. In spite of the guarded
optimism that we expressed during that debate, which
following the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008) —
which, inter alia, reaffirmed the commitment to the
two-State solution, declared support for the peace
negotiations launched at Annapolis in November 2007
and reaffirmed their irreversibility — we are now at a
juncture in which peace seems more remote than ever
and the situation on the ground has become even more
volatile.
As we are all aware, resolution 1850 (2008) was
the first resolution adopted by the Council on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in more than four and a half
years, despite Israel’s systematic violations of
international law and United Nations resolutions in the
occupied Palestinian territory, which only strengthened
Israel’s impunity and lawlessness and hastened the
deterioration of the situation. Thus, shortly after the
adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), and instead of
implementing measures to build the confidence and
trust necessary for peacebuilding, we bore witness yet
again to Israel’s blatant disrespect for the Council, the
peace process and all legal norms, demonstrated by its
savage war against the Gaza Strip, launched in
disregard for all standards of military conduct and
human decency and with disastrous humanitarian and
political consequences.
That brutal and merciless military aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian civilian population
ravaged a tiny area that was already gravely deprived

09-27993

S/PV.6100

and suffering as a result of years of the unlawful Israeli
blockade. We are all aware by now of the human and
physical tolls of destruction deliberately inflicted by
the occupying Power during that three-week
aggression, the magnitude of which was unprecedented
since the occupation began in 1967.
A final tally of the casualties of the Israeli
aggression reveals that more than 1,400 Palestinians
were killed. The overwhelming majority of these were
civilians, including hundreds of children and women,
while more than 5,500 Palestinians, including more
than 1,800 children, were injured. I have with me a
photograph of one of those children. Many sustained
permanent injuries and maiming as a result of the
excessive, indiscriminate and lethal use of force, which
included prohibited weaponry and ammunition used by
the occupying forces against the civilian population.
The physical toll of destruction wantonly caused
by Israel in the Gaza Strip is equally immense. Billions
of dollars will be required to rebuild Gaza, where the
occupying Power damaged or completely destroyed
more than 21,000 homes and refugee shelters;
thousands of business properties, including agricultural
farmlands; vital civilian infrastructure, including water,
sanitation and electricity systems; and roads, hospitals,
ambulances, mosques, schools, national institutions
and several United Nations facilities.
The horrifying facts have become all too clear, so
I will not dwell on the details. However, I wish to take
a moment to urge a closer look at the human side of
this tragedy. We must stop perceiving the killing of
civilians in armed conflict as simply a silence that is
associated with death. Only when we begin to
understand the maddening and destructive force that
defines killing can we begin to understand the depth of
the trauma, anguish and suffering inflicted on a people
forced to endure such military assaults without a safe
place to hide or to flee to. The deafening cries and
paralysing screams of fear and pain of the children,
women and men killed and wounded and of their
shattered, terrorized families — those were the real
sights, sounds and core of a war in which no distinction
was made between combatants and civilians.
I had the honour of being in Cairo two weeks ago
as part of a delegation from the Palestine Committee of
the United Nations. We visited a hospital in Cairo and
saw with our own eyes dozens of injured Palestinians.
One of them was the child depicted in the photograph I

09-27993

have here. We took that photograph with Ambassador
Paul Badji, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
This child’s name is Mahmoud Haani, and he caused
the international delegation to weep when he told us
his story. He asked us to take a message in the name of
the thousands of martyrs and wounded, and he asked us
to pose a question to Israel, the occupying Power:
“Why did you cause me to lose my eyesight and to ruin
my future? I am a child and only 12 years old. My
name is Mahmoud Haani.” I have conveyed his
message to the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral, and every person with a conscience is
responsible for holding accountable the criminals who
carried out these crimes and for ensuring that they face
the justice they so deserve.
The task of recovery has now begun, including
attempts to heal the wounds of families whose lives
have been shattered and forever altered by the brutal
attack and who must cope not only with grief and
loss — and, for many, renewed displacement — but
who must also struggle to survive under the deplorable
living conditions caused by the ongoing illegal Israeli
blockade, which constitutes collective punishment of
the entire population. The situation is as abnormal and
unstable as can be imagined.
We are fully cognizant of the short- and longterm consequences of this crisis and know that the road
ahead as we rebuild and heal our society will be
extremely difficult. Not only funding, but monumental
efforts will be needed to help repair the physical,
psychological and societal damage and to achieve a
just resolution of the conflict that will fulfil the rights
and needs of the Palestinian people to freedom and
human dignity in their homeland after decades of loss,
oppression, statelessness and suffering.
Nevertheless, we reiterate our appreciation to all
countries and organizations throughout the world that
are supporting the recovery and reconstruction of Gaza,
including those that participated in the donor
conference at Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt. In that
connection, we extend our thanks and appreciation to
the Arab Republic of Egypt for generously hosting that
important conference. We are deeply grateful for the
outpouring of solidarity and generous support for our
people. Moreover, we thank the United Nations and all
of its agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which in all circumstances have continued to provide
invaluable assistance to the Palestinian people in all

7

S/PV.6100

fields, particularly emergency health care and food
sustenance, aimed at alleviating the humanitarian
crisis.
While addressing humanitarian needs, we must
also focus on other issues necessary for stabilizing and
restoring some normalcy to Gaza. The achievement of
a permanent, durable ceasefire is one such priority. At
the same time, the inhumane Israeli blockade of Gaza
must be lifted to end the imprisonment of our people.
The immediate long-term opening of all border
crossings is imperative and must allow for the import
of all essential supplies, including sufficient food,
medicine and fuel, as well as building supplies
necessary for reconstruction and other goods and
commercial flows necessary for economic recovery.
If Israel continues the punitive blockade on the
movement of persons and goods into and out of Gaza,
it will only ensure an increase in the poverty, despair,
indignation and frustration of the Palestinian people
and the peoples of the region.
In addition, serious steps must be taken to pursue
accountability for Israel’s crimes against the
Palestinian civilian population. We reiterate our calls to
the international community, including the Security
Council, to investigate the grave breaches of
international law committed by the occupying forces in
Gaza, bearing in mind, inter alia, articles 146, 147 and
148 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. All crimes,
including the wilful killing of civilians, wilfully
causing great suffering or serious injury to body or
health and extensive destruction and appropriation of
property, must be investigated and the perpetrators
must be prosecuted.
Our consciences will not allow these barbaric war
crimes against our people to go unpunished. Evidence
continues to be collected, and all options are being
explored. The Palestinian leadership has taken initial
steps in this regard and will continue to act responsibly
and collectively by all appropriate means, including
through the Security Council, to ensure that the law is
upheld and justice is served. We will thus work
diligently to follow up the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s board of inquiry, of the fact-finding
commission to be dispatched by the Human Rights
Council and of any other relevant investigations being
carried out.
In this connection, I refer to the important letter
recently conveyed to the Secretary-General and

8

Security Council from prominent individuals in the
field of international justice and reconciliation of
conflict, calling for the establishment of a United
Nations commission of inquiry to investigate all
serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed during the Gaza conflict. As stated by the
distinguished signatories:
(spoke in English)
“We have seen at first hand the importance of
investigating the truth and delivering justice for
the victims of conflict and believe it is a
precondition to move forward and achieve peace
in the Middle East.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Indeed, only in this way can we seek to end Israel’s
impunity, prevent the recurrence of such crimes and
progress towards securing a just and lasting peace and
coexistence between the two peoples.
While the human misery and hardship quotient in
the Gaza Strip has risen to intolerable levels, the
situation in the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, also remains
volatile. Israel continues its military raids and arrest
operations in the West Bank, adding daily to the
thousands of imprisoned Palestinians, including
children, women and elected officials, whose release
we continue to demand. Also, and of particularly grave
concern, is Israel’s ongoing settler colonization
campaign in the occupied Palestinian territory, which it
is pursuing in grave breach and defiance of
international law, United Nations resolutions and the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion, and in
total contradiction to the objectives and spirit of the
peace process.
In letter after letter, statement after statement —
including the statement by President Mahmoud Abbas
at the Council’s special meeting on 26 September 2008
to specifically address this issue (see S/PV.5983) — we
have drawn attention to this unlawful campaign and
cautioned about its destructive impact on the situation
on the ground and on the peace process. We have
repeatedly appealed to the Council to uphold its
responsibilities and act to compel the occupying Power
to comply with its legal obligations and bring to an
immediate halt all settlement activities and all acts of
settler terrorism and violence against the Palestinian
people. Regrettably, the lack of action and Israel’s

09-27993

S/PV.6100

refusal to respect international law have created a tense
and dangerous situation on the ground and completely
undermined the peace process.
Even during the peace process, this massive
colonization campaign has never ceased. In fact, in the
period since the Annapolis conference, it has
multiplied 17-fold. I repeat, settlement activities have
multiplied 17-fold, at a minimum. The illegal campaign
to expropriate Palestinian land continues, as do efforts
to carry out a de facto annexation. For this purpose,
Israel continues the expansion of settlements and
settlement outposts; the construction of settlement
infrastructure; the transfer of thousands more Israeli
settlers to the occupied territory; the construction of
bypass roads and of the wall; the imposition of a racist
permit regime, residency restrictions and hundreds of
checkpoints; demolitions of Palestinian homes; and
excavations, all of which are particularly intense in and
around occupied East Jerusalem.
Indeed, the situation in and around East
Jerusalem is most critical, as Israel continues to
de-populate the city of its Palestinian inhabitants while
simultaneously promoting its Judaization by all of the
aforementioned unlawful actions, including in the area
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif in the Old City. The character
and physical landscape of the city continues to be
changed by the occupying Power, including through
measures to isolate it from the rest of the West Bank. In
addition to non-stop settler colonization, Israel also
continues to impose a closure on Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem and to obstruct
Palestinian cultural events and development in the city,
including the prevention of recent events in connection
with the celebration of “Jerusalem: Capital of Arab
Culture 2009”.
While the Security Council and General
Assembly have repeatedly declared such measures
unlawful and null and void, more is needed at this
critical juncture than declarations and statements.
Action must be taken to halt all Israeli colonization
measures aimed at illegally and unilaterally
determining the fate of the city, for there can be no
peace without East Jerusalem — the capital and heart
of the future Palestinian State.
The intent of all such illegal measures and
practices by Israel is clear: it is to dramatically alter
the demographic composition, character, geographic
nature and status of the occupied Palestinian territory,

09-27993

including East Jerusalem, so as to entrench its presence
on the land in order to prejudge the outcome of final
status negotiations in the peace process in Israel’s
favour.
On the ground, such flagrant breaches continue to
affect all aspects of Palestinian life, undermine the
territory’s contiguity, integrity and unity, and inflame
tensions. The separation, isolation and cantonization of
Palestinian communities by the settlements, the
separation wall and the checkpoints, which can only be
likened to apartheid and segregation, are gravely
affecting these communities and destroying their
societal fabric. In the peace process, these provocative,
illegal Israeli actions have undermined the drive for
peace, poisoning the atmosphere between the two sides
and tainting the process as a whole, calling into
question Israel’s commitment to the process and
credibility as a “partner for peace”.
Colonization and the peace process cannot
coexist. Israel’s settlement activities are totally
contradictory to the peace process and the core
principle of land for peace sustaining it. This
illegitimate policy has repeatedly damaged the peace
process and is physically destroying the prospects for
achieving the two-State solution for peace on the basis
of the 1967 borders in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the terms of reference of the peace
process — on which there is international consensus —
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We thus reaffirm that continuing negotiations
under such conditions would be futile and
unacceptable. A process under such conditions will
never achieve its goal of two States living side by side
in peace and security. The Palestinian leadership has
always negotiated in good faith, but we cannot
continue blindly in this process while Israel destroys
all chances for the realization of our legitimate national
aspirations.
The international community, including the
Quartet, the main sponsor of the peace process, must
realize that continued declarations or mild appeals to
Israel will no longer suffice. More of the same will not
change this grave situation and, worse still, further
appeasement will only deepen the problem. In the face
of continued defiance, real and serious action,
including practical measures, by the Quartet and the
international community as a whole is required to bring
an end to such destructive and unlawful Israeli

9

S/PV.6100

practices, which jeopardize the viability of the future
independent State of Palestine and the prospects for
peace and stability in our region.
Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled
to cease immediately all settlement and related
colonization activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and abide by its
obligations under international law in that regard,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention. Moreover,
demands must be made upon Israel to clearly affirm its
respect for its Road Map obligations and other peace
process commitments in both word and deed, to freeze,
all settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth, and to dismantle the outposts.
In this regard, we express serious concern about
the shift to the far right of the new Israeli Government
and over rhetoric and positions that totally contradict
the two-State solution for peace, the Quartet principles
and the peace process itself. The new Israeli position,
inter alia, calls for the expansion of settlements, rejects
the establishment of a Palestinian Arab State and
insists on full control over Jerusalem, indicating an
intention to vigorously pursue Jewish habitation there
in order to assert Israeli control over the eastern parts
of the city. We therefore emphasize that demands must
be made upon Israel to not only talk of peace, but to
actually act for peace, just as the Palestinian leadership
has done over the past 15 years since the start of the
peace process, including by upholding its Road Map
obligations.
In this connection and in closing, I wish to make
a brief reference to the status of Palestinian
reconciliation efforts. Despite the stall in the talks
mediated by Egypt, we remain hopeful of achieving
unification of the Palestinian political factions in order
to strengthen our efforts in pursuit of our just national
cause, which continues to confront so many challenges.
Arrangements are being made for a transitional
Government and elections and to address other priority
issues. We reaffirm our intention to work hard and
seriously to heal the divisions and to achieve the
national unity so vital to the achievement of our
legitimate national rights.
In this regard, we urge the international
community, particularly after having witnessed the
disastrous ramifications of recent years, to engage
diplomatically
with
a
unified,
representative
Palestinian leadership. That is imperative in order to

10

allow us together to address, with coordinated and
serious action, the many urgent issues we currently
face and to advance the overall goal of a just,
comprehensive, lasting and peaceful settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and of the Arab-Israeli
conflict as a whole on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the principle of land for peace
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): I would like to acknowledge
the presence of Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
thank him for his informative briefing.
Our region is at an important juncture that may
determine the future of the Middle East for some time
to come. There is much reason for optimism, but also
cause for concern. In the Middle East, moderates are
working towards peace. These are the true partners in
building a secure future for the region. In contrast,
there are also extremists who use every opportunity to
sabotage progress made and seek to destroy good will,
hopes and aspirations on all sides. Among these are the
Hamas and Hizbollah terrorist organizations, led,
supported, harboured, financed and trained by their
Iranian and Syrian patrons. Many would agree. Iran
continues to threaten to wipe Israel off the map, and its
development of nuclear capabilities should sound
alarms across the globe. Iran is indeed the real danger
to our region, the world and the future.
Let me state in no uncertain terms that Israel is
committed to the peace process. However, the peace
process must be based, among other things, on the
three clear principles set out by the Quartet and the
international community: recognition of the State of
Israel, renunciation of terrorism and violence, and
adherence to previous agreements between Israel and
the Palestinians. Any future Palestinian Government
must therefore abide by the same basic conditions,
which are fundamental to any relationship between
peoples. Lasting peace can be forged only on solid
foundations of mutual respect and recognition between
leaders, peoples and societies.
Relations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority continue to advance in real terms and in a
number of areas. In the economic realm, overall
domestic production in the West Bank increased by
5 per cent in 2008 and trade with Israel increased by

09-27993

S/PV.6100

over a third. In addition, over $1.76 billion in aid was
distributed in the West Bank in 2008 — an increase of
74 per cent over the previous year — showing an
increase in international confidence in the management
of the Palestinian economy. Israel recently removed
about 10 roadblocks and 130 temporary barriers in the
West Bank. Among these, one particular road, from
which a roadblock was removed just recently, remains
open in spite of the ruthless murder by terrorists, nine
days ago, of two Israeli police officers. As mentioned
already, a few days ago, an extremely dangerous car
bomb was found and defused at the entrance to a
shopping mall in the city of Haifa, preventing
catastrophic consequences and the loss of many lives.
Meanwhile, the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority have increased their security
cooperation in an effort to improve the lives of both
Israelis and Palestinians.
These positive developments, and others, are
proof that confidence-building steps, taken by those
who cherish a genuine desire for progress, can bring
the parties closer to their common goal.
In contrast, the situation in Gaza remains
problematic. Since 18 January, over 100 rockets and 60
mortars have been launched into Israel from Gaza,
including a Qassam rocket that landed near the coastal
city of Asheklon just yesterday. As we have stated
before, Israel will not tolerate a return to the status quo
ante, with continued terrorist attacks jeopardizing
civilians throughout the southern part of my country.
Israel’s obligation was, is and will continue to be to
safeguard the security of its citizens.
Let me turn for a minute to the Palestinian
Permanent Observer. I would like to say that, indeed,
civilians on both sides, including children,
unfortunately bear the burden of the conflict. I could
tell the story of the children of Sderot, Ashkelon and
Ashdot, who are also asking themselves and their
parents why more than 1,000 rockets were fired at
them, preventing them from living a normal life — and
this, after Israel fully withdrew from Gaza. For
example, the child Osher Tuito, who was a successful
football player and lost his leg from a Qassam, is
asking those questions every day after he had to move
from Ashdot to Ashkelon, where he is still exposed to
Qassam rockets. Indeed, each side has stories to tell.
Let us not use those stories — except only to advance
and try to unite in order to achieve peace for our
peoples.

09-27993

Unfortunately, some actors in the region continue
to give direct support to Hamas in Gaza, by various
attempts and through various venues, providing it with
offensive capabilities. The use of tunnels under Gaza’s
southern border is ongoing. The danger remains. While
we are encouraged by the willingness of members of
the international community to tackle the smuggling of
military capabilities, as witnessed at the recent London
conference, tangible measures must immediately be
taken against smuggling, as only concrete action will
help to stabilize the region.
Let me remind this important Council that
Corporal Gilad Shalit continues to be held hostage by
terrorists. This is a dire humanitarian problem. Four
days ago we marked 1,000 days and nights since his
unlawful, criminal detention in June 2006. During this
time, all access to him has been denied. Defying all
standards of decency and humanity, Hamas has been
attempting to cruelly manipulate the hearts and minds
of the Israeli people, raising the price of his release
during negotiations. Hamas is exploiting in a most
cynical way Israel’s sensitivity for human life and the
moral values demonstrated throughout the years by the
Government of Israel and its people.
It is worth remembering that in the military
operation that ended in January, the true targets of
Israeli actions were Hamas terrorists, not the citizens
of Gaza. Ordinary Gazans were used as human shields
by Hamas, who deliberately staged attacks from, and
hid in, heavily populated civilian areas.
In spite of the ongoing attacks from Gaza, and
despite Israel’s commitment to its crucial security
needs, we are not indifferent to the humanitarian
situation of Gaza’s population. More than 140,000 tons
of humanitarian supplies and 13.5 million litres of fuel
for Gaza’s power station have been delivered into the
Gaza Strip since 18 January. That amounts to an
average of 140 trucks per day entering Gaza. However,
let me state clearly Israel’s position: expanded activity
at the crossings will be discussed upon the release of
Gilad Shalit.
Turning to the situation in Lebanon, while we
recognize the work of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the Lebanese Armed Forces
(LAF) in southern Lebanon, more needs to be done to
ensure the continued stability of the area. Israel
recently witnessed the most serious violations of
resolution 1701 (2006) since it was adopted. Rockets

11

S/PV.6100

were fired from Lebanon into Israel, wounding
civilians. During the past several months, UNIFIL and
the LAF have discovered a number of other rockets,
preventing them from also being launched against my
country. These developments should be cause for great
concern to States that desire regional tranquillity.
For years, Israel has been alerting the Security
Council to Hizbullah’s ongoing military build-up in
southern Lebanon. This terrorist organization, backed
and supported by Iran and Syria, continues to increase
its presence and strength in the area, using private
homes and other civilian property for its activities.
Thus, Israel joins the international community in
its call for robust action against arms smuggling along
the Syrian-Lebanese border, in accordance with the
recommendations set out in the report of the Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team II, transmitted
by the Secretary-General in document S/2008/582.
This is a time of great flux in the Middle East.
Radicals are competing with moderates for domination.
There is no better time than today for the international
community to show its support for moderate voices and
to assert its resolute opposition to terrorists and those
who support them. We ask Member States to add their
vocal and tangible support in the quest for a durable
peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
Middle East.
Uganda welcomes the briefing by Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
which we believe presents an opportunity for United
Nations Members to gauge overall progress and help
focus on the way forward. We note from the briefing
that limited progress has been recorded since the
briefing given in January 2009 (see S/PV.6077).
The relative peace and quiet that has
characterized the last few weeks is encouraging. The
regrettable incidents reported by Mr. Pascoe are a
reminder to us all that the momentum for peace must
be sustained and consolidated in order to find a lasting
solution to the problem of the Middle East. We
commend Egypt and other partners for the role they
have played and continue to play in mediating
ceasefire talks between Israel and Hamas. Uganda

12

welcomes the appointment of a number of special
envoys to the Middle East and is encouraged that most
of them have already started their work in the region.
However, the situation still remains fragile. We
are concerned about the reports of intermittent
hostilities that continue to disrupt the peace. There is
need for a durable and fully respected ceasefire as
envisioned in resolution 1860 (2009). But that
ceasefire will always remain temporary if it is not
accompanied by sustained efforts to find a political
settlement in the Middle East.
Uganda is convinced that a durable solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be achieved only
through negotiations among the parties concerned. It is
of concern that the divisions that exist among the
Palestinian groups continue to weaken the negotiation
efforts. We therefore commend efforts by Egypt and
others for the work done to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation.
As we have heard, the situation in Gaza remains
precarious.
The
humanitarian
situation
and
reconstruction demands following the disastrous war
early this year still pose a huge challenge. Because of
the blockade, the overall levels of humanitarian
assistance getting into Gaza remain below what is
urgently required. The socio-economic infrastructure
remains in shambles. We note from the briefing that
during the violence many lives were lost and much
property destroyed and that the war has caused
enormous suffering that is still being experienced even
today.
Uganda therefore welcomes the outcome of the
international aid conference for Gaza and its
reconstruction that was held in Sharm el-Sheikh, in
Egypt, where $4.5 billion was pledged. We call on all
those countries and organizations that made pledges to
honour them.
However, even with the pledged money coming
in, dealing with the humanitarian situation and the
reconstruction efforts will require that Israel
completely lift the blockade in order to facilitate easier
humanitarian access. Furthermore, all Palestinians will
have to work together to implement the recovery and
reconstruction plans.
With regard to Lebanon, we note that the security
situation in south Lebanon has been relatively calm in
recent months. We welcome the progress made in the

09-27993

S/PV.6100

normalization of relations between Lebanon and its
neighbours. We also welcome the proposed 7 June
parliamentary elections in Lebanon and call on all
parties to ensure calm and stability during the electoral
period.
Despite the limited progress, we are concerned
that the ceasefire is not fully implemented, in
contravention of resolution 1701 (2006). In this
connection, we call upon Israel and Lebanon to respect
the ceasefire. Uganda commends the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and all
humanitarian agencies that, despite the very difficult
circumstances, continue to provide relief assistance to
the people caught in this conflict.
Finally, Uganda will continue to support all the
parties in the Middle East in their efforts to achieve
comprehensive peace based on the vision of a region
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live
side by side in peace within secure and recognized
borders, as envisaged in Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) and other relevant Council resolutions.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his extensive
briefing. Let me also underline that Turkey also aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.
The tragic events at the start of this year have
further complicated the political, humanitarian and
socio-economic aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
The recent hostilities devastated Gaza, with a heavy
death toll of over one thousand lives, mostly women
and children. The Palestinians in Gaza are now faced
with formidable suffering and hardship. As indicated
by the latest report by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), growing numbers of Gazans live
in extreme poverty, and the numbers of the
unemployed keep rising.
On the other hand, Israeli citizens living in the
cities adjacent to Gaza should also feel safe and secure.
Rocket attacks launched from Gaza have been a
constant threat to them.
Time will not, in itself, heal all wounds. Active
engagement by the international community is
imperative in dressing them. In this context, we are
encouraged by the amount of pledges and the level of
participation at Sharm el-Sheikh earlier this month,

09-27993

where the international community reiterated its full
support for the two-State solution and expressed its
expectation for strong commitment on the part of all
sides to such a settlement.
In addition to $150 million pledged in Paris in
2007, Turkey announced in Sharm el-Sheikh another
contribution of $50 million for specific reconstruction
projects in Gaza. Moreover, voluntary contributions of
the Turkish people to various donation accounts
opened for Gaza have reached almost $50 million. This
amount will also be used for reconstruction projects in
Gaza.
However, we cannot possibly speak of the
reconstruction of Gaza and the return to daily life until
the blockade completely ends and the crossings open.
There can be no improvement in the socio-economic
conditions of the Palestinians unless restrictions on the
movement of people and goods are lifted, not only in
the Gaza Strip but also in the West Bank. Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) clearly underlines the
need for the comprehensive opening of crossings. That
resolution should be fully implemented. We must also
ensure that the ceasefire is sustainable and respected by
all.
We are increasingly concerned about Israel’s
ongoing settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. Turkey has repeatedly made it clear that
settlement-building, which is contrary to Road Map
commitments and the two-State solution, is wrong and
should stop. None of the parties should take any action
that would undermine the peace process and prejudge
the final status negotiations. This also applies to the
Palestinian factions.
In the aftermath of the unfortunate events,
securing Palestinian reconciliation and unity once
again becomes an issue of critical importance and
urgency. We commend President Abbas for his tireless
efforts to achieve that vital goal. The Palestinian cause
would be best served if the Palestinian factions settle
their differences and join hands. That is a must in order
to keep alive and to realize the aspiration for an
independent Palestinian State representing all
Palestinians. We maintain our contacts with and
guidance to different Palestinian groups in this
direction.
Turkey is also committed to the empowerment of
the Palestinian Authority in the context of the Statebuilding process. We will continue with our

13

S/PV.6100

contributions to strengthen the Palestinian Authority
and its institutions and economy.
It is an undeniable fact that Israel’s need for
peace, prosperity and security is best served by a
strong and united Palestinian State living side by side
with Israel. The Israelis and Palestinians are bound to
live next to one another. They can do so either as
combatants or as good neighbours and friends. It is
high time that they make the right choice.
We have always emphasized the need for a
comprehensive approach to the issues, since the
problems of the region are all interlinked.
We are ready to assist once again in order to
achieve the resumption of the indirect talks between
Syria and Israel, if the parties so desire.
We welcome the establishment of diplomatic
relations between Lebanon and Syria and the reciprocal
appointment of ambassadors. We are also encouraged
by the current American engagement with Syria.
We believe that the forthcoming elections in
Lebanon will be an important step in taking the
Lebanese people towards a better and brighter future,
consolidating the positive developments in the country.
We have confidence in the wisdom of the people of
Lebanon, that they will not miss this opportunity. For
its part, Turkey will remain committed to contribute to
the stability of Lebanon through its participation in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and, through
its reconstruction projects, to the prosperity of that
country.
We will continue to work for a viable and
comprehensive peace on all tracks of the Middle East
peace process.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing. I welcome and thank the
delegations of Palestine and Israel for their
participation in this debate of the Council. We align
ourselves with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The serious engagement of Palestinian factions
over the past month in a dialogue process mediated by
Egypt has led to the establishment of five committees
that are working on national reconciliation issues, the
successful outcome of the Cairo international

14

conference on the reconstruction of Gaza and the
further efforts of the Palestinian Authority to improve
socio-economic rehabilitation and reconstruction,
especially in the face of the devastating global
financial crisis.
These
developments,
however,
remain
overshadowed by the extent and scope of the
challenges that persist in the region. We condemn
Israel’s
continued
military
activities
and
bombardments, its ongoing construction of the
separation wall and its expansion of illegal settlements
in the West Bank. In the same vein, we condemn rocket
attacks against Israeli civilians.
Already pauperized by an 18-month blockade and
a tight regime of closures and restrictions on
movements that date back to the early 1990s, the
Palestinian population in Gaza has been driven to the
limit of human suffering by the unprecedented
aggravation and hardship in the aftermath of the war.
The recent tragic events in Gaza only further prove that
violence will not and can never be a solution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict. At this politically delicate
juncture, pending the formation of a new Government
in Israel and the outcome of reconciliation efforts
among Palestinian factions, we call upon all the parties
concerned to opt for peaceful rather than military
means for settling their disputes and to desist from any
action that is detrimental to innocent civilians and to
the process of negotiations towards a two-State
solution to the conflict.
We underline the pressing need for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), especially
with regard to a durable, lasting and fully respected
ceasefire, the opening of border crossings and intraPalestinian reconciliation. In that connection, the role
played by the United Nations, the League of Arab
States and countries of the region remains essential.
We support collective efforts aimed at addressing
the heavy casualties and damage to the physical life
and psychological well-being of the Palestinian people
and the immediate post-conflict needs of affected
families, as well as at facilitating long-term recovery
and reconstruction in Gaza. We commend United
Nations agencies, in particular the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, and other humanitarian organizations for
their bravery in rendering emergency assistance to
Gazans, and we urge the parties concerned to extend

09-27993

S/PV.6100

the fullest cooperation in facilitating humanitarian
activities.

expectations for the peaceful coexistence of two States,
Palestine and Israel.

We urge all parties concerned to respect
international humanitarian and human rights laws in all
circumstances. In this connection, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s initiative to dispatch the board of
inquiry to Gaza, and we look forward to the report on
the results of its investigation.

However, just 11 days following the adoption of
the resolution, the situation in the Middle East
experienced precipitous changes. Beginning on
27 December, Israel carried out military actions against
the Gaza Strip that lasted more than 20 days and
resulted in heavy casualties among Palestinian civilians
and enormous loss of property. The Middle East peace
process was thus severely tested and suffered a major
setback. China wishes to reaffirm that we oppose any
attempt to solve disputes through military means, as
well as any act of violence targeting civilians.

A lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East cannot be disassociated from concurrent progress
on other, related tracks. We note the steps taken by the
Government of Lebanon to assert full authority over its
territory, strengthen the country’s political stability and
socio-economic development and normalize relations
with countries of the region. We join the SecretaryGeneral in condemning the recent terrorist attack
against PLO personnel in Lebanon and request that the
culprits be brought to justice. We call upon all parties
in Lebanon to refrain from violence, build on the
general momentum of national unity and reconciliation
created since the signing of Doha Agreement, in May
2008, and concentrate their efforts on ensuring that the
parliamentary elections scheduled for 7 June 2009 are
conducted in a free, fair and peaceful manner.
While reiterating our support for the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), we stress
the imperative for all parties concerned to work
together to peacefully tackle such outstanding issues as
Israel’s intensified air violations of Lebanese territory
and its continued occupation of the northern part of the
village of al-Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line, the unresolved status of Shaba’a farms and
the environmental contamination and civilian
casualties due to Israel’s failure to provide the
technical strike data on the cluster munitions and
landmines used earlier by its forces.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We welcome this open meeting of the Security
Council. We also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his briefing.
On 16 December 2008, the Security Council held
a ministerial-level meeting on the question of the
Middle East (6045th meeting) and adopted resolution
1850 (2008), demonstrating its support for political
talks between Palestine and Israel and their efforts to
achieve lasting peace in the Middle East. The meeting
also
indicated
the
international
community’s

09-27993

The current situation in the Middle East remains
tense and fragile. The Palestinian and Israeli sides have
not yet reached a lasting ceasefire agreement, and
hostilities and acts of violence still occur. The
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is a cause for
concern. The reconstruction process is beset by
difficulties. The plight of the Palestinian people on the
West Bank of the Jordan River is also worrisome.
There are still multiple uncertain factors vis-à-vis
the resumption of talks between Palestine and Israel.
We appeal to the parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint, renounce violence and military
means and refrain from any action that may exacerbate
the tension. We urge Israel, the occupying Power, to
open the border crossings, stop building settlements on
the West Bank and allow the Palestinian people to
enjoy normal and dignified lives. We are concerned
about the plight of the Palestinian people and appeal to
the international community to continue to provide
humanitarian, development, technical and other kinds
of assistance to Palestine.
We believe that, given the tense and fragile
Middle East situation, the international community
should focus its efforts on the following four areas.
First, the security situation should be
consolidated in order to push for a durable ceasefire.
The parties concerned should fully implement in good
faith resolution 1860 (2009), adopted on 8 January, so
as to reach a comprehensive and durable ceasefire
arrangement as soon as possible. In this context, the
international community must support the efforts
undertaken by Egypt and other countries.
Secondly, the commitments for assistance for the
reconstruction of the Gaza strip must be honoured in

15

S/PV.6100

order to alleviate the humanitarian situation on the
ground. We welcome the positive outcome of the
pledging conference held at Sharm el-Sheikh on
2 March and we appeal to the international community
to translate the commitments made into concrete
actions. Israel must open the border crossings and
ensure unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance
and the materials necessary for reconstruction. At the
same time, we expect the Board of Inquiry established
by the Secretary-General to give a timely report to the
Security Council on the findings of its investigations.
Thirdly, there must be a push for intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of
critical importance to safeguard the Palestinian
people’s interests and the resumption of the Middle
East peace process. We appeal to the various
Palestinian factions to engage in sincere talks and
resolve their differences.
Fourthly, there must be an expeditious
resumption of the Middle East peace process. We have
always maintained that political talks are the only
correct avenue leading to durable peace in the Middle
East. The Security Council should support the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiation process in a more
proactive manner, and in particular ensure that the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council are
respected and implemented. We hope that the Quartet
will play an even greater role and push for a
resumption of political talks between Palestine and
Israel on the basis of the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map, so as to
fulfil as soon as possible the vision of two States,
Palestine and Israel, coexisting in peace.
China stands ready to work with the international
community and will continue to play a constructive
role in favour of an early proper settlement of the
Middle East question and the attainment of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thank you and
your delegation for holding a large number of public
meetings. We believe that in the eyes of the
membership of the Organization, this is a healthy
practice. I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for the
briefing he gave us and to welcome the presence of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine.

16

The last time that the Council debated the
situation in the Middle East, the population of Gaza
was experiencing dramatic days. Today, we face a
different scenario, characterized by relative calm.
Despite that, the humanitarian situation in Gaza is still
deplorable, and my delegation must once again
condemn the terrorist attacks against the territory of
Israel and the air attacks on Gaza.
In this context, we recognize the importance of
acts of solidarity with the affected peoples, especially
the intervention of Egypt which little by little has
contributed to reducing tensions and has played a
fundamental role in reaching the first agreements.
For Costa Rica, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza calls for particular attention. A high percentage of
the population there depends on humanitarian
assistance. The United Nations must have all the
facilities needed to provide humanitarian assistance
and to carry out its programmes with no obstructions.
Besides that, Gaza’s reconstruction and normalization
of life for its population are of great importance to us.
The National Early Recovery and Reconstruction
Plan for Gaza presented by the Palestinian Government
is a general framework to reactivate the Gaza economy,
which should guide the actions of the international
community. In this context, the commitments made
during the Sharm el-Sheikh conference of 2 March are
a major contribution towards the reconstruction of the
territory, which has lost 14 per cent of its infrastructure
and 75 per cent of its arable land.
However, the beneficial effects of these
contributions for the reconstruction of Gaza will not
translate into sustainable results as long as the
negotiations are not resumed and as long as no
concrete agreements are reached on substantive issues,
leading to permanent political solutions, including a
permanent ceasefire.
Today it is important to call once again for full
respect by the parties for their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law.
Accordingly, normalization of border crossings is a
major objective. Although there has been an
improvement in the entry of basic necessities in recent
weeks, the levels of goods entering Gaza are still much
lower than those of July 2008. The levels of
humanitarian assistance continue to be far lower than
what is urgently needed.

09-27993

S/PV.6100

The opening of the crossings is vital, in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of
resolution 1860 (2009). It is also important to put a halt
to the illicit traffic of weapons and ammunition and to
prevent them from entering Gaza freely. Costa Rica is
pleased welcomes the international agreement signed
on 13 March in London by representatives of nine
countries, in which an action plan was established to
respond to the ongoing concerns about the smuggling
of arms into Gaza.
Costa Rica is also concerned at each new
settlement built in occupied Palestinian territories. The
Council should stress the need to put an end to the
continued expansion of illegal settlements. We are not
unaware of, and the new Government of Israel should
not ignore, the broad consensus in the international
community on the need to put a halt to the growth of
illegal settlements that go against the commitments that
have been made.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of great
importance for the return to a peace process in which
all Palestinian political actors will take part. It is
imperative for Palestinian factions to find common
ground, which will make it possible for them to work
in a constructive fashion and provide their people with
the hope for a life lived in peace and safety.
We know that, among the efforts to improve the
situation in the Middle East, those being made by the
League of Arab States are decisive. We hope that, at
the coming Doha summit, there will be strengthened
initiatives to reach lasting peace in the region, leading
to the consolidation of an independent Palestinian
State, the strengthening of Israel’s security and creative
coexistence benefiting both peoples.
Costa Rica commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General to mandate the Board of Inquiry to
investigate the incidents that affected United Nations
personnel and installations in Gaza during the recent
conflict, and we hope to receive its results in the near
future. We believe it important for the credibility of our
Organization that all acts of hostility against United
Nations installations and its personnel be investigated
and that the responsibility for such acts be assigned.
We hope that the Security Council will be part of
the solution leading to a last peace between Israel and
Palestine and to an environment of peace in the Middle
East. The international community must continue to
show its commitment by supporting the parties and

09-27993

facilitating their goal of reaching a permanent solution
to the conflict and of two States coexisting in peace
and security. To that end, we call for fulfilment of the
commitments adopted in the peace process on the basis
of the Madrid principles, the Road Map, the resolutions
of this Council and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Similarly, we recognize the work of all agencies
and organizations of the United Nations, in particular
that of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his comprehensive briefing on the Middle East
peace process. We agree with the main assessments
that he presented to us. We were interested to hear the
statements of the Permanent Observer of Palestine and
of the Permanent Representative of Israel.
Today, the international community must think
about how to provide new impetus to the search for
peace in the Middle East. The impasse in that area
undermines efforts to stabilize the situation in the
region. Much will depend on how the Government of
Israel conducts itself following the election of Prime
Minister Binyamin Netanyahu. We are convinced that
negotiations with the Palestinians must not be resumed
from scratch; they should be pursued taking all
previous achievements and agreements into account.
The main thing is to ensure that the new Israeli Cabinet
stays the course of settling the crisis on the basis of the
concept of a two-State solution and resolves itself to
the necessity of freezing settlement activity, including
in East Jerusalem.
Strengthening the fragile ceasefire in Gaza,
making it stable and reciprocal, and further action to
restore a fully fledged peace process are urgent tasks.
We cannot allow a recurrence of the tragedy of the
peaceful inhabitants of Gaza, where thousands of
people, including children, fell victims of the violence.
It is also necessary to free the citizens of southern
Israel from the permanent threat of rocket attacks on
their homes. The best way to do that is for all sides
fully to implement resolution 1860 (2009).
Clearly, it is important to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1850 (2008), which
supports a comprehensive peace process in the Middle
East. The efforts of Egypt in that regard are of key
importance. The international community must
continue energetically to support them and we cherish

17

S/PV.6100

the hope that its mediation activities will be successful.
The donor conference in Sharm el-Sheikh, at which the
international community expressed its readiness to
pledge more funds than expected for the recovery of
Gaza, contributed positively to that end. For its part,
Russia will continue to provide the Palestinians with
all necessary assistance.
The recent conflict in Gaza has again
demonstrated the importance of an intra-Palestinian
reconciliation on a mutually acceptable legal basis that
includes the Arab Peace Initiative and the Palestine
Liberation Organization platform. Dialogue is complex
but must be continued. There are no alternatives to that
process. We must recognize that the crisis surrounding
Gaza has led to calls to withdraw the Arab Peace
Initiative. That is of serious concern to us. The Arab
Peace Initiative, with the vigorous support of Russia,
has become an integral part of the international legal
basis for progress towards genuine peace in the region.
It is necessary to ensure that we do not go back on that.
We are making preparations for the Moscow
conference, on which there is international consensus,
based on the decisions in the Security Council
resolutions and of the Quartet. We welcome the fact
that Mr. Pascoe referred to that important upcoming
forum. We will continue our interaction with the
Secretary-General and all other colleagues of the
Quartet in preparing the Moscow conference. That
forum will provide renewed impetus to the peace
process and ensure its comprehensive character.
Negotiations must be resumed not only on the
Palestinian, but also on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
and multilaterally. Only such comprehensive settlement
can guarantee the peace and security of all peoples in
the region.
Russia is carefully following developments in the
situation in Lebanon and political efforts to create an
atmosphere conducive to make the June parliamentary
elections peaceful and successful. In that regard, we
are concerned by the reports from Lebanon of a
deterioration in the situation in the Palestinian refugee
camps. We remain convinced that we cannot allow the
political situation in that country to worsen. The
problems of Lebanon must be resolved exclusively
through national dialogue and by seeking mutual
understanding between political forces in the country.
Russia will continue to promote that. We welcome
ongoing progress in the development of bilateral

18

relations between Lebanon and Syria. That is another
important factor for stability in the region.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I, too, would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
detailed briefing, and we are grateful that we had the
chance to listen to Ambassadors Mansour and Shalev. I
wish to align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Czech Republic on behalf
of the European Union. I will therefore focus on a few
aspects that are of particular importance to Austria.
The
briefing
by
Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Pascoe once more underscored the urgency of
stabilizing the humanitarian situation of the population
of Gaza and the need to ensure an early recovery. The
results of the Sharm el-Sheikh conference have
demonstrated the international community’s readiness
to help the people in Gaza to rebuild their lives, but,
beyond international support, that task requires
immediate and decisive action by the parties.
First and foremost, the populations of southern
Israel and Gaza need to see full respect for a permanent
ceasefire. We are gravely concerned about the fragility
of the current provisional ceasefire and we reiterate our
condemnation of indiscriminate rocket attacks. We
look to Israel to urgently provide full access for aid
workers and materials. We note Israel’s commitment to
alleviating the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We also
note that logistical steps have already been taken to
improve the delivery of aid. Unfortunately, supplies
continue to be highly insufficient in terms of the
quantity and scope of goods allowed into the Gaza
Strip.
Recovery and reconstruction efforts can advance
only if all crossings are immediately and
unconditionally opened for the passage of humanitarian
aid and commercial flows, including construction
materials essential for the rehabilitation of vital
infrastructure, homes, clinics and schools. That and the
freedom of movement of people are indispensable for a
return of normal economic activity and for a dignified
future for the Palestinian people.
Progress towards sustainable peace can only
come hand in hand with the reconstruction of Gaza as
an integral part of a future Palestinian State and
prospects for positive economic and social
development for all Palestinians. Moving forward on
the path to peace also requires rebuilding trust,
including by strengthening respect by all for the rule of

09-27993

S/PV.6100

law, human rights and international humanitarian law.
We also note the ongoing debate on that question in
Israel.
Austria reiterates that all allegations of violations
of international humanitarian law, by whomever they
may have been committed, must be thoroughly
investigated. In that context, we welcome the
establishment of the Board of Inquiry by the SecretaryGeneral and await its conclusions with interest.
Since the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008),
there have been serious setbacks and frustrations.
Israelis and Palestinians must steer back, and firmly
keep course, towards a just and comprehensive peace.
For the Palestinian side, that means speaking with one
voice and forming a Government committed to work
towards a settlement resulting in a two-State solution,
with a Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.
In conformity with the entire European Union,
Austria fully supports the Egyptian reconciliation
efforts.
As far as the current and any future leadership of
Israel is concerned, we hope to see a greater
commitment to peace negotiations as well as to the
two-State solution. We expect a halt to all activities
that jeopardize a negotiated settlement and the viability
of the two-State solution, such as the construction of
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem and
the construction of the separation barrier on occupied
Palestinian land — acts that are contrary to
international law. An immediate freeze on all
settlement activities, including natural growth, and the
dismantlement of outposts built since 2001 would reestablish confidence and strengthen the hand of those
committed to peace on the Palestinian side.
Looking beyond the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Austria strongly encourages intensified efforts by the
parties on all tracks towards a just and comprehensive
regional peace, including the early resumption of the
Syrian-Israeli track. We welcome the progress achieved
in the exchange of ambassadors between Lebanon and
Syria. We wish to underline the continued importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative to advancing the vision of
security, stability and good-neighbourliness for all
countries in the region.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I should like to join preceding speakers in

09-27993

thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his presentation on the
situation in the Middle East. I am particularly grateful
for the important information with which he provided
us.
As the Security Council meets once again to
consider the situation in the Middle East, the
Palestinian people — especially those in Gaza —
continue to dress the wounds of the December war,
which claimed numerous victims, particularly civilians,
and destroyed major socio-economic infrastructure.
In the context of the intensified humanitarian
crisis that resulted, particularly in Gaza, we welcome
the mobilization of the international community,
which, from the outbreak of the confrontation, spared
no effort not only to achieve the cessation of
hostilities, but also to come to the aid of the civilian
population.
In that context, we welcome the holding of the
donors conference on 2 March 2009 in Sharm
el-Sheikh, in Egypt, which came at the right time to
respond to the humanitarian crisis and assist in the
rebuilding of devastated Gaza. We must now hope that
the commitments undertaken on that occasion will be
fulfilled as swiftly as possible. That is all the more
important because, unfortunately, the challenges to be
met remain numerous and the humanitarian needs very
great.
Moreover,
the
conference
was
another
opportunity for the international community to show
the degree to which it can display its concern by being
in solidarity with a population in distress. My
delegation calls on Israel to join in this overall spirit of
solidarity and compassion, in particular by lifting the
embargo on Gaza and all restrictions on the movement
of goods and persons, which are prerequisites for the
resumption of socio-economic activity and the success
of reconstruction efforts.
The recent events in Gaza have revealed once
again the difficult conditions in which the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations intervene in
times of conflict. Their work — particularly that of
United Nations agencies, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East — is all the more remarkable and
praiseworthy for that reason. Therefore, it is important
to continue to support them and to ensure the
protection and integrity of their staff and infrastructure.
In that regard, we hope that the investigations of the

19

S/PV.6100

Board of Inquiry established by the Secretary-General
will help to shed light on the attacks carried out against
United Nations facilities.
We remain greatly concerned by the many
escalations that are further exacerbating tension
between Israel and Palestine. We invite the parties to
refrain from engaging in extremist rhetoric, which calls
into question a number of the significant achievements
that have been accomplished, including within the
framework of the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Also contributing to those escalations is the
continued policy of establishing Israeli settlements.
My delegation urges the next Israeli Government
to put an end to that policy and to resolutely commit
itself to the spirit of the peace process, which, despite
difficulties, today still provides us with the best
possible prospects for a settlement of the conflict. We
should also like to reiterate our appeal to the
Palestinian parties to achieve reconciliation and unity.
That is why we hope that the inter-Palestinian
negotiations currently under way under Egyptian
auspices will lead to a Government that unites all
Palestinian political sensibilities.
Beyond Gaza and the West Bank, antagonisms
are increasingly worsening in the region. We invite all
actors to display the utmost restraint in order to create
the best possible prospects for the success of the
ongoing diplomatic efforts.
In this troubled region, we must welcome the
relative calm and stability prevailing in Lebanon. We
call on the entire Lebanese political class to continue to
abide by the important May 2008 Doha Agreement,
and we hope that the June parliamentary elections will
be held in optimal conditions of security, transparency
and fairness. In order to avoid unnecessary tensions in
that country, we wish to stress once again the
importance of abiding by resolution 1701 (2006).
The gradual improvement in Syrian-Lebanese
relations is another reason for satisfaction. We hope
that it will make it possible to resolve outstanding
bilateral issues in a consensual and decisive manner.
Finally, returning to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, we express the hope that the conference at
Moscow will be held as soon as possible and that it
will help renew the momentum of the Annapolis
negotiations. That in turn should, inter alia, lead to the
creation of an independent Palestinian State coexisting

20

with Israel in peace and security. However, that will be
possible only if the minimal conditions for mutual trust
between the parties are created, including an end to the
settlement policy, exchanges of prisoners, a lifting of
the Gaza blockade, the opening of crossing points, a
halt to rocket firings, and inter-Palestinian
reconciliation.
For its part, the international community,
including the Security Council, must resolutely assist
the parties. In other words, if there is to be a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, the contributions of all parties are essential. That
is why we invite the United Nations and all States and
organizations committed to the process to continue
their efforts.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I join
colleagues in thanking Mr. Pascoe for his briefing this
morning, and I also thank the representatives of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority.
I would like to associate the United Kingdom
with the statement to be made later today by the
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic on
behalf of the European Union.
The situation in Gaza remains of the utmost
concern. Little has changed since we last discussed it.
The unilateral ceasefires declared by both parties in
January are still not underpinned by a proper ceasefire
regime. We reiterate our call for both parties to
implement in full resolution 1860 (2009).
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
perilous. The United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, is playing a critical role. We
urge Israel to allow free and unfettered access for
humanitarian aid and materials into Gaza.
We commend the United Nations framework for
the provision of humanitarian assistance in Gaza.
Based on important humanitarian principles that all
parties should respect, the framework would allow a
broader range of material to enter Gaza in such a way
that is monitored to ensure that it reaches only its
intended recipients.
Gaza also needs help for reconstruction. We were
encouraged by the commitments made at the Sharm
el-Sheik conference. The United Kingdom announced
that we were making available an additional $44
million to help rebuild schools, homes and hospitals.

09-27993

S/PV.6100

That brings the United Kingdom’s response to the
recent Gaza crisis to roughly $70 million. Sharm elSheik also reiterated the need to reopen the Gaza
crossings to legitimate trade and the movement of
people. We believe that is essential both for the
reconstruction effort and the peace process more
broadly.
While Israel should reopen the crossings, its
concerns about the smuggling of illegal arms and
ammunition into Gaza must also be addressed. Egypt
continues to have the immediate security responsibility,
but the international community could do more. That is
one of the reasons why we hosted a meeting in London
on 13 March, which agreed a programme of action
aimed at enhancing efforts to prevent the smuggling of
arms, ammunition and weapons components, in support
of resolution 1860 (2009).
As the Permanent Representative of Israel said,
we should also recall today the plight of Gilad Shalit,
who has now been held by Hamas for over 1,000 days.
We regard it as deeply regrettable that negotiations to
secure his release appear to have broken down. We
were also deeply disturbed by the attempted car
bombing at a shopping mall in Haifa. It is particularly
horrifying that the device was clearly designed to kill
and injure innocent civilians.
The recent Gaza conflict was marked by serious
allegations of misconduct by both sides. We welcomed
the Secretary-General’s decision to set up a board of
inquiry and to report on incidents of attacks on United
Nations facilities. We also welcome the Israeli
Government’s decision to undertake their own
investigation into allegations against its forces,
including, we hope, those that have emerged most
recently in the media.
While the Council’s focus has rightly been on
Gaza in recent months, we should not ignore events in
the West Bank. We remain deeply concerned by the
increase in settlement activity there, including in East
Jerusalem, including threats of house demolitions in
the Silwan area adjacent to the Old City and the
eviction notices issued to the al-Rawi and Hanoun
families. As the British Minister for the Middle East,
Mr. Bill Rammell, said on 21 March,
“These eviction notices are not conducive to
peace. We call on the Israeli Government to
suspend these eviction notices immediately.”

09-27993

The ongoing problems in Gaza and the West
Bank reinforce the need to reinvigorate the Middle
East political process. We welcome the recent talks in
Cairo aimed at Palestinian reconciliation as a step
towards creating the Palestinian unity necessary not
only for rebuilding Gaza, but also for holding elections
and delivering peace. President Abbas should lead that
process, supported by the international community.
We look forward to working with the new Israeli
Government towards lasting peace in the region. We
hope that new Government will make a strong early
statement of its intent to engage in the Middle East
peace process, based on the two-State solution and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We believe that is the only way
to achieve peace and security for both Israelis and
Palestinians.
Finally, Lebanon’s problems too remain
unresolved, although there has been some progress, as
Mr. Pascoe reported. Ongoing rocket attacks and
overflights remain a concern. We would urge all parties
to do everything possible to remain calm and make
further progress on outstanding issues, including
disarmament of militias, securing and delineating the
border, and on the status of Ghajar and Sheba’a.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by conveying my gratitude to the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs for his
presentation and to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the ambassador of Israel for their
statements. I also wish to voice my full support for the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.
It is for the States of the region and the
international community to see to it that the current
transition period in the region allows the laying of the
foundations of peace in the Middle East. As the
President of our Republic underscored, peace is
possible even if it does require painful concessions and
genuine political courage.
I wish to address three main points.
Turning to the situation in Gaza, consolidation of
the ceasefire, which requires full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009), remains a priority. Resolution
1860 (2009) laid out the main parameters for a durable
ceasefire, including the re-opening of checkpoints and
the setting up of mechanisms to ensure that the

21

S/PV.6100

smuggling of arms is stopped. In that regard, we
support the Egyptian efforts and call on all parties to
move quickly towards an agreement.
France and the European Union are resolved to
shoulder all their responsibilities in supporting the full
implementation of the resolution. The European Union
has declared its readiness to relaunch the EU Border
Assistance Mission — EUBAM Rafah — as soon as
conditions allow and has studied the possibility of
extending its assistance to other crossing points if
security there is guaranteed.
The issue of opening crossing points is decisive
to improving the humanitarian situation and to
permitting the reconstruction of Gaza to be carried out.
In that respect, we welcome the convening of the
Sharm el-Sheik conference and the pledges that were
announced. It was important that the meeting
concerned both Gaza and the entire Palestinian
economy. That effort is part of the follow-up to the
Paris conference and reminds us that the Palestinian
Authority should ensure the administration and
ownership of any reconstruction efforts.
There is no military solution to the crisis in Gaza.
We have condemned many times, and continue to
condemn, the firing of rockets against Israel. We have
also condemned Israeli land operations carried out in
Gaza and the bombardment by the Israeli army of
Palestinian hospitals and premises of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. France recalls that
international humanitarian law must be respected
everywhere, in all circumstances and by all parties to
the conflict. In that context, we supported the decision
of the Secretary-General to set up a board of inquiry,
and we expect that its conclusions will be presented to
the Security Council.
In parallel to efforts mentioned, France continues
to support the immediate, unconditional liberation of
Gilad Shalit. We support Egyptian mediation efforts
and continue to follow discussions under way with
great attention.
My second point concerns the stages that must be
got through rapidly in order to put the peace process on
the right track.
I wish to underscore here, first, the importance of
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. Palestinians must be
able to speak with a single voice. There will be no

22

peace agreement with only one part of the Palestinian
people and no viable Palestinian State without Gaza.
Although discussions with a view to inter-Palestinian
reconciliation are facing many difficulties, we continue
to back the efforts of the Egyptian mediation. We hope
that an important step can be taken, in particular in
view of the Arab summit in Doha aimed at
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. The States of the
region, of course, have an important role to play here.
When the time is right, we will be ready to work with a
Government of national unity that will abide by the
fundamental principles of the peace process and will
accept to resume negotiations with Israel in order to
achieve the two-State solution.
We continue to fully support the Arab Peace
Initiative, which should be an essential base for a
comprehensive and lasting settlement in the Middle
East.
Our expectations are equally high with regard to
the new Israeli authorities. Despite repeated unanimous
appeals by the international community, settlement
activities continue. A wave of destruction of
Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem has compounded
that. As the President of our Republic recalled, the
settlements policy, by rendering the prospects for a
Palestinian State more difficult, does not contribute to
Israeli security, but on the contrary, increases the
dangers. In order not to compromise the peace process,
Israel must act in a strong manner now, without delay.
The settlements policy must be completely frozen, in
conformity with all commitments undertaken since the
Road Map was adopted.
Furthermore, we support a resumption, as quickly
as possible, of talks between Syria and Israel, whose
success is necessary for stabilization of the region.
The elements I have just referred to will
determine, in this crucial moment for the Middle East,
the progress towards the necessary resumption of
negotiations with a view to the creation of a viable
Palestinian State, secure, independent and democratic,
and living in peace side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders. Peace must be based on
the principle of land for peace, Security Council
resolutions, and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
international community and the Council have an
important role to play here. While we are convinced
that peace will be negotiated between Israelis and

09-27993

S/PV.6100

Palestinians first, France is determined to take or
support any useful initiative.

statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel.

Allow me to conclude by saying a few words on
the situation in Lebanon. First, France welcomes the
appointment on 24 March 2009 of a Syrian ambassador
to Beirut, in conformity with the commitment
undertaken by the Syrian and Lebanese heads of State.
On the heels of the establishment of diplomatic
relations, the opening of embassies and the
appointment of the Lebanese ambassador to the Syrian
Arab Republic, this is an historic step in the
normalization of relations between those two countries.

More than two months have passed since the
unilateral ceasefires were declared by the respective
parties, but the situation in Gaza continues to be a
source of serious concern. We call on all parties to
make every effort to achieve a durable and effective
ceasefire agreement and fully implement Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The sustained
re-opening of the crossing points and the prevention of
the illicit trafficking of arms are essential ingredients
for an effective ceasefire.

The French authorities also reiterated, on the
occasion of the State visit of President Sleiman to
Paris, their support for Lebanon and their commitment
to the implementation of the Doha agreement, which
has enabled the Lebanese people to resume the path of
dialogue and national reconciliation. My country hopes
that the legislative elections to be held on 7 June 2009
will be carried out in a climate of stability and respect
for democratic norms and will facilitate the
consolidation of the unity and independence of
Lebanon to which we all aspire.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
be very serious. Sixty-five per cent of Gazans live
below the poverty line and 37 per cent live in extreme
poverty. 40,000 people in Gaza remain without access
to water through the public network. We must remind
ourselves that there has not been much improvement in
Gaza. Improved access for humanitarian relief items
and the opening of crossings remain a priority concern.
We strongly urge Israel to make further efforts to
improve the access of goods and humanitarian workers
to Gaza.

My country also welcomed the establishment, on
1 March 2009, of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
aimed at putting an end to impunity and ensuring that
justice prevails in Lebanon. We have also recalled the
importance of States continuing to cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor, as requested in Security
Council resolution 1852 (2008).

At the same time, we condemn the sporadic
rocket attacks into Israeli territory around the security
crossing areas. They have to be stopped immediately.
They undermine the security of Israeli citizens, the
efforts for reconstruction and the peace process.

France remains fully committed to the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1701 (2006). In this regard, we
attach special importance to the strengthening of
tripartite cooperation in the field under the aegis of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon; the
disarmament of militias within the framework of
national dialogue; the strict implementation of the arms
embargo; and the settlement of the issue of Ghajar. At
some point, progress will have to be achieved on the
Shaba’a farms issue. We welcome the work carried out
by the Secretary-General to that end, and we invite all
parties to commit themselves to a genuine diplomatic
process.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing. We appreciate the

09-27993

We have to realize how important it is mobilize
concerted international support to the humanitarian and
reconstruction needs of Palestinian people. It is
heartening that the Sharm el-Sheikh conference in
early March succeeded in mobilizing resources of over
$4 billion.
For our part, Japan pledged $200 million in
assistance to the Palestinian people and will provide
assistance to needy citizens in a timely manner. We
also support the development of the Palestinian
economy through the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity
initiative. The objective of this initiative is to help the
establishment of a Palestinian State. We also make a
positive contribution to the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians.
To reconstruct Gaza effectively and for the peace
process to advance, Palestinian reconciliation is of
utmost importance. We urge Palestinian leaders to

23

S/PV.6100

redouble their efforts to reconcile as soon as possible.
Japan continues to support President Abbas and the
Palestinian Authority in their efforts to reunify the
West Bank and Gaza.
We are encouraged by the efforts of Arab leaders
to create an environment conducive to the advancement
of peace in the region as a whole. We are confident that
the Arab League summit in Doha, Qatar, will
strengthen cooperation among the countries in the
region. At the same time, we hope that the incoming
Israeli Government will commit itself to the two-State
solution and work with the Palestinian Authority to
restore the peace process.
We acknowledge that the United Nations, under
the leadership of the Secretary-General, has been
playing a vital role in the Palestinian territory in the
areas
of
both
humanitarian
assistance
and
reconstruction. We would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the courageous work of staff of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) during this
difficult period. We also commend the work of the
United Nations agencies in supporting the
reconstruction efforts of the Palestinian Authority.
The damage and injuries incurred at UNRWA and
other United Nations facilities are not acceptable, and
such attacks should not be repeated. We appreciate the
Secretary-General’s intention to report back to the
Security Council on the findings by the Board of
Inquiry.
We expect a new political development on both
the Israeli and the Palestinian sides. It is essential for
all parties to respect and to work towards the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1850
(2008) and 1860 (2009). For that purpose, Israel must
freeze settlement activities in accordance with the
principles contained in the Road Map.
We firmly believe that peace can be achieved
only through dialogue, political commitment and
negotiation. For our part, we will continue to make
efforts to have a positive influence on the Middle East
peace process.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his detailed briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. We also welcome
the statements by the Permanent Representative of

24

Israel and the Permanent Observer of the Palestinian
Authority.
Despite the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009)
and the unilateral cessation of hostilities in the West
Bank, a tense calm prevails in the Middle East. The
humanitarian crisis brought about by the conflict has
not been resolved and continues to pose a threat to the
stability of the region. Now more than ever, it is
imperative that all of the actors concerned reiterate
their commitment to political dialogue, to the peace
process and to the establishment of a Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace within secure
and recognized borders.
The recent crisis in Gaza has shown once again
that weapons will not solve the conflict. Only a few
weeks after the partial cessation of hostilities, we note
with concern that rocket attacks from Gaza into
southern Israel, the most recent of which took place
yesterday in Ashkelon, have continued, as have air
incursions by the Israel Defense Forces into Gaza. My
delegation condemns these acts of violence and once
again urges all stakeholders to respect the provisions of
international humanitarian law at all times.
In addition to these events, we note that the lack
of substantial progress in intra-Palestinian dialogue and
the delays in the formation of a new Israeli
Government have led to the temporary interruption of
the peace process.
We also believe that the continuation of the
policy of demolitions and settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank does not bode well for
the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority or for the establishment of a lasting peace.
We therefore call on the parties to implement as soon
as possible the provisions of resolutions 1850 (2008)
and 1860 (2009), as they contain the elements
necessary for the establishment of a permanent
ceasefire and renewed dialogue. We must recall here
that it is only through the introduction of a monitoring
mechanism that a lasting ceasefire will be possible and
that an end will be put to illicit arms trafficking into
Gaza Strip, which was one of the central issues that
brought about the recent crisis. Here, we commend
Egypt for having taken steps to facilitate the intraPalestinian dialogue and establish the basis for an
agreement on Gaza. We also commend the
international community for its efforts to resolve the

09-27993

S/PV.6100

humanitarian crisis and begin reconstruction efforts as
soon as possible.
We should redouble our efforts to make progress
on the basis of agreements achieved at Sharm elSheikh in early March. The outcome of the Sharm elSheikh conference was encouraging: it is a starting
point for adopting a long-term approach to respond to
the humanitarian crisis, taking account of fundamental
aspects such as the permanent opening of all border
crossings; support for the rebuilding of infrastructure;
the sustainable economic, social and environmental
development of Gaza; and the strengthening of
governance. That collective effort made it possible to
obtain pledges totalling nearly $4.5 billion. We trust
that those pledges will be translated into concrete
action to benefit the civilian population and regional
stability.
Mexico is participating in the effort by making a
contribution to the World Food Programme, through its
Operation Lifeline Gaza, which provides food to those
affected by the conflict and promotes school
attendance by children. We shall also continue to make
an active contribution to the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which acted in an
exemplary manner throughout the recent conflict.
My delegation is concerned by the fact that
humanitarian work continues to be hindered, in
particular in terms of access for humanitarian
assistance and materials for rebuilding Gaza. In some
cases, we see actions that are clear violations of
international humanitarian law. Here, we recall the
importance of implementing the provisions of
resolution 1502 (2003) regarding the obligation of all
parties involved in an armed conflict to comply fully
with the rules and principles of international law
applicable to them related to the protection of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its
associated personnel, in particular international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to
establish a Board of Inquiry to shed light on the attacks
on United Nations facilities in Gaza; we await the
findings of the Board’s investigation and the
identification of actions to be taken to prevent further
incidents of this kind. We also call on the Government
of Israel to support the ongoing investigation —
undertaken at its own initiative — regarding possible

09-27993

violations of international humanitarian law during the
military operations in Gaza. We hope also that there
will be an investigation of alleged human rights
violations by Hamas.
Tomorrow will mark 30 years since the signing of
the historic peace agreement between Israel and Egypt.
For that model to be reproduced in the region, three
objectives must be attained. First, negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority should be resumed,
with a firm commitment by the parties to constructive
dialogue without preconditions. In the present context,
meeting that objective depends on progress in the intraPalestinian dialogue and on the will of the new
Government of Israel to support the peace process.
Statements to that effect made yesterday by the new
Prime Minister seem to be encouraging.
Secondly, there must be a continued commitment
by Israel and Lebanon to the provisions of resolution
1701 (2006), and the normalization of relations
between Lebanon and Syria must continue. We are
pleased to note that, to date, as a result of the Doha
agreement of May 2008, calm has prevailed in
Lebanon in the preparations for the parliamentary
elections to take place in June this year. But we deplore
the incidents that took place during the
commemoration of the assassination of Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri and the tragic news of the recent
assassination of Kamal Medhat, leader of the Palestine
Liberation Organization in Lebanon.
Thirdly, the indirect contacts between Israel and
Syria, in which Turkey has played a key role in the
past, must be resumed. In particular, the endeavours of
the Special Envoys appointed by the President of the
United States will also make it possible to achieve
progress on this matter.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my delegation’s
commitment to continue to support action by the
Security Council and interested States with a view to
attaining those objectives, while always giving
precedence to the contribution that the United Nations
should make, in the conviction that stability and
security in the Middle East will come about as a result
of dialogue and negotiation, not the use of force.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing and by welcoming the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the
representative of the Palestinian Authority.

25

S/PV.6100

The Under-Secretary-General has given us much
to consider, and at the outset I would like to discuss the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The United States is
deeply committed to relieving the immediate suffering
of the people there. We are also determined to
aggressively work for a lasting peace that provides a
stable and prosperous future for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. Our response to the urgent needs in
Gaza, however, cannot be separated from our broader
long-term efforts to achieve a comprehensive peace.
To date, my Government has contributed more
than $66 million to provide food, water, medicine and
shelter for the people of Gaza. At the 2 March donors
conference in Sharm el-Sheikh, Secretary of State
Clinton announced our intention to support the
Palestinian Authority and Gaza recovery with up to
$900 million in assistance. That pledge, designed in
coordination with the Palestinian Authority and to be
submitted to the United States Congress, will deliver
assistance to the people of Gaza and will further the
development of the West Bank.
The United States is working with President
Abbas and the Palestinian Authority to address critical
humanitarian, budgetary, security and infrastructure
development needs in Gaza. Direct budget support to
the Palestinian Authority offers one of the quickest
ways to meet those needs: the Palestinian Authority
spends more than 50 per cent of its recurrent budget in
Gaza, for instance, and Palestinian Authority employees
in Gaza’s hospitals and schools continue to provide
essential services to the people of Gaza under often
extreme conditions.
Through our assistance and support for the
Palestinian Authority, we aim to foster the conditions in
which a Palestinian State can be created — a State at
peace with Israel and its neighbours and accountable to
its people, a State of which Palestinians everywhere can
be proud. That is the Palestinian State we all envisage and
which we all have an obligation to help create.
We are engaging with the Government of Israel
on a daily basis about the volume and range of
humanitarian items and humanitarian workers entering
Gaza. We encourage Israel to make it easier to bring
humanitarian goods into Gaza and to ease restrictions
on urgently needed items, including critical building
supplies. As part of a lasting ceasefire, Gaza’s border
crossings should be opened to permit a robust flow of
aid and commerce, with an appropriate monitoring

26

regime joined by both the international community and
the Palestinian Authority. We also share Israel’s
concern about the fate of Corporal Gilad Shalit and
urge his immediate release.
I also wish to express our deep appreciation to
President Mubarak and the Government of Egypt for
their persistence in promoting a durable ceasefire in
Gaza and southern Israel, and in hosting Palestinian
reconciliation talks. The United States values Egypt’s
leadership in the region and its support for peace. We
support its efforts to forge a Palestinian unity
Government that can be a genuine party to peace and
can realize the Palestinian people’s legitimate
aspirations to an independent and viable State by
recognizing Israel, renouncing violence and accepting
previous agreements and obligations, including the
Road Map.
The smuggling of weapons into Gaza and
continued rocket attacks by Hamas constitute a serious
and immediate threat to regional peace and security,
putting innocent lives at risk and threatening to set off
another deadly round of violence. Working with our
partners in the region and beyond, the United States is
committed to moving forward quickly with new
mechanisms to block this arms trafficking.
We welcome the programme of action agreed in
London on 13 March by nine nations: Canada,
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Consistent with existing Security Council resolutions,
as well as with counter-terrorism and non-proliferation
conventions and regimes, this initiative will strengthen
the international community’s ability to support a
durable ceasefire. It provides a comprehensive
platform for enhanced cooperation, information and
intelligence sharing, diplomatic engagement and
military and law enforcement activities. Participating
countries will meet on a regular basis and have agreed
that the initiative would be open to others that wish to
join.
It is the policy of the United States to move
quickly and actively to seek a lasting peace between
Israel and the Palestinians. With Special Envoy
Mitchell leading our efforts, we are engaged in
determined and vigorous diplomacy. Lasting peace
requires more than a ceasefire, however. We urge all
parties to respect their obligations under the Road Map

09-27993

S/PV.6100

and to refrain from any activities that do not help the
cause of peace in the Middle East.
We have made clear to Israel that settlement
activity is unhelpful, and we call on Israel to dismantle
outposts created since March 2001. We also call on the
Arab States, building on the Arab Peace Initiative, to
reach out to Israel to demonstrate by both word and
deed that Israel has a permanent and secure place in the
region. The United States will engage to help support
the parties as they make progress towards a
comprehensive peace between Israel and all its
neighbours that respects Israel’s rightful place in the
community of nations and includes two States — Israel
and Palestine — living side by side in peace and
security.
President Obama, Secretary Clinton and
Ambassador Rice have stated their desire for principled
and sustained engagement in the Middle East. As
President Obama has noted, the United States intends
to pursue engagement with all countries of the region,
including Syria. On 7 March, United States officials
travelled to Damascus to build on previous discussions
in Washington, D.C. We are hopeful that Syria can play
a constructive role in the region by supporting, for
example, Palestinian reconciliation based
on
commitments undertaken by the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), a secure and stable Iraq, and free
and fair parliamentary elections in Lebanon.
Before closing, let me make several essential
points about the situation in Lebanon. Sadly, these are
also related to the unremitting threat of violence. The
United States condemns the attack on Monday that
killed Kamal Medhat, adviser to the PLO’s
representative in Lebanon, and his bodyguards. We call
on all parties to respect the rule of law and renounce
the use of violence. My Government supports the
Lebanese Government in its efforts to provide security
and to ensure that the perpetrators of this attack are
brought to justice.
We also remain particularly concerned about
Hizbollah’s continuing efforts to rearm. In Lebanon as
in Gaza, arms smuggling is a continuing threat to peace
and security in the region. Lebanese civilians will have
real security only when Hizbollah, the Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command,
Fatah al-Intifada and other militias disarm. The
Government of Lebanon must be the sole military
authority in that country. The United States continues

09-27993

to press all parties to support the conduct of free, fair
and transparent parliamentary elections in Lebanon,
unmarred by political violence. The shape and
composition of Lebanon’s next Government should be
decided by the Lebanese themselves, for Lebanon and
free from outside interference.
Finally, we are encouraged by the 1 March
opening of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon in The
Hague, and we are confident that the Tribunal will
bring to justice those who financed, planned and
perpetrated the assassinations of former Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and others. The rise of the Tribunal
illustrated the shared determination of Lebanon and the
international community to end an era of impunity for
political assassinations in Lebanon. The United States
will continue to support the Tribunal, and we
encourage all those committed to promoting justice in
Lebanon to do so as well.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
thanking him for presenting us with an analysis of the
challenges that the Middle East region is presently
facing. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of the Ambassador of Israel and the representative of
the Palestinian Authority.
In the aftermath of the violence in Gaza, two
priorities deserve our continuing attention: responding
to the humanitarian and reconstruction needs of Gaza
while keeping the conditions in place for the
revitalized peace process to continue as soon as
possible. Gaza is facing the enormous challenge of
reconstruction. We recognize that there is a continuing
need for the unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian aid and reconstruction material.
Let me underscore our appreciation for the work
being undertaken by the United Nations agencies and
their personnel on the ground, who continue to work in
challenging circumstances. We expect all parties to act
responsibly in order to facilitate humanitarian access
and the work of those United Nations agencies.
However, the diversion and instrumentalization of aid
are not acceptable.
We were heartened by the outcome of the recent
Sharm el-Sheikh conference, which helped to raise
much-needed financial support for the urgent recovery
and reconstruction of Gaza and sent a strong message
of international solidarity with the population of Gaza.
While the pledges exceeded anticipation, the

27

S/PV.6100

operationalization of assistance remains a challenge. In
order to have a tangible impact on the daily lives of
those in need, we hope to see the rapid implementation
of the Palestinian National Gaza Early Recovery and
Reconstruction Plan, under the Palestinian National
Authority. It is needed not only to boost the economy,
but also to help heal Palestinian society.
Croatia remains convinced that the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) remains
essential in order to avoid earlier patterns of behaviour
that led to the latest violence. In parallel with
humanitarian assistance and recovery, it is important to
secure a prolonged ceasefire. Given the precarious
state of calm in Gaza, we condemn all attempts to
reignite violence by launching rocket attacks on Israel
amid efforts to secure such a durable ceasefire. If there
is to be a credible and durable ceasefire, it is essential
that the capability of Hamas and other militant groups
to launch rocket attacks against Israel be put to an end.
Similarly, arrangements for the sustained reopening of
crossing points also need to be put in place. Resolution
1860 (2009) is clear on this.
Croatia appreciates the active and dedicated
engagement of Egypt to put in place conditions for a
durable ceasefire, as well as its efforts to secure intraPalestinian reconciliation, particularly with a view to
securing the long-term recovery and stability of Gaza.
We regret that an early agreement to release captured
Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit could not be reached.
The recent military hostilities in Gaza only
underscore the need to continue to work towards a
political solution and a lasting peace in the Middle East
based on the two-State solution. We understand that the
current period is beset by challenges, given the
political uncertainties on both the Israeli and the
Palestinian sides. This makes it all the more important
that the international community, including this
Council as well as an active Quartet, remain guided by
the objectives reaffirmed in resolution 1850 (2008)
and encourage the continuation of negotiations and the
reduction of all measures likely to erode confidence.
We are encouraged by the early engagement of the new
United States administration. We look forward to the
forthcoming summit of the League of Arab States to
advance intra-Palestinian reconciliation as a step that
will advance the overall peace efforts.
On Lebanon, let me convey our satisfaction with
the improved, but still fragile, political and security

28

climate in that country. We deplore all attempts to
undermine the prevailing atmosphere of calm,
including this week’s terrorist attack against Mr. Kamal
Medhat. The June elections will be not only a key test
but also an opportunity to consolidate stability and the
constitutional order in Lebanon. We are encouraged by
the improvements achieved in Lebanese-Syrian
relations, which come at a critical time, and expect to
see them translated into further tangible steps towards
full normalization.
Developments on the regional front and the
support of the region’s leaders for peace remain a
crucial part of the bigger picture and will inevitably
have a bearing on efforts to achieve a comprehensive
peace anchored in the two-State solution and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.
I wish to note that the peace process in the
Middle East is experiencing continual reversal. Peace
is impossible as a result of Israel’s illegal and inhuman
practices on several levels. They include its blockades,
killings,
construction
of
settlements,
land
confiscations, home demolitions, erection of barriers
and detention of 11,000 Palestinians, including women
and children, who have been held not for thousands of
days but for thousands of months.
Since mid-2007, Israeli occupying authorities
have imposed a suffocating blockade on the Gaza Strip.
Palestinians live under very depressing circumstances,
which has been met with a very embarrassing silence
on the part of the international community. Israel
unleashed a war against the residents of Gaza after they
had become weary as a result of hunger and the
blockade. Despite everything that has transpired, the
Israeli authorities are continuing their blockade,
placing obstacles in the way of mediation efforts,
reneging on their obligations and changing conditions.
All of that is part of an effort to perpetuate the siege
despite the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009) and
calls by the Secretary-General and many international,
regional and civil society organizations.
The occupying Power has committed grave
atrocities in the occupied Palestinian territories, in

09-27993

S/PV.6100

particular in the Gaza Strip. Many of those violations
rise to the level of war crimes and genocide under
international law and international humanitarian law.
That has been confirmed by numerous distinguished
international personalities, including the 16 who
addressed a joint letter to the Secretary-General and the
members of the Security Council. Reports by
Mr. Richard Falk, the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
occupied Territories, Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch have all called for investigations into the
crimes committed in Gaza. In addition, the Red Cross
has condemned the targeting of medical teams and the
fact that they have been prevented from reaching the
wounded.
All that has been borne out by eyewitness reports
and the dramatic articles published in The New York
Times and Haaretz on 22 March 2009, which included
witness accounts, documents and information about
war crimes and other acts committed in Gaza by Israeli
soldiers acting on orders from high in the chain of
command calling for the use of phosphorous bombs,
the targeting of ambulances and defenceless civilians
and the ransacking of houses. The reports also included
a statement by a unit leader who deliberately killed a
Palestinian woman and her two sons with an automatic
rifle, as well as an account of the killing of an old
woman crossing a street who posed no threat to Israel’s
occupying forces. The paper also included statements
of how, despite claims made by the Israeli army, pilots
deliberately and without warning targeted civilian
houses.
It is clear from the testimony of Israeli soldiers
that the orders they received essentially told them to
show no concern for the lives of Palestinian civilians.
An Israeli officer also stated that such orders could not
have been issued by a junior field commander; instead
they had to come from the highest level of the Israeli
army command. One Israeli soldier is quoted as saying,
“the staff command is responsible for issuing
these orders and is trying to manipulate the facts
and depict matters as isolated incidents. In fact,
they go much deeper than that”.
In addition, Israeli soldiers have admitted to
killing hundreds of women and children who waved
white flags, knowing full well that they were civilians
and posed no threat to them. They too confirmed that
their actions were carried out on the basis of higher

09-27993

orders. Haaretz
information.

also

published

that

confirmed

The international community must put an end to
the suffering of the besieged Palestinian people in
Gaza. It must not allow the occupying Power to
continue to hold the residents of Gaza hostage. The
lifting of the siege must not be linked to any other
issue, as it constitutes a violation of international law,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
international humanitarian law, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and numerous other instruments.
The perpetuation of the siege constitutes an act of
blackmail of the besieged that prevents them from
receiving food, medicine and shelter. The Israeli
authorities must also assume responsibility for the
rebuilding of Gaza, without using that as an instrument
of political blackmail to the detriment of those affected
and whose homes have been destroyed.
The situation in the West Bank is no less grave
than that which prevails in the Gaza Strip. A different
type of crime is being committed there, namely, that of
ethnic cleansing of Palestinians through a systematic
campaign to demolish their homes and prevent them
from rebuilding and to confiscate land through the
building of settlements.
That vicious campaign is focused in particular on
the city of Jerusalem, as has been confirmed by a
special report by the head of the European Union
mission in East Jerusalem that was published in The
Guardian. It describes the process by which Israel
demolishes Arab homes and prevents their inhabitants
from rebuilding or even gaining access to their
property. That serves not only to hamper the peace
process; it also obliterates any chance for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State.
We reiterate that the unbalanced and biased view
of some of the Council’s members has only served to
encourage Israel’s settlement activities. Moreover, the
Israeli Peace Now movement, which monitors
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, has stated that Israeli authorities plan to
build more than 733,000 housing units in the West
Bank. Of those, 15,000 have already been approved. If
the remaining units are also approved, the total number
of settlers would be double what it is now.

29

S/PV.6100

In addition, Israeli authorities have announced
that 1,700 homes were demolished in East Jerusalem
this year alone. That means the deliberate displacement
of 17,000 civilians. In addition, 35 outposts have been
established in other areas. Several houses have also
been demolished in the historic Selwan district of East
Jerusalem to build a city park, displacing 500
Palestinian civilians. That runs counter to the claims of
the Israeli authorities, which seek to portray what is
happening in Jerusalem as an isolated act committed by
extremist groupings while the truth is that the Israeli
Government is responsible for the targeting and
Judaization of the Old City of Jerusalem in violation of
international law, Security Council resolutions and its
obligations under the Road Map.
The Israeli Government’s practices affirm that
Israel’s only policy and only firm position for the past
six decades have been that it does not seek peace and
continues to expand settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories and attempts to terrorize and
humiliate the Palestinian people and bring them to their
knees. These practices show that those who rule Israel
are no more than a gang of criminals and that the
organizations and States of the international
community must make their position clear on the
crimes committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people. If they fail to do so, they should be considered
accomplices to these crimes and co-conspirators
against the occupied Palestinian people.
I now resume my duties as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by expressing my appreciation for the
excellent and valuable briefing presented by Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, which the Council is debating
today in order to provide the international impetus
necessary to achieve a peaceful settlement of the ArabIsraeli conflict, based on ending Israel’s illegal
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories since 1967 and the establishment of an
independent and viable Palestinian State.
This debate takes place at a critical juncture when
we are plagued by uncertainty about the future of peace
on the Palestinian track and the prospects for realizing
the two-State solution, which the Security Council has

30

often called for and firmly established through
successive resolutions, most recently resolution 1850
(2008), and at a time when the occupying Power
persists in its practices, particularly the unlawful
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the continuing siege of the Gaza Strip, and
the deprivation of its civilian population of the means
of living a decent human life.
The situation in the entire occupied Palestinian
territory remains extremely volatile, and the inability
of the international community to intervene to protect
the Palestinians under occupation exacerbates the
gravity of the situation. The Palestinian civilian
population of the Gaza Strip is struggling to cope with
the humanitarian disaster inflicted upon it by Israeli
military aggression and the 20-month siege, while the
Palestinian population in the West Bank also continues
to suffer as a result of Israel’s other grave violations of
international law and international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention. The
occupying Power continues to disregard its Road Map
obligations to freeze settlement activities and insists on
defying the international community’s repeated calls to
cease its illegal construction and expansion of
settlements and its construction of the illegitimate
separation wall throughout the West Bank, particularly
in and around East Jerusalem. The construction of this
wall seeks to alter the city’s legal status, political
character and demographic composition before the
beginning of final status negotiations.
The danger of such colonization is not limited to
mere violations of international law, United Nations
resolutions and Israeli commitments under the Road
Map; it also threatens to inflame tension and violence,
particularly in view of the proximity of the confiscated
Palestinian land in the Arab Sheikh Jarrah and
Al-Bustan neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem to the
Islamic holy places near there, in addition to the
documented danger of the violence of settlers who
have targeted the unarmed Palestinian population under
the protection of occupation forces.
Also in this connection, the occupying Power
uses military force to deny the Palestinian population
of East Jerusalem their legitimate right to celebrate
their city as the 2009 Capital of Arab Culture, and
continues to pursue illegal excavations inside and
around the city, threatening the sanctity of the holy
Islamic and Christian sites and violating their status as
universal heritage sites. The edifice of Al-Aqsa mosque

09-27993

S/PV.6100

is endangered as a result of the illegitimate excavations
taking place in Bab al-Maghariba, Salwan and Ma’man
Allah, the historic Islamic cemetery, with a view to
Judaizing the holy city and damaging the unity of the
West Bank territories by dissecting it into isolated
cantons, thereby undermining the prospects for
achieving the two-State solution and fundamentally
threatening regional peace and security.
The ongoing severe humanitarian crisis resulting
from the Israeli military operations in the Gaza Strip,
the lack of a lasting ceasefire and the failure to
maintain a calm and sustained opening of the crossing
points on the basis of the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access, as reiterated in resolution 1860
(2009), increases the gravity of the situation. Egypt
seeks the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) and resolution ES-10/18 adopted at the resumed
tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly, and has intensified its efforts and contacts to
establish calm, achieve a durable ceasefire and open
the Gaza crossing points, together with reaching an
agreement for the release of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees.
Egypt is also redoubling its efforts to achieve
Palestinian national reconciliation in order to form a
new Palestinian unity government under the leadership
of President Mahmoud Abbas, based on the Palestine
Liberation Organization commitments in favour of the
peace process, and to open the way for the immediate
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip, which, as resolution
1860 (2009) stressed, is an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied in 1967 and on which the
future Palestinian State should be established.
In this connection, Egypt, which hosted the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian
Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza early this
month, renews its call for Israel to ensure the
immediate, unconditional and sustained reopening of
its crossing points with the Gaza Strip in order to allow
for the movement of people, goods and reconstruction
materials into Gaza, put an end to the continuously
escalating humanitarian crisis, and rebuild what was
destroyed.
Undoubtedly, if justice is to be achieved, the
results of inquiries into the violations committed by
Israel during the recent military operations against the
Gaza Strip must be handled competently. In this
context, we look forward to the results of the

09-27993

investigation by the Board of Inquiry that was
dispatched by the Secretary-General to the Gaza Strip
to probe incidents of death or injury among United
Nations personnel or of damage to United Nations
premises during the Israeli aggression. We also look
forward to the results of the investigations of these
incidents by the committee established by the Human
Rights Council for that purpose as well as that of the
international fact-finding mission set up by the League
of Arab States. There is no doubt that these
investigations will bring the full truth to light and
clarify the events that occurred in violation of
international law and international humanitarian law.
As a result, the need to effectively address these
incidents will be imposed upon the international
community, and the Security Council in particular.
In the framework of addressing the conflict in the
Middle East, we cannot ignore or overlook the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) concerning
Lebanon. Egypt is gravely concerned about the failure
to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) as a result of
Israel’s continuing occupation of the Lebanese part of
the village of Ghajar, its non-cooperation with the
Secretary-General’s attempts to settle the situation in
the area of Shaba’a farms, and its persistent violations
of Lebanese airspace and territorial waters. This
behaviour has raised tensions that the Security Council
has to address as part of its efforts to achieve stability
in the Middle East.
The
international
community
has
clear
obligations regarding the maintenance of peace and
security in the Middle East. The obligation to respect
and to ensure respect for international law and
international humanitarian law in all circumstances
cannot be shirked. The situation in the occupied Arab
territories must not be an exception. Egypt believes
that the Security Council must intensify its efforts to
address the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory in all its aspects so as to compel the
occupying Power to end its violations and to respect its
commitments under international law and the
resolutions adopted by the Council, as this is the only
true way to achieve an environment conducive to real
peace.
Egypt also appreciates the effective way in which
the United States, under its new Administration, is
addressing the questions of peace in the Middle East
and a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue based
on the two-State solution, the principle of land for

31

S/PV.6100

peace, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008) and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which constitute a
comprehensive framework for a definitive solution.
That would allow a return to the path of peace and lead
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and an end to
the Israeli occupation of Syrian and Lebanese
territories. We look forward to the success of those
efforts towards a comprehensive settlement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.
There are so many war crimes against Gaza and
its residents for which Israel is responsible. The
irrefutable evidence includes the high number of
civilian casualties, targeted hospitals, destroyed
schools and property, and the recent testimony of
Israeli soldiers who committed atrocities in that war,
documented reports of which have been issued by
several bodies and non-governmental organizations, as
Mr. Pascoe mentioned. I shall return to that topic later.
All those actions are grave violations of
international humanitarian law — the rules that govern
conduct during war and its outcome, including
occupation. Worse still is the fact that Israel has
essentially violated the provisions of international law,
which governs the conditions for the use of force,
always under the pretext that the United Nations
Charter, specifically Article 51, gives Member States
the right to self-defence in the case of armed
aggression until the Security Council takes the
measures necessary to maintain international peace and
security. Since Article 51 is an exception to the general
rule provided by Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter,
which prohibits the threat or use of force, we must
interpret Article 51 in the narrowest sense. Contrary to
that, throughout its history Israel has tried to cover up
its aggressive acts by suggesting that Article 51
justifies them.
Allow me to recall how, in the past several years,
every time that the security situation has deteriorated
in Gaza, Israel has flooded the Council with a series of
letters, most recently at the beginning of this month, in
which it claims the right to exercise self-defence. It is
true that Israel withdrew its troops from the Gaza Strip

32

in 2005, but it has maintained complete control over all
its land and sea boundaries and airspace. Thus, from
the standpoint of international law, Gaza has remained
an occupied land.
Needless to say, the right to self-defence, which
Israel invokes to justify its use of force, contradicts the
reality of the occupation. That was the opinion of the
International Court of Justice in the case on the status
of the separation wall. The Court responded to Israel’s
claim of the right of self-defence by saying that the
right cannot also cover threats originating within,
rather than outside, the areas under its control.
The right to self-defence also requires the
existence of necessity and parity. Those two conditions
have never been fulfilled whenever Israel has used
force, as noted by the Secretary-General, who has
repeatedly condemned Israel’s excessive use of force.
In fact, international humanitarian law governs all
occupied areas. That is the principle established by
international law and set out in the Hague Conventions
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. When Israel
invokes the right to self-defence in Gaza and Lebanon
it is in fact engaging in “self-help” by cherrypicking its
own rights. Confusing those two principles will only
undermine the principle that created the need for an
Organization such as the United Nations and, prior to
that, the League of Nations. It takes us back to a world
controlled by the law of the jungle and the logic of
force.
Returning to international humanitarian law,
which must govern the relationship between Israel and
the areas that it occupies, the principles of that law
require the occupying Power to ensure the safety of the
population of those areas and the protection of their
property.
After briefly enumerating various frequent
violations by Israel in that regard, I shall only mention
a few examples of the testimony of Israeli soldiers who
were invited to Oranim College in Kiryat Tivon to
evaluate their experiences in the war in Gaza. As has
been mentioned, on 20 March 2009, the Israel
newspaper Haaretz published a complete transcript of
that testimony. For example, one soldier stated that
instructions to his unit were, upon entering any house,
to start shooting indiscriminately against anyone on the
grounds that anyone remaining in Gaza was a terrorist.
However, the residents of Gaza were never able to
leave because of the blockade. Another soldier reported

09-27993

S/PV.6100

how the soldiers wantonly destroyed property. Other
soldiers reported how snipers shot at civilians, women
and children, without any qualms.
Indeed, we have heard and read that the Israeli
army intends to investigate some of those practices, but
that does not alter the fact that this is a sample of the
conduct of soldiers in an army that the Israeli Defence
Minister, Ehud Barak, after reviewing those
testimonies, still described as “the most moral army in
the world”. As to the morality of that army’s members,
I refer to an article by Uri Blau, also published in
Haaretz on 20 March 2009, in which he described
certain drawings and logos that the soldiers had chosen
to put on their T-shirts after graduating from training
courses or returning from combat duty. Those included
an image of a child as a target in the sight of a gun with
the logo “The smaller they are — the harder it is”, or
drawing of a pregnant woman as a target in the sight of
a gun with the logo “One shot — two kills” or the
image of an Israeli soldier blowing up a mosque or a
Palestinian woman weeping at a cemetery. This is
merely a small sample of the morality that Mr. Barak
talks about.
While Israel was spreading destruction in Gaza, it
was also continuing to build the racist separation wall
and intensifying settlement activities in the West Bank.
As soon as military operations ceased in Gaza, tractors
and bulldozers returned to destroying Palestinian
houses in occupied Jerusalem in a clear policy aimed at
completing the Judaization of the city, and removing its
original inhabitants. This is another form of ethnic
cleansing carried out by Israel since its establishment.
Another aspect of this policy is the fact that Israel
has prevented Palestinians from celebrating Jerusalem
as a culture capital for the Arab world. It complements
the following statement made by Mr. Michel Sleiman,
President of Lebanon, during the debate on a culture of
peace in the General Assembly last November:
“Therefore, Jerusalem, the city of peace,
where believers in the monotheistic religions

come together, would not realize its historic
mission unless the injustice imposed on its sons
and on the Palestinian people as a whole is
redressed and the occupation is ended.”
(A/63/PV.46, p. 16)
In Lebanon, while my Government reaffirms its
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), Israel continues to procrastinate and to
avoid carrying out its obligations under that resolution.
It continues to occupy parts of southern Lebanon; to
commit daily violations of Lebanese airspace, always
under the pretext of self-defence — in yet another
example of its misinterpretation of Article 51 of the
Charter — and refuse to provide its maps for the
cluster bomb strikes that it carried out during its 2006
aggression. The Council knows full well that Israel has
not responded to the request of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon concerning a withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the Ghajar area. With regard to the
Shaba’a farms and the Kafr Shuba Hills, we appeal to
the Secretary-General to intensify diplomatic efforts to
find a solution that will ensure an Israeli withdrawal
from these areas.
In closing, we ask only that the Council ensure
the full implementation of its resolutions concerning
Lebanon, beginning with resolution 1701 (2006). We
ask only that the Council ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions concerning the
question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict so
that a comprehensive and just solution to this conflict
can be found. We have no doubt that the Council is
fully aware that every day that the implementation of
its resolutions is delayed will not only undermine its
credibility, but also increase the risk of crises in our
region and the threat to international peace and
security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are still a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m.

09-27993

33
