S/2014/305

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UN MIK
and developments related thereto from 21 January to 15 April 2014.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its regular engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, the communities in
Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues to be present
and to carry out its activities in line with the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of
24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes continue to work and cooperate closely with UNMIK.

II. Political developments
3.
During the reporting period, Belgrade and Pristina remained actively engaged
in the European Union-facilitated dialogue, albeit at a somewhat reduced pace
owing to general elections in Serbia and forthcoming legislative elections in
Kosovo. Encouraging progress was made, however, in the implementation of the
First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. The parties, led respectively by Prime Minister Ivica Dačić and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi, met in Brussels on 27 January, 12 February and 31 March,
together with the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton. The meetings focused, in particular, on the
implementation of the provisions of the Agreement concerning the structure and
staffing of the judiciary in northern Kosovo. The parties were steadily able to
narrow the differences in their respective positions and further progress in t his area

14-30884 (E)

080514

*1430884*

S/2014/305

was expected in the period ahead. Both sides also continued to engage within the
technical working groups established to support implementation.
4.
Progress was also made in the implementation of other areas of the Agreement,
including with regard to the integration of personnel of the Ministry of the Interior
of Serbia into the Kosovo police. By March 2014, some 284 former Serbian police
officers had completed induction processes and had been assigned to active duty in
northern Kosovo. Discussions concerning the establishment of the future
association/community of Serbian municipalities in Kosovo were expected to
resume after the establishment of the new Government in Belgrade.
5.
In addition to facilitating the ongoing dialogue between Belgrade a nd Pristina,
and following the positive decisions taken on 21 January by the European Council
to start accession negotiations with Serbia and a stabilization and association
process for Kosovo, the European Union remained engaged in Kosovo through the
continued deployment of EULEX. EULEX has been operating on the basis of
Council Joint Action 2008/124/CFSP and under the overall framework of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the authority of the United Nations. Since it
first deployed to Kosovo in 2008, EULEX has performed executive tasks in the
areas of the judiciary, customs and police. EULEX has been investigating serious,
organized and war crimes, as well as cases of corruption, and prosecuting suspected
perpetrators of such crimes. It has also contributed to building the capacity of the
Kosovo police, including through monitoring, mentoring and advisory activities.
6.
The current mandate of EULEX, which was extended by the Council of the
European Union in June 2012, ends on 14 June 2014. In the context of the strategic
review of EULEX, discussions were held during the reporting period on the role and
tasks of the Mission in the next mandate period. At the time of writing the present
report, those discussions had yet to be finalized and a formal decision on the
EULEX mandate had yet to be adopted. However, it is expected that EULEX will
continue to play a role in Kosovo and to focus on the remaining challenges in the
area of the rule of law, albeit in a more advisory and capacity-building capacity. At
the same time, EULEX will continue to perform certain executive functions and
retain jurisdiction over all ongoing cases. Kosovo judges will play an increased role
in the mixed panels of judges, except in special circumstances. Furthermore,
EULEX will continue to support the implementation of the agreements arising from
the European Union-facilitated dialogue, such as the agreement on the joint
management of crossing points and the Agreement of 19 Apri l 2013, in particular in
northern Kosovo.
7.
The European Union office is expected to play a greater role given that
Kosovo is engaged in a process of integration into Europe. The adjustments to be
made to EULEX will in part reflect the greater emphasis on European Union
integration instruments, in particular the stabilization and association agreement and
the structured dialogue in the area of the rule of law. It is also expected that a
modified EULEX will continue to perform its role until 14 June 2016, i n appropriate
cooperation and coordination with UNMIK, KFOR, OSCE and other international
actors.
8.
On 11 April, the President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, held separate meetings
with the leaders of the political parties of Kosovo represented in the Assemb ly,
including on the need for the EULEX mandate to be extended until June 2016.
Following those meetings, on 14 April, the President wrote a letter to the High

2/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in
which she expressed her support for the continued presence of EULEX in Kosovo
until 15 June 2016. The President also outlined the mandate and functions to be
carried out by EULEX in accordance with the expected outcome of the strategic
review of EULEX. Moreover, she referred to the establishment, if required, of a
specialist court within the Kosovo court system and a specialist prosecutor’s office
with seats within and outside Kosovo, for any trial and appellate proceedings arising
from the results of the work of the Special Investigative Task Force. On the same
day, the High Representative responded positively to the letter. She indicated that
EULEX would continue to assist Kosovo in strengthening an i ndependent,
multi-ethnic justice system and police service and contribute to its progress towards
further integration into the European Union.
9.
In Pristina, political discussions focused on the prospect of early elections for
the Assembly of Kosovo. In that context, the Assembly began to consider a draft law
on general elections with a view to holding early general elections under a revised
legislative framework. However, members of the Assembly representing the Kosovo
Serb community and other non-majority communities opposed certain provisions of
the draft law setting new voter eligibility criteria, which they believed would reduce
the number of Kosovo Serbs and members of other non-majority communities
entitled to vote. They did not attend the Assembly session in which the draft law
was adopted on first reading. On 11 April, in a letter addressed to the President of
Kosovo, the OSCE Mission in Kosovo highlighted a number of issues regarding the
draft law, including its incompatibility with other laws. OSCE also acknowledged
that the changes to the voter eligibility criteria established a more restrictive regime,
which might discourage or complicate participation in the elections by non -majority
voters.
10. On 6 March, the Kosovo government approved recommendations resulting
from a two-year strategic security sector review. Some of the recommendations, if
implemented, would require amendments to the Constitution and would therefore
have to be approved by two thirds of the Kosovo Assembly (including two thirds of
the minority representatives). Among the recommendations endorsed by the Kosovo
government is that of transforming the Kosovo security force into Kosovo armed
forces. The government submitted draft constitutional amendments on the matter to
the Assembly that were subsequently upheld by the Kosovo constitutional court.
KFOR was not involved at any stage of the survey or in drafting the
recommendations. KFOR indicated that making changes to the mandate, structure
and functioning of the security force might lead to a discussion among States
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), within the North
Atlantic Council, on the impact of such changes on the provision by NATO of
continued support to Kosovo. Meanwhile, the Serbian authorities and numerous
Kosovo Serb representatives expressed serious reservations ab out the proposed
transformation of the security force into armed forces, with Serbian officials
viewing it as a violation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
11. On 16 March, early parliamentary elections were held in Serbia, with OSCE
conducting the collection of votes by eligible voters in Kosovo. OSCE collected
ballots at 10 collection centres and 15 branches throughout Kosovo, deploying some
400 international staff. The Kosovo police, EULEX and KFOR provided security.
The electoral and security procedures were conducted professionally without major
incidents or problems.

14-30884

3/21

S/2014/305

III. Northern Kosovo
12. The main focus in northern Kosovo continued to be on the formation of
municipal authorities following the local elections held in November and December
2013. As previously reported, the newly elected mayors and representatives of
municipal assemblies in the north were sworn in on 11 January, with the exception
of the mayor-elect of North Mitrovica, who announced his decision not to take
office and work under the Kosovo legal framework. Thus, a new mayoral election
was held in the municipality of North Mitrovica on 23 February, with OSCE
assistance. It was won in the first round by Serbian Civic Initiati ve candidate Goran
Rakić.
13. Municipal assembly inaugural sessions took place on 10 February. Following
the North Mitrovica election on 23 February, the four municipalities began working
on their municipal statutes, which were completed on 12 March. The M inistry of
Local Government and Administration of Kosovo, which reviewed the draft statutes,
found, however, that some of the statutes failed to comply with relevant Kosovo
legislation and requested their amendment by the municipal authorities. Talks were
held to overcome the differences.
14. On 27 January, Oliver Ivanović, a prominent Kosovo Serb political leader and
a mayoral candidate for North Mitrovica, was detained for his alleged involvement
in war crimes committed in 1999 and 2000. The arrest triggered protests from
Belgrade and many local Kosovo Serbs and demands for his release until trial. Early
in March, following requests from the Serbian authorities and the Kosovo Serb
community, Mr. Ivanović was transferred from Pristina to a detention facility in
North Mitrovica. On 4 February, in connection with the same charges, EULEX
detained Dragoljub Delibašić, a former official of the Ministry of the Interior of
Serbia in northern Kosovo.
15. On 4 March, Kosovo police raided the homes of several local Kosovo Serb
police officers and offices hosting a Belgrade-sponsored court, the Directorate for
Urban Land and the medical insurance bureau in the Kosovo Serb majority
municipality of Shtërpcë/Štrpce. As a result, four Kosovo Serb police officers and
an employee of a local forestry service were detained. On the same day, several
hundred Kosovo Serb residents of Shtërpcë/Štrpce, joined by municipal assembly
members, staged a peaceful protest against the actions of the Kosovo police.
16. During the reporting period, entry into Kosovo was repeat edly denied to
Serbian officials, who protested the decisions of Pristina as a violation of agreed
procedures. On 5 March, several hundred people attended a rally in North Mitrovica
organized by the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia in the lead -up to the Serbian
parliamentary elections on 16 March. The party’s president, former Prime Minister
of Serbia Vojislav Koštunica, however, was prevented from entering Kosovo by the
Kosovo police. In reaction, around 50 Kosovo Serbs blocked the road to Gate 1 for
about two hours.
17. On 6 March, the four northern Kosovo municipal assemblies held an
extraordinary joint session in Zveçan/Zvečan. They expressed concern at the
restrictions imposed on visits to Kosovo by Serbian officials, police actions in
Shtërpcë/Štrpce (mentioned above) and the Kosovo government’s decision
regarding the establishment of the Kosovo armed forces, and called for the release
of detained Kosovo Serbs pending trial.

4/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

18. On 12 March, in the municipality of Zubin Potok, a group of armed pers ons
forcibly entered a local police station and released a Kosovo Serb who had been
arrested earlier that day for involvement in offences against EULEX. A grenade
explosion was reported near the police station, but no casualties. The acting police
station commander was suspended following the incident but reinstated a few days
later, after strong protests were lodged by the four northern Kosovo municipal
assemblies against his suspension.
19. The arrest on 25 March of two defence counsels involved in defe nding a
number of Kosovo Serbs on charges of obstruction of evidence triggered sharp
reactions in the north. On the same day, about 600 people blocked the main road in
the village of Rudarëi Madh/Veliko Rudare, Zveçan/Zvečan municipality, to protest
the arrests, while northern Kosovo Serb leaders temporarily suspended cooperation
with EULEX, which was responsible for the arrests. Following the arrest on
11 April of a Kosovo Serb in connection with the murder of a Kosovo police officer
in July 2011 and the attack on the police convoy in which he was travelling,
northern leaders again expressed their unwillingness to cooperate with EULEX.
Also to protest the arrest, about 100 Kosovo Serbs blocked the main Mitrovica Zubin Potok road to all traffic for five hours.
20. On 31 March, in Zubin Potok, a Kosovo police vehicle carrying three officers
was ambushed and fired upon near the main road to Gate 31. The officers sustained
non-life-threatening injuries and were transported to a hospital in North Mitrovica.
Both Serbian and Kosovo leaders strongly condemned the attack.
21. At the request of the European Union, the United Nations Development
Coordinator presented the findings of the recent evaluation by the United Nations
Development Programme on aid effectiveness in the northern municipalities of
Kosovo to a meeting of the donor coordination forum referred to as “European
Union plus”. The study recommends, inter alia, greater collective focus by donors
on long-term systemic factors constraining development in the north. The United
Nations team in Kosovo is engaged with international and local actors to encourage
efficiency and collective leveraging of resources.

IV. Security
22. Aside from the aforementioned incidents, the security situation in Kosovo
remained generally stable. Public protests, primarily related to socioeconomic
issues, were frequent but mainly peaceful. On 28 January, students of the University
of Pristina held a protest demanding the resignation of the rector over allegations of
academic fraud. The protests, which continued until 7 February, included violent
confrontations with the police, following which the rector resigned.
23. On 9 April, international attention was drawn to the killing of a 22 -year-old
Kosovo Albanian in Fallujah, Iraq. According to local authorities, to date eight
Kosovo Albanians have been killed in the conflicts in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic. Despite strong condemnation of such participation in foreign conflicts by
numerous local and international actors, including the Islamic community of
Kosovo, the matter continues to be of concern. In response, the Kosovo authorities
have undertaken to establish clear legislation prohibiting such participation.

14-30884

5/21

S/2014/305

24. The crime rate continued to decline, except in Pejë/Peć, where incidents
affecting Kosovo Serbs, including returnees, continued to be reported. In Istog/Istok
municipality, incidents also continued to be reported at a comparatively higher level,
the majority involving thefts, arsons and violations of property rights. Uninhabited
houses owned by Kosovo Serbs continued to be the targets of burglaries. Some
properties of the Serbian Orthodox Church and Serbian Orthodox graveyards were
vandalized. The Kosovo police response to crimes affecting ethnic minorities
continued to improve. Increased police patrols in the ethnically mixed areas of
Klinë/Klina municipality were especially welcomed by the local Serb population.

V. Rule of law
25. During the reporting period, UNMIK continued to monitor activities and
exercise certain responsibilities in the area of the rule of law and to engage in
technical cooperation with relevant Serbian authorities and Kosovo institutions.
UNMIK continued to facilitate requests for mutual legal assistance from countries
that did not recognize Kosovo. It also continued to provide document certification
services to Kosovo residents and at the request of non-recognizing States, primarily
for the certification of civil status, education and pension documents, for a total of
680 such documents.
26. UNMIK continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its
member States. During the reporting period, UNMIK received nine requests for
international wanted notices and issued five INTERPOL Red Notices.
27. On 21 January, the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council approved a strategic plan for
inter-institutional cooperation in the fight against organized crime and corruption.
The Office of the Chief Prosecutor appointed an anti-corruption national coordinator
who will provide periodic progress reports. The intention is to increase the
accountability of prosecutors and the prosecutorial system in the fight against
corruption.
28. A total of 1,712 persons were still listed as missing from the Kosovo conflict.
UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress on the issue of missing
persons. On 11 February, the thirty-fifth meeting of the Working Group on Missing
Persons was held in Belgrade under the chairmanship of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and with the participation of representatives of
Belgrade and Pristina and of UNMIK. Another meeting of the Working Group was
held on 7 April, in Pristina; that meeting was devoted to discussing plans for the
exhumation of remains from a possible mass grave site in Rudnica quarry in the
municipality of Raška, Serbia. DNA analysis of two remains unearthed in December
2013 confirmed that the individuals were Kosovo Albanians killed during the
conflict. At the 7 April meeting, it was announced that work at the site would begin
that day. International and local observers from Kosovo will participate in the work
alongside Serbian government forensic experts and workers. DNA testing will be
conducted by the International Commission on Missing Persons at its laboratory in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Working Group agreed that every effort must be made
to expedite the work at the site and to inform affected family members.

6/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

VI. Returns and communities
29. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
registered the voluntary return to Kosovo during January, February and March of
50 displaced persons, 29 of whom were Kosovo Serbs, 9 were Kosovo Gora nis and
12 were from the Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian communities. The total
number of voluntary returns by members of minority communities since 2000 is
25,193. UNHCR assisted 261 individuals in obtaining personal or civil documents
during January and February.
30. Additional efforts were made to address the low rate of voluntary return and
reintegration of displaced persons. On 5 February, the Kosovo government approved
a strategy for communities and returns for 2014-2018. In the strategy, housing
construction, local security, freedom of movement, access to public services and
employment opportunities were identified as priorities. According to UNHCR, an
increase was observed in the number of internally displaced persons seeking
information and availing themselves of the two main vehicles for promoting
voluntary returns: the “go-and-see” and the “go-and-inform” visits.
31. At the municipal level, the leadership of Gjakovë/Ðakovica, Istog/Istok,
Klinë/Klina and Pejë/Peć municipalities facilitated the allocation of land for Kosovo
Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian displaced persons living in
Montenegro. Displaced Serbs continued to face difficulties in trying to visit
properties and gravesites in Gjakovë/Ðakovica and calls were made from several
international quarters for the mayor to make greater efforts to promote tolerance and
reconciliation.
32. Following the local elections held in Kosovo in November 2013, most
municipalities south of the Ibar/Ibër river complied with the statutory requiremen t to
appoint representatives of minority communities as officers to key positions,
including the positions of deputy mayor, chairperson and deputy chairperson of
municipal assemblies and municipal director. Municipalities in the south also
reconstituted the mandatory policy and finance committees and the communities
committees, as well as the municipal community safety councils.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
33. The Implementation Monitoring Council, established by the Law on Special
Protective Zones, held two meetings during the reporting period. Discussions
focused on illegal constructions within special protective zones and property issues.
In February, the Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning issued
operational guidelines for the implementation of the Law.
34. Some progress was made in the implementation of the Law on the Historic
Centre of Prizren. In February, the Council on Cultural Heritage of Prizren reviewed
requests for the restoration of buildings in the special protective zone. In March, the
Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning established a task force on the
historic centre of Prizren to survey illegal constructions and prepare appropriate
responses. The municipality of Rahovec/Orahovac, however, has not yet be gun to
implement the Law on the Village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika Hoča or made any
progress in the establishment of the council of the village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika
Hoča, as mandated by law.

14-30884

7/21

S/2014/305

35. During the reporting period, 18 incidents targeting property of the Serbian
Orthodox Church were recorded. On 7 February, two graves were desecrated in the
Serbian
Orthodox
cemetery in
the
village
of Berivojcë/Berivojce,
Kamenicë/Kamenica municipality. A tombstone in the Serbian Orthodox cemetery in
the village of Binçë/Binać, Viti/Vitina municipality, and three tombstones in
Gjakovë/Đakovica town were damaged, on 15 February and 9 April respectively.
The mayors of Kamenicë/Kamenica and Viti/Vitina municipalities issued strong
public condemnations in each of those incidents and demanded swift investigations.
Two gravestones and the door of the Serbian Orthodox cemetery in Fushë
Kosovo/Kosovo Polje were also damaged, on 12 April. On 22 February, offensive
graffiti was sprayed on the front of the perimeter wall of the Hol y Virgin Serbian
Orthodox Church in Gjakovë/Ðakovica town. Municipal authorities condemned the
incident.
36. In a positive development, the Serbian Orthodox Church appointed
representatives to the municipal community safety councils in Pejë/Peć,
Deçan/Dečani and Klinë/Klina municipalities. A Serbian Orthodox priest was
nominated for membership in the municipal community safety council of
Rahovec/Orahovac.

VIII. Human rights
37. UNMIK, together with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, continued to work within the Human Rights International
Contact Group and its subgroups on property rights and on security incidents
affecting non-majority communities, bringing together international actors in
Kosovo for the promotion and protection of human rights. The Group reviewed,
among other things, the draft human rights strategy of Kos ovo, amendments to the
Law on the Ombudsperson, the draft laws on gender equality and
anti-discrimination and legislation on children’s rights.
38. The European Centre for Minority Issues and the Office of the Language
Commissioner of Kosovo completed an assessment of language rights in the
Assembly of Kosovo. Issues identified during the assessment included limited
human, financial and technical resources for language services, poor implementation
of proofreading and language standardization practices and the inadequacy of
mechanisms for controlling the quality of translations, including into Serbian, in the
promulgation of new laws.
39. Several events were held on the protection and promotion of women’s rights,
including in connection with International Women’s Day on 8 March. The United
Nations Children’s Fund, in a study on domestic and gender-based violence in three
Kosovo municipalities launched on 13 February, indicated that physical violence
remained the most frequent type of violence and that it was experienced by 17.3 per
cent of women and 50.2 per cent of children.
40. On 7 March, the President of Kosovo officially launched a national council for
the survivors of sexual violence related to the war with the objective of increasing
overall public awareness of the issue. Subsequently, on 20 March, the Kosovo
Assembly adopted amendments to the Law on the Status and the Rights of the
Martyrs, Invalids, Veterans, Members of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Sexual
Violence Victims of the War, Civilian Victims and their Families, intended to

8/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

recognize and protect survivors of sexual violence. Concerns were raised, however,
that the legislation still failed to address the experiences of non -majority victims of
such violence.

IX. Observations
41. I note with appreciation that Belgrade and Pristina have continued to
participate actively in the European Union-facilitated dialogue, albeit at a somewhat
slower pace, largely owing to the general elections in Serbia and the forthcoming
legislative elections in Kosovo. It remains essential for progress towards the full
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013 to continue apace, in line with the implementation
plan of 22 May 2013.
42. A few challenges remain with regard to the implementation of certain
provisions of the Agreement, in particular those relating to the establishment of the
association/community of Serbian municipalities in Kosovo. I encourage both sides
to continue to make efforts towards the full and faithful implementation of the
Agreement and to address the establishment of the above-mentioned
association/community in a spirit of openness and goodwill. The challenges to the
full implementation of the Agreement should not, however, over shadow the
remarkable progress that has been achieved since the start of the dialogue between
the prime ministers in October 2012. I welcome, in particular, the agreement
reached by the parties during the reporting period on remaining technical issues
concerning the integration of Serbian parallel judicial institutions into the legal
framework of Kosovo. I look forward to a final agreement on the integration of the
judiciary at the next high-level meeting within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue.
43. I also welcome the steps taken towards the full establishment of the new
municipal governments in northern Kosovo, following the holding of successful
local elections in 2013. I commend leaders in the north, as well as in Belgrade and
Pristina, for stepping up to face the delicate challenges that this has entailed.
44. Looking ahead, continued engagement by the European Union remains critical
to achieving further progress in the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, as does the support provided by the international community at large. At
the same time, active engagement by Belgrade and Pristina in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue is essential to attaining their shared objective of a closer
association with European Union institutions. In this respect, I note that Serbia
officially started European Union accession talks in Brussels on 21 January. In
parallel, Kosovo has begun its negotiations on a stabilization and association
agreement with the European Union. As noted in my previous report, the ongoing
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina has been instrumental to their recent
progress on the path to European integration.
45. As highlighted above and in annex I to the present report, a strategic review of
EULEX has nearly been finalized, laying out the blueprint for adjusting EULEX
operations to take account of the progress achieved in implementing rule of
law-related agreements on the ground. I also take note of the importance of a range
of European Union instruments to be applied in the context of talks on a future
stabilization and association agreement for Kosovo and, accordingly, the increasing

14-30884

9/21

S/2014/305

roles in this area for the European Union Office in Kosovo. That said, strengthening
rule of law institutions remains a long-term challenge and improving performance in
this area will remain an essential concern for both Kosovo and regional and
international communities. In this regard, I note that the President of Kosovo has
expressed, both publicly and in her letter dated 14 April to the High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, the support of
Kosovo for the continued deployment of EULEX, including in assisting with the
implementation of the agreements arising from the European U nion-facilitated
dialogue.
46. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Farid Zarif, for his dynamic and
effective leadership and all the staff of UNMIK for their dedication in carrying out
the tasks of the Mission. I extend my gratitude to our long -standing partners on the
ground, including the European Union, EULEX, KFOR and OSCE, and all members
of the United Nations family in Kosovo, for their contributions to peace, stability
and development, and for their close cooperation with UNMIK.

10/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo
(covering the period from 21 January to 15 April 2014)
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake monitoring, mentoring and advising activities in the area of the rule of
law and to implement its executive functions according to its mandate. In terms of
the agreements reached within the European Union-facilitated dialogue on the
normalization of relations between Pristina and Belgrade, EULEX continued to
facilitate their implementation in the rule of law sector. The operational capabilities
of the Kosovo police in northern Kosovo increased significantly with the integration
of 284 former officers of the Ministry of the Interior of Serbia. The collection of
revenues at the northern crossing points continued without major problems, while
the project on the copying and certification of civil registry books was finalized on
31 March.
Concerning the security set-up during municipal elections, EULEX supported
the Kosovo police through the provision of monitoring, mentoring and advisory
assistance during the entire process. The police responded to incidents
professionally and quickly.
EULEX continued to strengthen the rule of law throughout Kosovo, including
by making a number of arrests in northern Kosovo. Oliver Ivanović, Dragoljub
Delibašić (for war crimes) and Milovan Vlašković (for murder) were arrested at the
beginning of the year and Radovan Radić and Nebojša Vujačić were arrested in
April. A number of indictments and verdicts were pronounced in organized crime
and corruption cases. Pursuant to its mandate, the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force continued to investigate the allegations contained in the report by
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty on the inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo.
The States members of the European Union discussed the strategic review of
EULEX that was conducted by the European External Action Service. In the
strategic review it was envisaged that EULEX would continue to implement its
Kosovo-wide mandate, focusing on strategic leadership-level capacity-building, the
implementation of agreements arising from the European Union -facilitated dialogue
and security, in particular in northern Kosovo.

2.

EULEX activities, January to April 2014
War crimes
On 28 January, at the request of an international prosecutor from the Special
Prosecution Office of Kosovo, an international judge from Mitrovica Basic Court

14-30884

11/21

S/2014/305

ordered the detention on remand of Oliver Ivanović, a candidate in the repeat
mayoral elections held in Mitrovica North on 23 February suspected of war crimes
and incitement to commit aggravated murder. The previous day, Ivanović had
voluntarily presented himself at the police station i n Mitrovica North. On 7 March,
an international judge issued an order for his transfer from the detention centre in
Pristina to the detention centre in Mitrovica.
In the same case, on 4 February, Dragoljub Delibašić, former Mitrovica police
Commander, presented himself to the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo and was
subsequently arrested; detention on remand was ordered. Delibašić is charged with,
inter alia, incitement to aggravated murder committed with Oliver Ivanović. On
24 March, an international judge issued an order for the transfer of Delibašić to the
detention centre in Mitrovica. Also in relation to the same case, on 15 April Nebojša
Vujačić was arrested on charges of, inter alia, aggravated murder.
On 12 February, a mixed panel of local and international judges at Pristina
Basic Court convicted Ivan Radivojević of war crimes committed in Fushë
Kosovo/Kosovo Polje in 1999 and sentenced him to eight years of imprisonment.
On 4 March, a panel of one local and two international judges at the Co urt of
Appeals granted the appeal of an international prosecutor against the acquittal of all
seven defendants in the case Ejup Kabashi et al. The defendants had been acquitted
on 1 February 2013 by a panel consisting mainly of local judges. The Court of
Appeals found two defendants guilty of war crimes and sentenced them to five years
of imprisonment each while the other five defendants were sentenced to six months
of imprisonment each (suspended for one year) for providing assistance to
perpetrators after the commission of criminal offences.
On 15 April, the main trial in the case against Sylejman Selimi and three other
defendants accused of war crimes against the civilian population started in
Mitrovica Basic Court.
Organized crime and corruption
On 21 January, a panel of one local and two international judges started the
main trial against 10 defendants accused of issuing unlawful legal decisions at
Pristina Basic Court. The case, involving eight local judges and two lawyers, relates
to allegations that socially owned land was fraudulently conveyed to private owners.
On 31 January, an indictment was filed against two persons for extortion and
trading in influence in a case led by international and local prosecutors from the
basic prosecution office in Pristina. The defendants were suspected of having
threatened to kill a person in order to compel that person to provide them with
€30,000 or a luxury car for the purpose of exerting improper influence over
municipal decision-making in order to change the status of a piece of land.
On 5 February, EULEX and the Kosovo police, under the supervision of an
international prosecutor, conducted an arrest-and-search operation against
10 defendants allegedly involved in an organized crime group suspected of
committing, inter alia, fraud against the Italian Embassy in Pristina through the
unlawful procurement of Schengen visas. One of the defendants, Ukë Rugova, the
son of the late President of Kosovo Ibrahim Rugova, is a member of the Assembly
of Kosovo. On 14 March, a panel of one international judge and two local judges at

12/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

the Court of Appeals confirmed a ruling to keep the defendants in detention on
remand and under house arrest.
On 19 February, an international prosecutor of the Special Prosecution Office
of Kosovo filed an indictment against the former Minister of Transport and
Telecommunications, Fatmir Limaj, and four others accused of procurement-related
offences. a The defendants were charged with, inter alia, involvement in organized
crime and abuse of official position or authority.
On 11 March, a panel of one local and two international judges at Pristin a
Basic Court sentenced Arben Veseli to 10 years of imprisonment for having
organized and participated in trafficking in heroin from Kosovo to Germany in
2012.
On 13 March, a mixed panel of local and international judges at Prizren Basic
Court found all six defendants in the “Prizren mayor” case guilty of abuse of official
position or authority. The mayor was sentenced to a two -year suspended prison
sentence and prohibited from exercising functions in the public administration or
public service for 30 months. His co-defendants received suspended sentences of
between 5 and 18 months.
On 13 March, a mixed panel of local and international judges at Pristina Basic
Court sentenced Sulejman Topuzi to four years of imprisonment for the
unauthorized purchase, possession, distribution and sale of dangerous narcotic
substances and for involvement in organized crime in Kosovo, Albania and several
western European countries in 2009.
On 18 March, in an operation against organized crime and the smuggling of
migrants carried out in cooperation with Swiss law enforcement agencies that
carried out simultaneous operations in Switzerland, the Kosovo border police
arrested three defendants and searched four properties. The investigation is now led
by an international prosecutor of the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo. On
20 March, an international judge at Pristina Basic Court ordered that the defendants
be detained on remand.
On 21 March, two people were killed and six wounded in Pejë/Peć. The
homicides were thought to have been related to a long-standing feud between two
families. The Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo has taken over the investigation
into the case, which deals with the criminal offences of, inter alia, involvement in
organized crime and aggravated murder.
On 2 April, EULEX police, assisted by the Kosovo police, arrested three
defendants and conducted searches at several locations in the regions of Pristina and
Pejë/Peć. The ongoing investigation into organized crime and extortion related to
gaming shops and casinos throughout Kosovo is led by an international prosecutor
from the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo.
On 6 April, following an arrest by the Kosovo police on 3 April, a EULEX
judge at Pristina Basic Court ordered the detention on remand of two defendants in
the “Pristina municipality” case. A third defendant was ordered to report regularly to
the police station and prohibited from leaving Kosovo. The application for det ention
__________________
a An indictment was filed for comparable criminal activities against the same group in another

case, on 16 November 2012. A decision is still pending in the Court of Appeals.

14-30884

13/21

S/2014/305

on remand for the other eight defendants was rejected. Ten of the defendants, all
Pristina municipality officials, were being investigated for their involvement in an
organized crime group, in conjunction with the misuse of official position or
authority. The eleventh defendant was being investigated for falsifying documents.
On 8 April, in a retrial, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at
Pejë/Peć Basic Court sentenced Isa Salihi, a former employee of the Guarantee Fund
of Kosovo, to two years of imprisonment for having taken advantage of his office or
official authority to assist former judge Kolë Puka in issuing unlawful judicial
decisions and thereby acquiring a benefit for himself or another person. In addition,
Salihi was prohibited from holding public office for two years after being released
from detention.
Other cases
On 3 February, Milovan Vlašković was arrested on suspicion of involvement
in the killing of Kosovo police officer Enver Zymberi in 2011. On 4 February,
Vlašković was released on bail after an assessment of the procedural risks. On
3 April, an international judge rejected an application for detention on remand for
Vlašković and ordered his release on bail.
On 19 February, three persons were arrested and their houses searched because
they were suspected of having stolen a vehicle of the Serbia-run post office; the
robbery occurred on the way from Zvečan/Zveçan to Zubin Potok in August 2013.
The investigation was being conducted by EULEX Task Force Mitrovica in
cooperation with the Mitrovica border police and the Kosovo police.
On 3 March, a local judge at Pristina Basic Court sentenced three defendants
to one year of imprisonment each (suspended for two years). The three accused and
a group of unknown persons forcefully prevented and hindered the holding of a
public meeting of the non-governmental organization Kosovo 2.0. The case was
investigated by the Kosovo police and led by a mixed team of one local and one
international prosecutor.
On 14 March, a panel of three local judges at Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court
sentenced a Ukrainian citizen to three years of imprisonment for facilitating
prostitution and money-laundering while another defendant was sentenced to two
years of imprisonment. The case was investigated by the Kosovo police and led by
one local and one international prosecutor. A third defendant, als o a Ukrainian
citizen, pleaded guilty to the same charges in January 2014 and was sentenced to
18 months of imprisonment.
The Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo took over an investigation involving
five persons in Štrpce/Shtërpcë, four of whom were Koso vo Serb police officers
suspected of revealing official secrets, illegally possessing weapons and misusing
authority. On 14 March, an international judge ordered four of the defendants to
report to the Štrpce/Shtërpcë police station on a weekly basis.
On 25 March, EULEX Task Force Mitrovica arrested the lawyers of Žarko
Veselinović (who is being detained on remand for the attempted murder of two
members of the Kosovo police Special Operations Unit) on suspicion of having
caused obstructions in respect of evidence or official proceedings. On 3 April, a
panel of one local judge and two international judges of the Court of Appeals
ordered both defendants to be placed under house arrest.

14/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

On 11 April, EULEX executed an international warrant issued by INTERPOL
for the arrest of Radovan Radić in Zupče/Zupç, northern Kosovo. The arrest warrant
had been requested by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo in 2011. The arrest was conducted as part of an ongoing investigation into
the killing of Kosovo police officer Enver Zymberi on 26 July 2011 and the attack
on the police convoy in which he was travelling at the time of his murder.
Special Investigative Task Force
The allegations made in the January 2011 report authored by Council of
Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo” continued to be investigated by the
Special Investigative Task Force. The allegations included abduction, detention,
mistreatment, killing, as well as organ harvesting and trafficking in Kosovo.
Investigative and operational activities continued apace, while cooperation
with judicial and law enforcement authorities in the region and beyond remained
fruitful. The Task Force continued to engage with injured parties, victim advocacy
groups and individuals in order to gather information useful for the investigation.
The Lead Prosecutor, Clint Williamson, continued to work with relevant
Governments in the European Union and beyond to ensure that the Task Forc e’s
investigation is independent, impartial and professional and can be completed in the
coming months. During the reporting period, Mr. Williamson and members of his
office travelled to Europe and North America, as well as Kosovo, to hold talks with
governmental agencies on important issues related to the Task Force’s work.
In Kosovo, Mr. Williamson met the Minister of Justice, Hajredin Kuçi, and
reiterated his determination to conduct an impartial and independent investigation
that uncovers the whole truth behind the serious allegations contained in the
2011 Council of Europe report. Mr. Williamson underlined that the Task Force had
been empowered to investigate and, if warranted, prosecute individuals personally
responsible for crimes alleged in the report. He emphasized that the investigative
work was still under way and that it was premature to prejudge its outcome.
Mr. Williamson also met the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Farid
Zarif, the European Union Special Representative and He ad of the European Union
Office in Kosovo, Samuel Žbogar, and the EULEX Head of Mission, Berndt
Borchardt, in order to discuss cooperation with the Task Force.
Throughout the reporting period, engagement also continued with officials at
the most senior levels of the European Union in order to ensure continuing support
for the Task Force and, in anticipation of the conclusion of the investigation, to
prepare a viable adjudicative mechanism should an indictment be warranted.
Property rights
In the area of civil justice, EULEX commissioners of the Kosovo Property
Claims Commission adjudicated 1,048 cases (mainly inter-ethnic property claims)
during the reporting period. In total, 42,696 claims were lodged with the Kosovo
Property Agency; for only 1,214 claims is a decision still pending.
From 21 January to 15 April, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel in
the Supreme Court adjudicated 57 appeals. A total of 62 appeals were filed against

14-30884

15/21

S/2014/305

the decisions of the Kosovo Property Claims Commission during the reporting
period.
During the reporting period, the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court
rendered 175 decisions in trial panel cases. The Special Chamber also closed
598 worker list cases and finalized 63 cases at the level of the Kosovo Property
Agency Appeals Panel.
Legislation and other legal issues
On 20 March, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted the law amending and
supplementing the Law on Declaration, Origin and Control of the Property of Senior
Public Officials and on Declaration, Origin and Control of Gifts of all Public
Officials. The adoption of the law is a positive step towards fighting corruption in
Kosovo. Also on 20 March, the Assembly adopted the law amending and
supplementing the Law on Public Procurement in Kosovo (No. 04/L -042). The aim
of the law is to support local companies in tendering procedures. On 14 March, the
Assembly adopted the law amending and supplementing the Law on the Special
Chamber of the Supreme Court of Kosovo on Privatization Agency-Related Matters
(No. 04/L-033). The amended law assigns the responsibility for translating claims
and accompanying documents to the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court.
Other key issues
EULEX provided extensive monitoring, mentoring and advisory assistance in
the process of drafting regulations on recruitment and appointment to the Kosovo
Judicial Council and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council. In March, the Kosovo
Prosecutorial Council approved a new regulation on the selection and appointment
of the Chief State Prosecutor (the incumbent retires in August 2014). The selection
process is under way; nine candidates have applied for the post.
In February, the Kosovo Judicial Council and the Kosovo Prosecutorial
Council moved forward with the establishment of a justice academy by finalizing
and harmonizing the corresponding law with the package of laws related to the
Kosovo judiciary.
In addition, EULEX advised the Kosovo police during the planning,
operational and review phases of the repeat mayoral elections in North Mitrovica.
The plans and resources allocated by the Kosovo police were adequate and its
reaction to incidents were prompt, professional and proportionate.
EULEX carried out a questionnaire among staff of the Kosovo Correctional
Service to identify potential cases of corruption. The exercise was conducted on
behalf of the Anti-Corruption Task Force, which was set up by the Ministry of
Justice to look into the findings on the Service in the 2013 progress report of the
European Commission.
EULEX interacted with the Professional Standards Department of the Kosovo
police and supported a cooperative relationship between the police and the Kosovo
Police Inspectorate in order to ensure proper execution of Inspectorate
recommendations.
In addition, EULEX supported preparations for handing over responsibility for
the close protection of Bishop Teodosije to the Kosovo police, after two consecutive

16/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

threat assessments had found that the threat level was not sufficient to justify further
close protection by the mission. A road map was drafted to guarantee a proper
handover process to a Kosovo police close protection unit. Further consultations
were held with the Bishop in order to meet his concerns. EULEX withdrew its close
protection assistance on 28 February.
Following a site assessment at the suspected mass grave in Raška, Serbia,
conducted in October and December 2013 by EULEX experts at the Department of
Forensic Medicine under the authority and by order of the Serbian War Crimes
Deputy Prosecutor, bone sampling to identify the DNA o f the discovered remains
took place on 5 February 2014. The tested remains were identified as belonging to
Kosovo Albanian victims. The demolition of the building located at the site began
on 10 April. In order to examine the whole area, exploratory excava tions are to be
conducted around the area under the building and beyond. It is foreseen that the
forensic phase will begin on 22 or 23 April with the full participation of EULEX
forensic experts.
On 26 March, the remains of 46 individuals, which had been handed over to
their families by EULEX experts at the Department of Forensic Medicine, were
buried. On 24 March, 27 individuals were handed over to families from
Suharekë/Suva Reka, while the following day families from the village of Krusha e
Vogël/Mala Kruša received the remains of 19 individuals.
The north
The arrest of Oliver Ivanović on 27 January sparked reactions from the local
population and protests against his arrest were held on 27 and 30 January. In
addition, Kosovo Serb political leaders made public statements in his support.
On 23 February, during the repeat mayoral elections in North Mitrovica,
EULEX fulfilled its role as second responder and contributed towards a peaceful
environment during the election process. Excellent coordination with the other
security providers (the Kosovo police and the Kosovo Force) and OSCE facilitated
the holding of the elections.
On 12 March, a group of approximately 50 persons stormed the police station
in Zubin Potok and unlawfully released a suspect who had been detained on
suspicion of having committed serious criminal offences against EULEX personnel
and Kosovo police officers. The incident was preceded by a protest of
approximately 120 people outside the police station. The suspect remains at large.
In the aftermath of these events, the Acting Station Commander in Zubin Potok
was placed on temporary suspension by the Acting Regional Director, Nenad Djurić.
Local community leaders protested against the suspension and declared their
intention to suspend cooperation with EULEX and Kosovo police authorities in
Pristina until the Acting Station Commander had been reinstated. Furth ermore, on
17 March a group of approximately 50 persons demanded the reinstatement of the
Acting Station Commander by blocking the Mitrovica-Zubin Potok main road for
about one hour. On 18 March, the Kosovo police Directorate General ended the
suspension of the Acting Station Commander, who returned to his post.
On the evening of 31 March, a Kosovo border police patrol consisting of three
Kosovo Serb officers was attacked in an ambush in the vicinity of Zubin Potok
while performing a regular patrol. Two officers received light injuries, while the

14-30884

17/21

S/2014/305

third officer sustained life-threating injuries and was admitted to intensive care at
the hospital in North Mitrovica. The Kosovo police initiated a large search operation
immediately after the incident and its Major Crime Unit, forensic experts and
EULEX police officers were dispatched to the scene.
Implementation of the agreements arising from the European
Union-facilitated dialogue
EULEX verified the stay of new criminal cases in Serbia -run courts in Kosovo
after 15 July on two occasions, as agreed in the European Union -facilitated dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade.
A total of 284 former officers of the Ministry of the Interior completed the
basic orientation training conducted by EULEX and were integrated into the Kosovo
police. As at 20 February, all integrated officers were on duty throughout the four
northern municipalities. Their deployment increases the number of Kosovo police
officers in the north by approximately 120 per cent.
The project supporting the implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina agreement
on the copying and certification of civil registry books was finalized on 31 March. A
total of 12,391 civil registry books (355 more books than had initially been
identified) were certified and handed over to the Kosovo authorities. The last
handover took place on 6 March. The certification of civil registry books only
partially fulfils EULEX goals in this area. The establishment of a fully reliable,
comprehensive and sustainable civil registry in Kosovo remains a challenge.
With regard to the implementation of the technical protocol on integrated
border management, an agreement on the permanent location of each of the six
crossing points was reached on 18 March and officially came into effect on
21 March. The collection of customs revenues at the Rudnica-Jainjë and BërnjakTabalije crossing points continued uninterrupted.
In line with the agreed procedures on mutual legal assistance, both parties
(Belgrade and Pristina) continued to send requests through EULEX. In January,
Belgrade started replying to the requests for the first time since the procedures
entered into force on 20 March 2013. Since then, EULEX has received around
342 replies out of the 1,600 requests transmitted to Belgrade. Serbia sent 39 requests
to Pristina during the reporting period, all of which were being processed.

3.

EULEX strategic review
Mindful that the current EULEX mandate comes to an end on 14 June 2014
and of the findings of the strategic review conducted by the European External
Action Service, the States members of the European Union acknowledged that since
the deployment of EULEX in 2008 local institutions have become more developed
and the environment in which EULEX operates has changed significantly as a re sult
of the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, the
opening of negotiations for a stabilization and association agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo, and EULEX support.
The European Union has at its disposal different instruments with which to
regularly assess progress by Kosovo on the rule of law and that play a crucial role in

18/21

14-30884

S/2014/305

assisting efforts to reform Kosovo, in particular with regard to the judiciary, the
police and customs, and in strengthening the European perspective of the region.
An extension of the EULEX mandate will support this new dynamic. Bearing
in mind the need for further efforts, especially in terms of supporting the
prosecutorial and judicial sectors, EULEX will strike the right balance betwee n the
direct exercise of its functions and the gradual transfer, based on progress made, of
ownership and responsibility to local rule of law institutions. It will continue to
carry out its Kosovo-wide mandate, retaining its international police officers, judges
and prosecutors, and focus on strategic leadership -level capacity-building and on the
implementation of agreements arising from the European Union -facilitated dialogue
and security, in particular in northern Kosovo.
Specifically, the proposals envisage that:
• Judges and prosecutors will be further embedded in rule of law institutions so
as to ensure the sustainability of results and of their work in supporting the
institutions of Kosovo
• As a matter of principle, EULEX judges and prosecutors will adjudicate in
mixed panels and prosecute in mixed teams with their Kosovo counterparts
• EULEX will focus on bringing to a successful completion its cases under the
extended mandate
• For rule of law institutions to be sustainable, it is necessary tha t their
management be entrusted to Kosovo officials and that EULEX remain
involved, where required
• EULEX police will continue to work in close cooperation and consultation
with the Kosovo police
EULEX will continue to operate under the overall authorit y of the United
Nations and in accordance with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). Changes
to the EULEX mandate will result in a reduction in the number of staff, in
accordance with operational needs.

14-30884

19/21

S/2014/305

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 April 2014)

Country

Number

Austria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Pakistan

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 April 2014)

Country

20/21

Number

Czech Republic

1

Norway

1

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

14-30884

S/2014/305

14-30884

21/21
