UNITED

NATIONS

COUNCIL

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SmIXTH

YEAR

2.2-85’”

MEETING:

16 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2285), . . , . , , , , , . . , , , , . , , , , . , . . . . . . . , , , , , , , .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.........................

I

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

SlPV.2285

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents
are composed
of capital
bined with figures. Mention
of such a symbol indicates
a reference
Nations document.

letters comto a United

published in
Documents
of the Security
Council (symbol Sl , , .) are normally
quarterly
&rpp/~c~tu
of the ~~7kicrl Rw~rds
qf the S~r~ir.v Corr~il. The date
of the document
indicates
the supplement
in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security
Council,
numbered
in accordance
with a
system adopted
in 1964. are published
in yearly
volumes
of Rcsolrrrio~~.s rrd
.!kcisiorrs
of f/w Saurrit,v Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively
to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2285th MEETING
Held In New York on Tuesday, 16June 1981, at 3.15 p,m,
President: Mr. Porfirlo MIJlirOZ LED0 (Mexico).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
ProvIsional agenda @IAgendal2285)
I. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the security @~pcil (S/14509)
The meeting was called to order ut 4,20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Uttar datsd 8 Juts 1931 from the Char@ d’affak
of the Permaael!t Mt8Bton of Iraq to the united
Natbtu addmaed to the Preddaat of theSecurity
coltnciI w4m
I. The PRESIDENT (inter retation jkom Spanish):
In accordance with decir Pons taken at previous
meetings 12280th to 2281/k mrcllng~], I invite the
re#r&elitlitives of lraq IUKI lame1 to take ptace, at the
Cbircil table, and 1 invite the npresantatlves of
Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mongolia,
Morocco. Nicaraaua. Pakistan. Poland. Romania.
Sierra Leone, Sohalja, Sri Lanka, the .Sudan, thk
Svrian Arab Reoublic. ‘Turkev. Viet Nam. Yemen.
Y’ugoslavia, Zanibia and of t& Palestine Liberation
Organization to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
At the hvitutiorl
qf the President,
Mr. Hornmudi
(Iruy) and Mr. Bilrm [lsraeij
took placer at the Council
tcrble atld Mr. Beafjcrorti (Algeria),
Mr. Kaiser [Baugludesh)~ Mr. COW&I da Costu (Brazil),
Mr. Tsvetkov
(Bo/,qctricr),
Mr.
Mrhierccr
(Cuba),
Mr.
Hulinsk.$
(Czechc~slovn~icr),
Mr.
Abdel
Meguid
(Egypt),

Mr, Sinclair Guyana),
Mr. Rdcz (Hungary),
Mr, Krishnan IIndia), Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia),
Mr. La Rocca (Italy), Mr. Nuseibeh IJordan), Mr, AlSabah (Kuwait), Mr. Tu&i (Lebanon), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco),
Mr, Chumorro Mora (Nicaragua), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr, Freyberg (Poland), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Koroma ISlerra Leone), Mr. Adnn
(Somalial, Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. Abdalla
( the-&don), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet
Num),-Mr, Alalni (Yemen), Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavla), Mr. Mutukwa (Zambia) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took the places reserved
fwhem at the side of the Corrncil chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
I~have received a letter from the representative of
Malaysia in which he requests to be invited to
partici fate in the discussion of the item on the
Count PI
I 8 agenda. In conformity with the usual practlce 1 propose, with the consent of the Council, 10
invite that reuresentative to uarticiuate in the discusiion,-without’the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant arovisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
pro~Jsio&l
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Halim
(Malaysia) took the place resewed for him at the side
J the Council chamber.
3, jbc PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
the flnt speaker is the represent&a
of Morocco.
lidtc-hhnto
take a phce at the Council tabk and to
mjre his atatemant.
4. Mr. MRANI ZENTAR (Morocco) (interpretation
fror,~ French): Mr. President, 1 should like to thank
you and the other members of the Council for allowing
me to take part in this debate on the Israeli aggression
against the Republic of lraq.
5. At the same time 1 should like to express my great
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, conducting our business in
such difficult circumstances, because your presence in
the post of President is not only a tribute to Mexico,
with which most of our countries maintain steadfast
relations of trust, it also assures us that, thanks to YOUI
competence and the authority unanimously recognized
in you, our work will lead to the constructive results
that the entire international community expects of us.

6, I should also like to congratulate the representative of Japan, who presided over the Council Itist

at all costs lo keep the Arab and Islamic world around
il. we will understand
why Mr, Begin has struck a

month

in masterly

fashion

at a very

blow
carry

7,

Republic

of Iraq,

which

international relations.
The

diMcult

time

has so often

in

and why he claims to dictate to the Arabs what
technolonv thcv can be allowed to have and what use

mani-

festly proved its fidelity, dedication and attachment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
has been the target of premeditated,
unjustifiable and pointless aggression by Israel, 10

they

was taken

and every

the Arabs
over

the Director

General

have and on what hills

their

own airspace,

and yet sent Israeli

tion aircraft daily into Arab airspace.
IS. My delegation
wishes vigorously

technical

this strange concept
stronnlv
to condemn

of international
this abusive

observn-

to denounce
relations
and
claim to tech-

nolog% supremacy that is to be militarily imposed to
the scientific, technological
and industrial
impoverishment of the Arab world on the basis of so-called
imperatives of security unilaterally established and
arbitrarily given effect by the reckless use of force and
violence. all in violation of the decisions of the United
Nations and the provisions of the Charter.
16. His MaJesty Hassan II said in his message of

costly and absurd.
Ruther,

what arms they could

they could be deployed. On the same day he refused to
allow some to have unarmed AWACS planes flying

and -political provision was made to prevent and,
should the need arise, to cut short any modification or
misuse of the facilities being built so that they could be
used to produce nuclear bombs-and,
incidentally,
any such modification would have been complicated,
10.

it.

stop at nothing.
14. We already knew that Mr. Begin had decided for

8. Yesterday [2282nd meering] we listened with great
interest and $&tude to the statement of the rep&entative of France, Mr. Jacques Leprette, and we thus
had an opportunity
to receive first-hand
information
as
to the nature of the Osirak Tamuz nuclear facilities,
their equipment,
their capacities
and their purposes.
precaution

can%ake-of

13. Israel. meanwhile,
will not sign the Non-Proliferation
Treaty
and, consequently,
will allow no
inspection,
does not comply
with any rules and will

which !he international community has reacted.

9, =Every

against the Iraqi plant, why be threatens
to
out aggr:ssive
action again as often as necessary

of the International

Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) categorically
refuted
the Israeli claims that Osirak could prove to be a
nuclear threat to anybody, since Iraq was not only a
signatory to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons [General Assembly resolurion 2373
(XXII), annex] but that country had also roperly
complied with the statutory inspections wh P,h had,
what is more, never brought to light any activity
@ntrary to the provisions of the Treaty.’

solidarity

with

President

Saddam

Hussein:

“This uqiustifiable action appears as a blatant
challenge to all international rules, all values of
civilization and moral principles of humanity and is
an attempt lo thwart sincere efforts made to
establish peace and security in the Middle East.”

11. This act of international vandalism has not thus
far been iustified by any argument acceptable in the
&&test -degree and no authority, no- national or
&emotional agency, even among those most indul&t
about Israeli aberrations, has lent the least
&adence to the !l!ogical, reasons offered by Israel for
%$tifitii
facilrttps with sophisticated technology
@iIt for t e first time III nn Arab country.

17. Indeed, the very praiseworth efforts now being
made to ensure security for the t; rother country of
Lebanon, to guarantee iis sovereignty, its unity @nd its
fundamental territorial integrity, together with the
international effort to win recognition for the inalienable right of the Palestinian Deople to establish a
sover&n State on its own iratibnal territory, an
essential prerequisite for the return of peace and
harmony in the Middle East, all these efforts could,

12. If we compare the zeal of Israel since the end of
the British
Mandate in acquiring the most advanced
technological
means for producing
civil and military
goods, the most sophisticated
weapons to preserve
a
permanent,
comfortable,
general
technological
lead
over their neighbours,
if we consider that for 30 years
Israel has been developing
an “iceberg”
style of atomic
programme--and
we saw the tip of it and some of the
waves it has made when we beard what might be
styled the slip-ups of the Ministry
of War and of the
Mossad and saw a few flashes from the explosions
of
nuclear tests which South African complicity
was not
able to cover up-if
we place all this alongside such an
abundance
of murderous
gadgets and the state of
technological
impoverishment
in which Israel wishes

because
of the Israeli aggression
jcopardized
to a very great extent.

against

Iraq,

be

18. In nrticlc 3 (b) of the Definition
of Aggression
[Gorwd
A~sertrbly
resoluhtn
3314 (XXIX),
utmex].
the General Assembly
defined aggression
as follows:
“Bombnrdment
against the territory
Article

5, paragraph

“No consideration
political,
economic.
serve as a justification
2

by the armed forces of a State
of another State . . .”
I adds:
of whatever
nature,
whethe
military
or otherwise.
may
for aggression.”

19, It therefore follows that Article 39 of the Charter,
which provides that measures shall be taken in such an
instance, and Article 41, which mentions the measures
which the Council must consider as a minimum, have
full force,
20. Furthermore, Israel has committed this crime
and openly acknowledges its responsibility in the
matteiand-there are, therefore, grounds for calling for
just and equitable reparation for all loss of life and
damage to property involved,
21. Besides this reparation, it is especially necessary
that Israel should not be given the chance to maintain
or strengthen a so-called balance of power which
favours it so flagrantly that it has constantly abused it,
22, The freedom of peoples and nations, their dignity, and their right to life, cannot be haggled over and
are not divisible. Our community has the duty lo
protect them in order to ensure, as far as possible, the
maintenance of international morality which would
allow future generations to build an ever better world.
23. This responsibility, this very human mission, is
today incumbent on the Council.
24. The PRESIDENT finterprctation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the Minister for External Relations
of Cuba, hir. lsidoro Malmierca, who has requested to
be allowed 10 speak as the representative of the
Chairman of the non-aligned movement. On behalf of
the Council, I most cordially welcome him, and
1 invite him to take a seat at tlie Council table and to
make his statement.
25. Mr. MALMIERCA
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish):
It is do1 our custom lo repeat the ritual
formulas of diplomacy. We are living at a time of
serious danger to international peace and security and
we welcome the fact that, at this diBlccIt moment, the
Council is being led by Mr. Munoz Ledo, an
exemplary representative of independent, courageous
and esteemed Mexico.
-&. Once again the Council is obliged to hold
einorgency meetings lo consider another act of aggression by the State of Israel, although this time it is an
act of aggression which is unprecedented in the history
of international

relations.

27. The response will depend on the capacity shown
by the Council at this time 10 check the aggressive
actions of the Tel Aviv Govcrnmcnt
abide by the most elementary
national law.

and to oblige it to
principles
of inter-

28. Already there is a long. too long. list of resolutions of the United
Nations.
the non-aligned
movement and other internaGonal
bodies which vigorously
condemn the expansionist
and aggressive
mature of the
State of Israel. In the same context.
we have con-

demned the economic, political, diplomatic and mllitary support of North American lmperiailsm for Israel
and the policy of disregarding the legitimate representatives of the people of Palestine, the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO), and ignoring the mr\ior
obstacles to the achievement of a just and lasting
peace in the region,
29. Developments in the conflict in the Middle East
in the last few months bear out this view of the
situation. Perhaps we could regard as an isolated
incident this criminal and uqjustifiable attack by Israel
against a civilian Iraqi target, the peaceful purposes of
$icic have been acknowledged and certified by
30. We do not feel it necessary to begin to thoorizo in
order to show that this actlon by the Government of
Israel, which is typically terrorist in nature, forms part
of the Zionist policy pursued from positions of
strenath. the most recent manifestaUons of which have
glverigrounds for alarm to international public oplnion. We are referring to the stepping-up in the last few
weeks of indiscriminate air, sea and land attacks
against Lebanon and the people of Palestine living in
the south of that country, against the Arab forces #
deterrence as well as against Syria and other Arab
nations.
31. Those responsible for these serious events and
for the dangerous deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East are none other than those who in the past
few years have made it lmposslble for the Council to
take effective measures against Israel while, on the
other hand, supporting the Israeli authorities in their
intransigent and aggressive attitude by increasing
their economic assistance, supplying sophisticated
weaponry, persistently resoning to partial and separate agreemeets, openly denying the most flrndamental
rights of the long-suffering Palostlnlan pea le and
repeatedly exerting pressure on various Ara & countries an4 threatening them.
32. All of those actions have their place in the global
strategy of the United States Government, characterized by the use of cold+war langua$e, the sttw\lthoning of its military presence in the region and the
Pentagon’s efforts to set up new military bases in
countries of the Middle East. the Arabian peninsula
and eastern

Africa.

33. Those
elements
that support
the aggressive
Zionist @ime
may once again attempt to prevent the
Council’s
taking action in these particularly
alarming
circbmstances.
34. That is why, in accordance
with the request of
the Government
of Iraq, the countries
of the nonaligned
movement
held an extraordinary
plenary
meeting
today
at United
Nations
Headquarters
in
which. after lengthy consideration
had been given to
the dangerous
consequences
that the criminal
Israeli
action could have for the peace and security
of the

expansionist policies which have constan0y eqdangered international peace and security.

regian and throughout the world, it was agreed, lnler
alla, that the Security Council would be asked to
implement the most compreher,eive, binding sanctions
against the State of Israel for which provision is
contained in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
N@ons [S/14544, nnne~l.

“The non-aligned countries recalled the principled and consistent support they had extended to
the just struggle of the Arab peoples against expansionist policies and aggressive actions of Israel, and
expressed their full solidarity with and support to
Iraq in the&fence of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity,

35. May I recall that the same reauest had already
been fQrIiNIlated by the Sixth Conference of Heads df
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held at
Havana in September l9792 ana was ratified by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non;“.ln,fd- Countries held at New Delhi in February

“The

plenary

strongly

demanded

that

Israel

s_ho~ld refrain from any such aggr%ssiVe act&
“It reaffirmed the inalienable right of non-aligned
countries to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes in conformity with their priorities, interests and needs.

36, We do noi. Insider it untimely to bring this to the
attention of members of the Council, because if this
craven act of aggression carried out by the Zionist
authorities were to be allowed to go unpunished, then
all the peoples of the Middle East would be vulnerable
to like acts of aggression and an extremely dangerous
precedent would have been created ln international
relations,

“The plenary expressed its conviction that Israel,
as the aggressor who Inflicted severe material
damages and loss of human lives, has the responslbility to pay prompt and adequate compensation to
Iraq.

37. On behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, we wish from this podium to appeal to
meinbers of the Council to aonlv the necessary bindlnn
sanction9 against the Staie’ ;f Israel, pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, and
we reiterate our strongest support for and solidarity
with the Government and the neonle of Iraa in the face
of the criminal Zionist action.‘Weshould thbrefore like
to read out the communiqu6 adopted at the extraordinary meeting of the countries of the non-aligned
movement held today at Headquarters. It reads as
fdlo~_sl.

“The plenary reaffirmed
the General
Assembly
resolutions concerning Israeli nuclear armaments
and demanded that Israel comply with the said
resolutions.
“In view of the act of aggression committed by
Israel anti the constant threat its aggressive policies
pose to international peace and security, the nonaligned countries called upon the Security Council
to take,effective measures against Israel in accord$%TQ;;th Chapter VII of the Charter of the United

“An extraordinary plenary meeting of non-ali ned
countries was held in New York on 16 June 19f I in
response to a request by Iraq to consider the grave
act of aggression committed by Israel against the
Fepyblic Qf Iraq.

“The non-aligned countries called u n all States,
and especially the United States op” America, to
refrain from giving Israel any assistance, whether
military, political or economic, that might encourage
it to pursue its aggressive policies against the Arab
W!Wies and the Palestinian people.

“The plenary was chaired by His Excellency
isidoro Malmkrca, Minister for Poroign Affairs
of Cuba, and was addressed by His Excellency
Saadoon Hammadi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq. and representatives of other member

“The plenary pledged to work at the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly to enable it to
adopt decisions
which would prevent
Israel from
committing
such acts of aggression
and force it to
comply
with the norms of international
law, the
principles
of the Charter
and the provisions
of
ihe rklevant
resolutions
of the United
Nations.”
[S//4544,
U/lllC’\..]

countries.
“Having
considered the grave situation arising
from the premeditated
attack on the Iraqi nuclear
installations,
devoted
exclusively
to peaceful
purposes. the plenary
strongly
condemned
the naked
Israeli aggression
as an act of State terrorism
and a
blatant violation
of the sovereignty
of a non-aligned

38. The PRESIDENT
linrc~,p,clrclliori,~on~
Sp~rr~ishJ:
The next speaker is the representative
of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization.
1 invite him IO take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

coulltry.

“The plenary considered
the latest act of aggression by Israel, coming as it did in the wake of recent
attacks
on its Arab neighbours,
particularly
the
Palestinian
people, as a new manifestation
of its

3’9. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
~irttcrpr’c’/utim
fiort~ Spcrrlish): Mr. President,
it gives
me great pleasure
and satisfaction
to greel in you.
4

Mr. Murloz
Ledo, a worthy
representative
of a very
friendly
country,
Mexico,
In the light of our experience, and familiar as we are with the great qualities
and weI!-known
abilities
which you have shown, we
arc certain that you will lead the work of the Council
most prudently
and diligently
to success.
40. In past times, Mexico opened its doors to
immigrants, including those from Palestine, offering
them hope for a better life, for themselves and their
children, Those children are today true Mexicans and
they do not feel like strangers. It is true that they have
neither forgotten nor abandoned-their roots, but they
.~
are-Mexicans.

41, The Government of Mexico and the PLO have
the best possible relations of mutual respect.
$$Thq spenker continued In Blglish.]
42. -At long last the Council has convened to consider
yet another act of terrorism committed by a State
Member of the United Nations. This series of meetings
is long overdue. The monstrous crime committed by
the organized terrorist gang of Tel Aviv is but the
latest in the chain of crimes perpetrated during the
recent hase of the renewed and escalated acta of
aggress Pon by the Member
commonly
known
as the
State of Israel. This latest phase started a few months

way :o prove it now, but eventually we may be able to
do so,~One of the alms, in our opinion, was to prove a
point, namely
that Washington; D.C., is omtiipotent
and that its arm-its striking arm-is Tel Aviv. The
new strategy started in the form of daily bombing and
shelling of the Palestinian refugee camps in southern
Lebanon, bombing and shelling of an unprecedented
magnitude. Begin could not refrain from admitting that
Israel would continue its raids and strikes, if not
hourly then at least daily. He called that strategy preemptive. So, children must be killed now to prevent
them from growing up and to prevent the increasing
probability of their joining the ranks of the fighting
Palestinians.
45, ion this matter of renewed and escalated Israeli
attacks, a number of letters have been addressed to the
Council and to the Secreta-ry=General. It is no accident
that a situation of near confrontation was created
when the Israeli war machine directed its guns against
S!&!ala&~l)lm@.mes
+he!Wers.
46. Israel insists that Syria has no right to defend
even itsown territory because, Israel maintains, the
defence of Syrian territory by the Syrian people
constitutes a threat to the security of Israel. Such a
t&ted and sick argument can at best be attributed to
the teachings of Adolf Hitler @nd his gang.

ago: to be precise, it was initiated almost concurrently
with the accession to pOwer of the new Administration
in Washington. The green light was given by the leader
6f the new United States Administration when he
@bUely said “there is the terrorism that is being
p ctised by the PLO.” That statement was reported
n-T/t@ NP)V York Times of 3 February 1981. How
diametrically opposite can people be? fiesident Rea. n’s predecessor’s first reference to my people was
fi!Bt we ahould have our homeland; at least he tried to
@u?d mom coqcerned with the basic human right of a
@jopIe to have Its own homeland. But since January
$981: the Washington Administration has shown sign8
$@t 11is not really concerned with human rights.

47. Israel has arrogated to itself the power to decide
and determine what methods any sovereign State,
especially the neighbouring States, can adopt to
tisure its defences and-guarantee its independence
and tdhdlintsndt~.
lerael-in
its own Winion
iurill decide. Atidihie reminds us of a histo& fact:
@n 3 --April -1939, Adolf Hitler Issued topieecret
directive8 to the armed forces of the Reich-top-secret
directivea known as “Case White Unknown”, The
sim of the plan was “to destroy Polish military
tten#th and create in the East a situation which
uttsIie~f&~re@t~mnts
of -titional defence”4he
Quional de&% d NUJ Oectnatw . The analogy mittbt

$3. The head of the new Administration apparently
did not Ret his message across to Tel Aviv. Maybe in
Tel Aviv they could not believe what they had heard.

@M’i~Wtt licqiil&nents ii ohly Qne aspect of a$greaSive militarism. And this, in our view, continues.

or maybe they were not sure of what President
Reagan
meant. His assistant,
the National
Security
Advisor,
Mr. Allen, sent a sort of explanatory
message in which
he justified
Israeli aggression
under the pretext of hot
pursuit.
He disingenuously
declared that “there
is no
question
that the United
States must identify
the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
as a terrorist
organization”
and that there is “ample
justification
fol
taking action against acts of terrorism”.
What is said
cannot be unsaid.

48. The state of tellsion
had to be escalated
still
further,
and in this the role of Washington
should be
underscored.
The campaign
of lies and intimidation
and terrorization
of the-Arabs
was continued.
A myth,
a scarecrow,
was created in Washington
for exportation to the Middle East-not
much different
from the
myths
of the early
1950s. I refer to the myth of
communist
expansion
threatening
the independence
of
the Arab States-particularly
the oil-producing
countries-and
the anticipated
potential
effectiveness
of
protection
that could
be provided
by the United
States, be it by AWACS or the rapid deployment
force, was overstressed.
But the Arabs of the 1980s
are not that clumsy. We do not willingly
believe what
the others-namely,
Washington
and others-wish
us

44. Such statements
did not only encourage
the
terrorist
gang in Tel Aviv to escalate its aggression;
in
fact. they instructed
Tel Aviv to exacerbale
further the
tense and explosive
situation
in the area. There is no

to believe. We have developed, we have learned
through the years, and we too can make our own
&lS&Wt&Xt-MastQ-Who K&’
thB2&2llS Us,
49. --But then came the climax: the arm of Israel to
strike the blows as directed by Washington must reach
out. And it did. The Foreign Minister of Iraq gave the
Council [228&h meeting] the details of the barbarous
terrorist attack on his country, But did this terrorist
attack achieve the aim of terrorizing the Arabs and
bringing us to our knees? No. Our determination to
defend our survival, to defend our territorial integrity,
to defend our natural resources and, most importantly,
to defend our people is more deeply rooted and further
strengthened. And how did the Pentagon react? “By
George, what a beautiful job: you beat us to it.” That
statement, attributed to Henry E. Catto, Jr., clarifies
wliat=I=have been saying. He said: “The United States
Government saw no reason to be concerned that the
Intelligence services had not discovered that the raid
was planned or in progress.“~Naturally, Washington
was not at all concerned that the crime was being
perpetrated or was in progress, despite the violation of
the airspace of two friendly States and the act of
aggression on the territorial integrity of a third State,
!!qt
JO.--As a matter of fact, Washington was delighted.
Did npt Mr. Catto express grudging admiration for
what he called the “surgical precision” of the
bombiag? Did he not say, “You cannot but admire
their technical proficiency, which is what they dis@yed”? How cynical and nauseating. Are murder
oclde-is deStrLICtiQn, carried out smoothly
8~s
the most sophisticated weaponry-a glorious
&when eommitted with a smile? I tell you, this is the
llthlt of inhumanity and immorality. This is not only
collusion and co-operation and complicity between
@ashlngton and Tel Aviv: this is inviting, indeed
etifimanding, more operations to be carried out with
@jltu- “surgical
recision”. Are we nearing the
e@ce-the
brln I: of disaster?
&?When
-asked whether Israel would attack II
i@@yv reactor, Menachem Begin said, on 9 June:
-Let us deal first with that mcshu~unah. Saddam
Hussein.” There are two elements iithat statement:
the first, “let us first deal with this” one-implying
that he will deal with the other one at a later
stage-and the second, describing the head of State of
Iraq as a meslllr~~o~ah, as crazy, as mad.
LT.

52. Again, a reflection on what the Nazis said: on
10 August 1939, the daily paper Der Fueher
carried
the following: “Warsaw threatens bombardment
of Danzig . . . unbelievable agitation of the Polish
Archmadness”-madness
Fuehrer--although

again.
But Begin
he is acting like one.

is no

53. And now let us return to consider why the United
States Government
saw no reason to be concerned
that the intelligence
services had not discovered
that

the raid was planned or in progress. The intelligence
services simply could not have failed to discover that
the raid was planned and in progress; otherwise, there
might be questions about the efficacy and efficiency of
the SDV and defence systam which is costing the
American taxpayer billions of dollars. Or, perhaps, the
intelligence services immediately recalled the fate of
the spy ship Liberty, and so the souls of their
colleaFdes victims of Israeli crime hover over them.
The sense of security that the man in the street-the
ordinary Joe Smith-enjoys
or wants to believe in
might be shattered, and a counter-productive effect
.m&h! develop.
54. Sometimes I go into flights of imagination, and
I can imagine the following appeal being made to the
American citizenry: “No, citizens, please believe the
Government: the intelligence services did function
perfectly, but the United States Government wanted
the oil producers to know and have trust in the United
States!‘-albeit at the expense of violating the airspace
and committing aggression against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the oil-producing countries.
SS, It is the freedom of flow of Arab oil that must be
safeguarded and guaranteed, and not the sovereignty
and independence of the oil-producing colintries.
What -they desire is the marked stagnation and
frustration-nay,
the undermining-of
the sincere
endeavours of the Arab people to make peaceful use of
their natural resources while those resources last. It is
the develooment of those countries, it is the social
services rehdered to their peoples, it is the education
of their children, it is their asoirations 10 a healthier
arid more develdped society that the Israelis wish to
prsvent and arrest. It is through such terrorist acts that
the United States and Israel imagine they can convince
the Arabs and win their confidence.
36. lmoedinn the development of other countries in
the regibn a& arresting ihe advancement and wellbeing of the Arabs is yet another power that Israel
wishes to arrogate to itself. If Israel considers that
cdueation of tbt Arabs in the neighbouring countries
e&Wltutes e threat to its security, then Israel will
Intervene and exercise that arropated power. Israel is
not satisfied to invoke national securi:; in the military
field and on questions
relating
to borders:
it also
invokes
its economic
national
security
and says that
the latter might demand
stagnation
and no advancement. Israel believes
it is omciscient
and omnipotent. As a matter
of fact, it is under the guise of
national
security
that schools
and colleges
in the
occupied
Palestinian
territories
are closed and classes
interrupted.
It is under the guise of national security
that young Palestinians
are compelled
to leave their
home or are evicted.
But Israel is not the military
occupation
power in the rest of the Arab world. The
Arabs, as well as the Palestinians,
have the inalienable
right to advancement
and improvement
of their economic situation,
and we will defend that right by all
means.

57, The Arabs, according lo that Israeli concept--as
supported by the Government of the United States
-must remain In the dark ages to “e~loy” the benefits
and feats of modern science and technology meted out
to-them by their so-called friends,
58. To add insult to ir&ry,
the United
States
Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig. Jr., bothered
by his conscience, goes theological and reports to the
Speaker of the House and the Chairman of the Foreign
Relaiions Committee. “In these circumstances, I must
report on behalf of the President that a substantial
violation of the 1952 Agreement may have occurred.”
Two elements in that report call for theoloaical
scrutiny, Secretary of State Haig must have a ilear
conscience and refrain from passing judgement
a phi, The questions that must be answered at this
juncture, Secretary of State Haig, are: Did Israel In
f&Z ~violate the 1952 Mutual Defense Assistance’
Agreement? If so, was that violation substantial? And
who_ is~going to decide? Where can we draw a line?
Where can we draw the line between selfedefence~and

gpssion?
$9. ls~flying 1,200 miles, violating the airspace of two
States, dropping bombs on a third State, destroying an
ihstallation for advancement and development by
peaceful-means, under the supervision and investigatlGn of the intarnational community-is
that “jour.
ney” undertaken to ensure the self-preservation of the
attacking team? Is it a legitimate act of self-defence? II
needs only the wisdom of the wise to answer.
Moreover, who sets the yardstick with which we
measure the degree of substantiality of a violation?
!&&4 is tke criterion?
60. And, finally, what is the result? A “suspension
for the time being of the immediate shipment of four
F-16 air&
which had been scheduled for” 12 June
1981. A suspension of four aircraft for the time
bcifi
_ so let it be. A slap on the wrist. a pat on the
&u%r.
Again, here 1 go into a flight of wild
6Mgination. This is what I imagine: “Listen. child,
~.@&!ly .bM dpno something not nice. Please, try
i&Et0
da it win. I understand. This week you get no
kot monej. but noxt weekend we ahalisee; Who
news? If you act like a good boy-scout we might

fp”

make it up for you. Anyhow.
you have enough saved
up from the last few weeks or years. We have given you

billions of dollars of taxpayers’ money. Now we shall
take care of the other
understand.”

side. We I\ .‘I cxpiain.

President addressing the Arabs in my imagination
-“what
do you want the nuclear reactor for? Ood
bestowed on you camels and oil, so you must be
grateful. Israel has no camels and no oil. It has only a
dozen atomic bombs, more or less, but it has promised
that it will not be the first to use those atomic bombs.
Unless your camels go berserk Israel will not use the
atomic bombs.“~Then, in my imagination, the Presi.
dent says to his Arab guests: “Finally, my friends,
remember you are only friends but Israel is our
ally-and
our commitment to our ally has first
priority,”
62. It sounds dramatic but it is actually tragic. The
Washington Administratron had already assured Tel
Aviv: “Go ahead, do not worry, we are committed by
treaty to veto any concrete action by the Security
Council against you. All that the Security Council can
do k-&YOU
‘naughty?.”
63. That is how we understand the concent of the
Washington Administration and its role in thCSec&lty
Council in defence of Tel Aviv. II is not the orincinlos.
it is not the international consensus, it is noi the
Charter. it is not the national interests that determine
this particular policy-and
the facts do not really
COunt.
64. ++‘ill the Council act in the spirit and substance of
the principles of the Charter? Will it prove beyond a
doubt that the Charter is the guide and the beacon and
not pertiit itself to become a class-room in which to
debate interpretations of international law to no avail?
65. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait has
set forth before the Council the unanimous wUI of the
Arab States and expressed their hope to see the
Council apply the provisions of the Charter. I shall
quote the following from his statement:
“If we really respect our great international
Qrganization and care for its credibility WC must
rovide it with tho nocossary moans that will enable
Pt to discharge its responsibilities. In the case undor
discussion it is in ibt intorert of memlity and
international peace that this Council adopt a resolution calling for the imposition of sanctions Mainrt
the aggressor. Without such a resolution Israel will
continue to violate international
rules and principles
and thus will rest assured that it will be neither
deterred
nor penalized.

They will

61. And on this trip of my wild imagination.
1 can
visualizc
the President
of the United
Staies
summoning
the Arab representatives
and telling
them:
“Listen,
my friends. you must realize thar Israel is a
small Zionist State and lives in constant fear of Arab
attacks.
You just have to look around:
Syria is
deploying
missiles to defend its borders and the PLO
still practises terrorism.
As friends. please go and tell
Syria and the PLO to behave. But tell me”--this
is the

“The exercise of the right of veto against a draft
resolution
imposing
sanctions
on Israel will have a
negative
impact upon world Public opinion,
which
has condcnmed
in nn unprecedented
way the Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installation.
The
leaders
of various
countries
of the world
have
strongly
condemned
that aggression.
and so has the
press in different
parts of the world.
International
public opinion will therefore
be dismayed
to see the
aggressor
free to pursue
its aggressive
policies
against other nations, in this case the Arab States.

“Should any State cast its veto to prevent the
-adoption of such a resolution the Arab peoples will
-undoubtedly be greatly shocked because they still
-=believe that the United Nations represents the
:conscience of the-international community and is a
G’efuge to which peace-loving nations turn, -Will,
:~:then, the hopes of the Arab people be frustrated,
and will the aggressor be given the green light to
-proseed with its acts of terrorism and piracy7

few years hence, about another wild seed falling on
fertile ground? And why wait? Only last Sunday Prime
Minister Begin announced on television that he had
been tipped off by a very well-informed source about
the A-bomb in Baghdad. 1 hasten to add that he did not
say that he had been informed by his allies; he said he
had been tipped off by a very well.informed source.
Since his own military have today denied that they
supplied him with the information, I wonder who that
very well-informed source was.

= “Any objection to the imposition of sanctions will
~-in this case be explained by the Arab people and the
_peoples of the third world as an act of bias in favour
-of the aggressor for reasons which can neither be
-understood nor justified, especially since the Arab
-right is crystal clear in this case. Should any State
y exercise its veto power, which God forbid, this
-.C!ouncil will thus reinforce in the minds of weak
-peoples the conviction that the principles and rules
-gembodied in international charters are different from
-those of the real world. There is no doubt that that
-=would jeopardize the chances for mutual respect and
confidence among different peoples as well as the
-settlement of conflicts .in various parts of the
wor!d.” [2281st meeling, pnrus. 21 to 24.1

71, Yes indeed, there is fertile ground.
72. The same Mr. Sharett noted that he was “medim
tating on the long chain of false incidents and
hostilities we”-that is, the Israelis-“have
invented,
and on the many clashes we have provoked which cost
us so much blood, and on the violations of the law by
our- men-all of which brought grave disasters and
determined the whole course of events and contributed tq the security crisis”.
73. ..And there were the others-the overwhelming
maioritv of the Zionist leaders in Israel, Dersons like
M&he-Dayan, who vehemently rejected-any border
security arrangements offered by the neighbouring
Arab States. Dayan insisted un pursuing the policy of
terror, attacks and incursions. Such acts, according to
Dayan,~“are our vital lymph. They help us maintain a
h& !ension~ among our population and in the army”.

66. Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber AI-Sabah, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, spoke on
behalf of the Council of the League of Arab &&s. of
which he is the current Chairman.
67. Remedies, if not cures, have been prescribed to
“save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war”. ‘I~IOS~ measures should apply equally to our
gejgph in
68. ‘Earlier-in my statement, I said that Washington
might -have instructed Tel Aviv to exacerbate the
situation further and that there was no way to prove
that now, but that eventually it might be possible to
pcave it.

74. Terror was, is and will remain the modus
operandi
of the Zionists. This is neither the time
nor the place to recall that it was the Zionists
who introduced terrorism into Palestine, the savage
and cold-blooded massacring of innocent Palestinian
Arabs. This was carried out by planting explosive
charges in the bazaars and souks of Haifa, Jaffa,
Jerusalem and other cities and villages. Terror was the
method finally adopted by the Zionists to “spirit the
ulation across the frontiers”. That was
the-final
indigenoussoRut on, the decision to make the dream of
Theodor Herzl come true. Terror proved effective to
displace the Palestinians-temporarily.
We are determined to pursue by all means our struggle to return; it
is our inalienable right, unanimously supported by the
international community: it is the prerequisite for
peace.

69, -1 recall that in 1956 Israel attacked Egypt. What
W~ISIthe role of the United States then? MO&
Sharetteand we all know who he was-noted that
“Teddy Kollek brought in a classified cable from
Washington in which Kermit Roosevelt of the CIA
described the terrible confusion prevailing in the
Slate Department under the shock of the NasserC;oxh”---that
IS. Russian--”
‘deal’. Kermit Roosevelt
added: ‘We are surprised at your silence. . . If, when
the Soviel arms arrive. you will hit Egypt. no one will
protesl.’ ” Sharett noted a couple of days later that
Ben-Gurion had declared in the Cabinet Meeting, “if
they really get MiGs . . . I will support bombing them.

75. The Zionists do not like peace. As Foreign
Minister,
the same Share&
as far back as 2X May
19%. instructed
Israel’s
ambassadors
as follows:
“There
may be an attempt
to reach peace by pressuring [Israel] to make concessions
on the question of
territory
and the refugees.
1. warned
a$ainst
any
thought
of the possibility
of returning
a few tens of
thousands
of rifugees,
dven at the p&e of peace”.
I leave it entirely
up to the Council
to determine
the significance
of such an attitude
towards
peace,
which
remains
the declared
policy
of Israel.
The
so-called
framework
for peace--the
CHmp David
accords-explicitly
attempts
to deny the Palestinian

We can do it!“. Sharelt
added. “1 understand
that
he”that is. Ben-Gurion--“read
ihe cable from
Washington.
The wild
seed has fallen
on fertile
The “fertile
ground”
was Ben-Gurion.
who
ground”.
got Ihe message.
70. All Ihis was revealed
at a much later date. Who
knows in what or in whose memoirs
we shall read. a

x

pursue their policy of provocation and aggression
against all. As long as the Council does not seriously
address itself to the heart of the conflict, the question
of Palestine, the inallenable rights of the Palestinian
people, the fate of 4 million Palestinians, the Council
will not succeed in finding a solution and a peaceful
end to the conflict in the Middle East. It will continue
to busy itself with derivatives, derivatives which are
charged with explosives that lead the world to the
brink of a mr\ior armed~confrK!nMo&
brat w!&!!
remain derivatives.

-people its inalienable rights as defined and affirmed
repeatedly by the General Assembly. The denial of the
-attainment and exercise of our inalienable rights is the
reason why we Palestinians pursue and escalate our
struggle; under the leadership
of the PLO. The PLO is
--the representative
of the Palestinian
people. This Is

the will of the Palestinian people and the consensus of
the international community. The representative of
Ireland had no doubts about this when he made his
statement on a procedural-matter- in-this-chamber-on
12 June 1228&/t me&g],
76,

To return

to the issue

of peace

82. The PLO notes with great satisfaction and
gratitude that zpeakers in this debate have addressed
the heart of the conflict, the question of Palestine,
affirming that t&_question of Pa&in_emains
the
key to peace,

in the Middle

East, the PLO has on several occasions declared
before the Council and the General Assembly that the
-Palestinian people want peace, We thirst for peace.
But what peace can we savour and enjoy when we are
prevented from exercising the basic human right: the
ri&t~ live in &tge 1~ our- own homes?

83. We believe it could prove useful to recall that the
Palestinian National Council in 1977 considered the
different aspects of the question, in particular in the
light-of the-position of the international community.
A consensus was emerging.~The Palestinian National
Council authorized the elected executive committee to
participate on an equal footing in all endeavours and
conferences held under the auspices of the United
Nations in order to resolve the question of Palestine,
the core of the Arab&raeli codflict, oti the basis of the
attainment and full exercise of the inalienable-rights of
the Palestinian people. That, in our oplnion, was the
road to peace. On I October 1977, the world heard the
joint statement of the Soviet Union and the United
States of America, and the PLO saw in that statement
a beamof hope, a process conducive to peace.

77. :The policy of the Zionist movement is opposed tJ
-peace, The peace they talk about calls for a prohibitive
price-namely,
the denial of the rights of the Palestinian people, the annulment
of those rights. We havejust

quoted Sharett’s condition. 1 shall quote it again: “no
return, not even at the price of peace”. It is the
apocalyptic peace-as the representative of Lebanon
put it so well-that they are after. The Zionists are
opposed to peace because, as Dayan said, “it ties our
hands”.
78, What do the Zionists want? Let them state it here
in clear terms. But if they want to pursue their
persistent policy of aggression. of expansion, of
confiscation and of the denial of the huma rights of
@!irs, there will be no peace.

84. Our dreams and hopes were shattered when,
instead of a comprehensive approach, our inalienable
rights were trampled on, the Ueneral Assembly
resolutions calling for a conference to achieve a
ace in the Middle East were discomprehensive
regarded, and a r ilateral approach and partial treaties
replaced the comprehensive peace process. Those
troaties. it now transpires, were defigned to pre-empt
peace.

79, --The Council is committed to the maintenance of
international peace and security, and in our opinion it
is incumbent upon its members to determine that the
terrorist attacks by Israel do constitute a threat to
-peace, and to recommend that measures be taken in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter-Arti.
:& 41-to restore and maintain international peace
a$d-8ocurity.
80. The credibility of the Organization depends upon
the application of the provisions of the Charter. The

85. In our hope wo still cling to the United Nations.
On several occasiona the Council has dealt with the
question of peace in the Middle East. Several drafi

world has its eyes fixed on the current
proceedings.
Humanity
aspires to seeing the Council
save this
generation
and the succeeding
generations
from the
scourge of war. and reaffirm
the faith of all peoples in
fundamental
human rights. Will the Council’s
sublime
mission be undermined’!

resolutions
were submitted.
but unfortunately
the
United States Iaged its veto, and our sincere hopes and
endeavours
were frustrated.
But we do not despair.
We shall continue
to play our part in the search fol
peace and 1 solution
to the Middle
East conflict.
preferably
through
the Council.

81. I appeal to each and evr-v
member around this
table to preserve
our faith &I., trust in the United
Nations. Failure to take action will only encourage
the.
terrorist
gang in Tel Aviv to continue and to escalate
its criminal attacks not only on the Palestinian
refugee
camps in southern
Lebanon,
bc! on the Palestinians
everywhere
and on the Arab countries.
They will

86. A few weeks ago President
Brezhnev
proposed
the convening
of a conference
to attain peace and a
solution
to the Middle
East conflict.
The PLO highly
appreciated
the proposal and welcomed
it.
87. The PLO still believes that a conference
should
be held under the auspices of the United Nations and

9

with the participntion on an equal footing of ail the
parties to the conflict-l
repeat, all the parties to the
conflict including the PLO and, perhaps, the members
-of the Council. The aim of such a conference should be
to resolve the question of Palestine through a comprehehsive settlement that would guarantee-our inaiienable rights as defined and atfirmed by the General
Assembly, particularly at its seventh emergency spe.
cial session [rcsohlion
ES/7/2]. That is the way to
peace and to the end of the Middle East conflict.
88. We Palestinians have had enough. Chiveus peace.
Let us all have peace. Let us all e@oy peace. But let us
take action that will ensure the right of us all 10 enjoy
peace,
89. At this point, Mr. President, I wish through you
to extend our thanks to the members of the Council
who joined in invitiug the PLO to participate in the
consideration of the auestion before the Council. To
the member that voted in the negative 1 can only say
that-we are not distressed. We note the concern of the
United States regarding the provisional rules of
procedure-l
repcat, the provisional rules of procedure-but we should like it to know that the legal
foundation of a decision is the basic rule that the
Council is master of its own procedure, We look
forward to the day when the United States Administratlon shows equal concern for and adherence to the
substance and the principles of the Chnrter and the
@&&real Declarution of Human Rights,
90, Zionist leaders in Israel are suffering not only
from megalomania but also from the phenomenon of
insensitivity to acts of wrongdoing and to moral
occupation. The late Zionist leader and Israeli Foreign
M&&!er~Shareu~pointed out that:
“We do not have a moral approach to moral
-problems, but a pragmatic armroach to moral
pblems . . . this does not mean that public opinmyon, the army, the police have drawn no conclusions
--from the acts committed. Their conclusion was that
-Arab blood can be freely shed. I , . All this must
.-brirrp about revulsion in the sense of justice and
honesty in public opinion; it must make the State
Bppeatin the eyes of the world as a savage State that
does not recognize the principles of justice as they
have

been

established

and

accepted

by contem-

poriiry society.”
Sharett

continues-and

this is back

in IYSS:

“What
we [the Israelis] succeeded
in achieving
in
I948 cannot
be repeated
whenever
we desire it.
Today we must accept our existing frontiers and try
to relax rhe tensions with our neighbours
to prepare
the ground for peace. I proved that the occupation
of the Gaza Strip will not resolve
any security

problem, as the refugees . . , will continue to
constitute the same trouble, and even more so, as
their

hate will be rekindled

by the atrocities

that we

[Israel] shall ‘cause them to suffer during the
occupation , . .“.
91. The question now is this: will the Zionist lsraeli
leaders in 1981 take heed? Or can they not take heed
because of their ideological commitments “not to have
their hands~ tied and to keep the vital lymph”‘?
92. In the light of the revelation of this morning that
the Israeli military sources had no information about
the alleged secret underground instullation where
atomic bombs were being manufactured, and in the
light of the rejection by France of the Israeli allegations, we have the right to ask why did Begin order
that terrorist attack, and precisely why now’? Is this
another of his malicious efforts to presempt peace?
Was he aware of any serious and fruitful endeavours to
achieve peace in the Middle East? Was he trying to
provoke a situation to embarrass his benefactors in
Washington and drive a wedge between the Government of the United States and its friends among the
Arabs? Or, finally, did Washington really give the
green light to Begin to strike in order to humiliate and
anger ttie Arabs? 1 really cannot find a proper answer,
but, as responsible people, members of the Council
might feel that they should ask and seek an answer,
93. Finally, a word to those who use the Bible as
their source of wisdom and action. 1 must say:
remember how nicely Abraham was received in the
land of Canaan. Read not only Joshua. and do not
follow in his footsteps.
94, 1 quote from Joshua: “to smite with the edge of a
sword and utterly destroy the enemy, neither leaving
anv to breathe”. That was the first holocaust perpeirated and recorded. To those people I would
counsel a reading of the same Joshua:
“Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good
things are come upon you, which the Lord your Uod
promised you: so shall the Lord bring upon you all
evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this
good land which the Lord your God hath given
you.” [Joshua 23:/S.]
95, The PRESIDENT (interprefationjhn
The next speaker is the representative
slovakia.
I invite him to take a place
table and to make his statement.

Spmish):
of Czechoat the Council

YG, !Ar. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia)
(i~er~~~erutiwt from
Kusuim):
Permit
me. Sir, to begin by
congratulating
you on your assumption
of the presidcncy of the Security
Council fur the current
month.
The Czechoslovak
delegation
warmly
and sincerely
greets you, an eminent diplomat
in your own country,
a country
with which mine is linked by age-old ties of
friendship
and fruitful
co-operation.
Y7. The Israeli air raid on the research
centre
Osirak
on 7 June this year is a flagrant
act

of
of

aggression, The present Government of Israel gave the
order for it to be carried out in a burst of irresponsible
adventurism, showing total disregard for its consequences for peace and security throughout the
world. Can we even for a moment imagine what would
happen if all States were to explain their conduct with
the same sort of senseless excuses? Mr, Bedjaoui of
Algeria quite properly noted before the Council that:

alarm to the international community. Has not the
General
Assembly of the United Nations in its
resolutions condemned-and
severely condemnedthe constant desire of Israel to gain access to nuclear
weapons? The raid on Oslrak should once again
remind everyone whom this concerns that it is time to
cease any cooperation with Israel in the military field
and particularly in the nuclear field, It is time for the
Couticii to give effective thought to the danger
represented by nuclear weapons in the hands of an
aggressive rkgime which has promoted terrorism to the
rank-of a State policy.

“The Israeli action has the monstrous characteristic of introducing into international relations new
-frightening forms of action based on aggression,
-baptized ‘preventive’ in order to make the unac~ceptable acceptable.” [2280111rrteetbg, pm. 157.1

102. Czechoslovakia welcomes and supports the
timely decision in this connection of the Board of
Governors of IAEA on I2 June of this year; that
de&ion has been transmltted to the Council [S/145321.

98. However, it is obvious that an overwhelming
mJority of States Members of the United Nations
regard the raid against Iraq as a violation of the
principles of the Charter and the fundamenta&rms-of
international law.

103. Czechoslovakia naturally sufmorts the idea of
creating a nuclear-weapon-f&e
z&ie in the Middle
fiast region. However, this idea should not be utiilzed
in order to camouflage the aggressive policies of Israel
towards the neighbouring Arab countries. Is it not
abundantly clear that this was the purpose of document A/36/315, which was so hastily distributed by the
Israeli delegation? This simply conceals an attempt to
distract attention from solving the most fundamental
problems of the Middle East to involve the Arab
countries in an unequal discussion and to preserve the
advantages and benefits which have been illegally
usurped by Israel.

99, =The Czechoslovak delegation, which has spoken
on several occasions in the Council when it discussed
various aspects of Israel’s aggressive policies, warned
from the very outset that the conclusion of the
separate Camp David deals vhrually gave a free hand
to Israel against the Middle Eastern States which
categorically opposed this anti-Arab plot. Are not the
continued occupation of Arab lands. the gross flouting
of the inalienable rights of the Arab people d
Palestine, the attack on Lebanon, is not this most
recent barbaric raid on Osirak, which caused civilian
casualties and also material damage, clear proof of
tkis?

104, The position of the Czechosiovak Socialist
Republic on the matter which is now being considered
by the Council is reflected in the statement made by
the Czechosiovak Ministry of Foreign AfWrs on
I I June, which emphasizes, inter alla:

100, By force of arms and by acts of terror, Israel is
maintaining the Middle East in a state of conflict.
However, this is only half of the truth. In view of the
uninterru ted and comprehensive economic, military
and poht,Pcal support which the United States continues to extend to Israel, the Government of that
great Power has thereby atllxed its
policies pursued by Israel r.nd is
for the fact that in the Middle East
are flouted and aggression goes on unpunished and
tension remains.

“The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic demands
that the United Nations Security Council condemn
lsraei most resolutely and take a decision regarding
the imposition of sanctions against the aggressor
under Cha ter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.” P$114533, a,lnex.]
105. The PRESIDENT

thermetaflon

thm

Smn-

ishJ: The next speaker is ihe representati-ve of riang
iadesh. I invite him to take a blace at the Council table
and to make his statement.
’

101, The irresponsible
nature of the raid on Osirak is
made even clearer
by the fact that this attack was
perpetrated
against a State which was from the very
outset a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of
Nuclear
Weapons.
and which had therefore
made all
ils nuclear
activities
subject
to the relevant
international
safeguards
within
the 1AEA framework.
Furthermore.
this raid was carried out by the air force
of a State which refused
to become a party to this
extremely
important
international
legal instrument,
If
now the representatives
of Israel take the liberty of
asserting that the destruction
of this peaceful nucieal
insfallalion
belonging
to Iraq has made peace more
dur~ablc. then it may legitimately
be asked whcthel
Israel’s
nuclear
activities
are ii source of imminent

106. Mr. KAISER
(Bangladesh):
Mr. President.
it is
an honour to speak before the Council when you are
presiding
over its deliberations
for the month. I have
had the privilege
of working
with you in the Council
and have always benefited
from your wisdom,
knowledge and skill and your rich experience
as a diplomat
and politician,
finely
meshed
with your pragmatic
understanding
of intricate
problems,
which
lends
unique relevance
to your decisions.
You represent
a
country,
Sir, which has established
itself as a relentless champion
of a better economic
order, in an effort
IO render justice IO the teeming.
deprived
millions of
II

.the world, For that and the concern for peace, the rule
of international law and the oromess of mankind
ishown by our brothers in Mexicd un?ler the presidency
-of Mr. Ldpez Portillo. we nay tribute to vour
countrymen’and your leadership and we assure-you
tha! our people and leaders salute your great country
and its leaders.
107. 1 also take this opportunity to express our
gratitude and warm regards to your predecessor,
Mr. Masahiro Nisibori of Jaoan. for the excellent and
efficient way in which he cbndhcted the business of
{he C;runcil- during the month of his presidency,
‘108, Mr, President, I take this opportunity of
extending the most profound and sincere thanks of my
aeople, my Government and myself to YOU and to the
&her members of the Council for the &arm and rich
tributes rendered in the Council on 4 June last [2279rh
meellng] on the occasion of the martyrdom of the
late lamented President Ziaur Rahman. The moving
expression of profound admiration for President Ziau;
Rahman, as a unique leading personality of the world,
particularly of the third world, as a servant of
Bangladesh and humanity and your words of sympathy and encouragement in our mourning have been a
source of solace for the people of Bangladesh.
109, Through you, Mr. President, 1 would convey to
the Council that, although we are in the midst of deep
mourning for a great leader, who belonged not only to
us but to the entire world, we, {he people- of
Bangladesh, wish to assure the Council that the high
ideals of peace, freedom, fairness and justice that
inspire the people of Bangladesh, of which the late
President Ziaur Rahman was a unique embodiment,
will continue to guide us and also that we are at the
service of the world and shall do our humble best to
bring about a peaceful order based on law and justice
for mankind in all aspects of life.
110. On a stunned and surprised world the news
broke last week of the sneak attack of Israel on
completely unsuspecting Iraq, which threw into chaos
and anarchy the valiant attempts to establish the rule
of international law and the efforts to control the
demon of the brutal and naked use of military might in
the Middle

112. Our views on the subject are well known and
well recorded and today we do not draw any sense of
smug consolation from the fact that ‘*we had told you
so”.

but

we

view

the

situation

with

tha

gravest

concern. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, on this subject of the unprovoked act of
aggression
of Israel against Iraq, has expressed
the
views of the Government in no unmistakable
terms
[ S/MS30] :

“The Government of Bangladesh condemns the
bombing of the nuclear plant in Iraq by Israel as a
most outrageous violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and all international laws and
norms. This is a despicable act of international
piracy. This act of naked Israeli aggression without
any provocation is the most arrogant example of the
reckless use of its armed might. It is an act of
barbarity without parallel and is an affront to the
entire civilized world and a challenge to the ruie of
La_wand inwnat!on_a! relations.
“The growing armed might of Israel clearly poses
a threat not only to the Middle East but also to
international peace and security and to the principles and values which the international community
-is committed to uphold and defend.”
113. The Parliament of Bangladesh has also strongly
condemned the wholly unprovoked Israeli attack on
the nuclear plant in Iraq as the most outrageous
violation of the Charter and international laws and
norms and has characterized this action as a flagrant
example of international terrorism.
114. I shall not now go into details, but we have
repeatedly pointed out the danger of the denial of
human nnd legal rights to the people of Palestine by
Israel. Israel’s denial of that people’s inalienable right
to a homeland, its usurpation of the Arab and
Palestinian territories acquired by feats of arms and its
repeated aggressive activities in Lebanon are known
to all and have caused not only numerous setbacks to
the chances of establishing peace and stability in the
region but also embarrassment to Israel’s friends and
supporters, whose trust and confidence, as we always
believed, was mistakenly placed in Israel.

East. That area is already an unfortunately
spot and the Council
has repeatedly
been
engaged,
as have other United
Nations
organs,
in
striving to bring about stability
and peace in a region
which has not known these precious values for a long
time.

115. I should
like here to go into the profound
implications
of the latest Israeli act of agprcssion
against Iraq. with its immediate
effect on the countries
of the region. as well as the definite
setback to the
efforts
to spare mankind
the horrors
of war by the
establishment
of the rule of international
law.

I I I. Bangladesh
has. in the Council,
in other organs
of the United
Nations
and elsewhere,
along with
numerous
other representatives
of nations, pointed its
finger correctly
at the root cause of this situation:
na~nely.
Israel’s greed for dominance,
its arrogance
based on the military
muscle acquired from others and
its utter and contemptuous
disregard
for all the legal
;und human
rights of the people of the region.

116. Israel’s sterile excuse is based on nothing more
than supposed evidence
of Iraqi nuclear preparations.
evidence
which not only has gone unsupported
but has
also been rejected by the world community
and some
of the friendliest
supporters
of Israel.

trohlcd

117. Iraq was one of the first
nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty

nations to sign lhc
and became one of

“This attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre is a
serious develonment wlth far-reaching lmnlications,
The Agency’s safeguards system is a-basic element
of the Non-Prollferatlon Treaty. During my long
time here, I do not think we have been faced with a
-more serious question than the lmullcations of this
development. The Agency has ins&ted the Iraqi
reactors and has not found evidence of any activity not in accordance with the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. A non-NPT country has evidently not felt
assured by our findings and about our ability to
continue to discharge our safeguarding responsibilities effectivelv. . . . From a noint of orlncinle.
one can only conclude that it ‘6 the ‘Age&y’s
safeguards regime which has also been attacked.
‘Where will this lead us in the future7 This is a matter
of grave concern which should be pondered well,“’

its very early adherents. Iraq signed the Treaty on
I July 1968 and ratified It on 29 October 1969, The
agreement on the application of safeguards to till
nuclear activities in terms of the nuclear Non-Pr,liferation Treaty was concluded with IAEA in 1972.
lraa has faithfully observed the provisions of the
Trebty. The last safeguards inspeciion took place in
January this year. The Director General of IAEA
reported to ttie Board of Governors that all nuclear
materials were satisfactorily accounted for,
118, Time and again the Iraqi Government has
stressed the peaceful nature of the nuclear facilities
they have acquired and facilities still under construction. The acquisition of technical knowqhow and
knowledge for peaceful uses of nuclear energy Is fully
in accord with and is supported and encouraged by
various provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and
varo&=aher-decisioas
of -Ihe United Nations.

123, In this context. it is relevant to ooint out that the
Israeli action has ihrown -the -while-- question of
adherence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty into a
debate. It may not come out in the opeh in this
chamber today, but perhaps every adherent of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty is debating this matter within
hlmself, Who authorized Israel to decide that Iraq
does not need to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes because it is an oil-rich country? The
absurdity of that logic does not need any explanation
or elaboration. -011 Is ~a non-renewable source of
energy. Every nation, oil-rich or oil-starved, has the
right to seek alternative sources of energy, nuclear or
non-nuclear, If the reason given by Israel is taken to its
logical conclusion, it could even provide a pretext for
Israel to destroy a university in a neighbouring country
which may be teachine nuclear physics, as was
pointed otit bi the Mi&tcr
for Fbriign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia, Incidentally, the sovereign integrity of
his country, along with that of Jordan, was also
violated without compunction in the course of the
lsra~ll raid.
-

119. That is Iraq’s clean record. On the other hand,
what do we see on the part of Israel? We see a
persistent refusal to let others inspect its nuclear
facilities to satisfy the world regarding its intentions:
and, of course, it has never been a signatory of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, It is widely believed
-not only by us, but in many quarters friendly to
Israel-that Israel is in possession of nuclear weapons.
In this context, the evidence gathered by other neutral
non-interested parties should not be overlooked.
120. My delegation has ample reason to believe the
assertion made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq that.
“The motives behind the Zionist campaign and
-aggression against Iraq are, first, the desire to cover
up Israel’s possession of nuclear weapons and
secondly, and more importantly, the determlnatlon not to allow the Arab nation to acquire the
scientific or technical knowledge necessary for
its development and progress,” [228&h mrerlng,
para. 43.1

124. Israel quotas Artlclc 51 of the Charter. What a
travesty. Who has pivon Israel the t@ht to distort the
concept of self-defence aa doflned in the Charter by
the use of spurious oxcusor? Can it arrogate to itself
the right to commit acts of aggression against another
sovereign nation and in the process throw to the winds
all approved international law, including the inviolability of the rights of sovereign States over theil
airspace?

121. .My country adheres to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty along with more than 100 other nations.
Members of the Council can imagine what a Pandora’s
box the Israeli aggression against Iraqi nuclear facilities has opened, Is it not legitimate to ask the obvious
question: what are the safeguards for a signatory of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty after this unprovoked
aggressive act. which led to destruction and loss of
life, by another country. which does not adhere to the
Treaty and which has consistently refused international or any other impartial inspection of its nuclear
installations?

125. In this context, we should like to repeat what we
have long felt: that to inject arms, and in massive
quantities, into any troubled area is asking for .grave
consequences. It is simple logic, and a lesson of
history, that when it comes to problems betwesn
na!ions or within a region, it is the capacity of the

122. The Foreign Minister
of Iraq quoted the Director General of IAEA.
and made the following
quota:
tion from that authoritative
head of the Agency which
is the zealous
guardian
of the observance
of the
provisions
of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty:

nations

that

matters,

not their

intentions,

for

intcn-

tions can always change while capacities remain. That
is exactly what has happened.
Israel has the arms, mid
has the capacity and technical
know-how
to use them:
it sees no rule of conduct or provision
of international

13

law preventing it from forcing its political will on its
nelghbours whenever it feels like using those arms,

repeated, The scenario is the same. The preseminence
of the military capability of South Africa is even
greater than what one suspects. There are reports of
clandestine acquisition and development of nuclear
arsenals, The vast mr\iority nf the people of South
Africa and Namlbia have been held hostage under the
repressive laws of colonial domination and racial
discrimlnatiqn.

126. In this co ‘ext, I should like to quote some
extracts from an &torial which appeared in The New
-York Times of 9 June under the heading “Israel’s
Illusion”:
“Israel’s sneak attack on a French.built nuclear
<reactor near Baghdad was an act of inexcusable and
Fhort4ghted aggression,

130. The Israeli attack on Iraq is unprecedented in its
scope and nature. It is therefore no wonder that even
Israel’s friends have found it difficult to justify that
act. The international community must condemn in
one voice this irresponsible act on the part of Israel
and ensure that it is not repeated-not in Iraq or any
other country. The Council, as the principal organ of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security, must act now-and
decisively, There should be no doubt in anybcdy’s
mind that Israel cannot act with impunity in the way it
has been doing. This is an extremely serious matter
where peace is hostage, and the Council should ponder
very carefully the consequences of the act which took
place on 7 June. All those who are in the Council or
outside have a clear responsibility to judge the
question without any prejudice, on its own merit, and
initiate actlon commensurate with the grave issues
which are at stake. The Charter has ample provisions
for such action. And, above all, the people of the
world, wherever they are, should be made aware that,
when an attempt of so grave a nature to disrupt peace
and subvert international law has taken place, the
world must act in its own interest to save human
beings by taking appropriate deterrent action to ensure
that there is no repetition and that the country at fault
does not get away with its enormous guilt. This would
be the very first step to restorlng the confidence of u
shocked world in the fact that international law and the
rules governing conduct of relations between nations
cannot-be broken with impunity.

:-~ “But Israel has become the first nation to act on
.- that impulse [to take pre-emptive action1 and thus to
tear yet another of the international system’s fragile
barriers against anarchy. What good is Israel’s
heroic and painful quest for secure and recognized
I:~und~@les if it, too, pays them no heed?
“When Prime Minister Begin cries out that he is
-c’not -afraid of any reaction by the world’, he
-embraces the code of his weakest enemies, the code
of terror, He justifies aggression by his profound
sense of victimhood. And he assumes that even
= commitments to allies-like those governing the use
--of American-weapons-can
be twisted to suit any
-pypose,”
Where now is the cry for secure borders for Israel
which we have been hearing for such a long time?
Should not the Council now consider seriously the
question of providing security for Arab neighbours
that flnd their sovereignty threatened by Israel,
which has been disproportionately and indiscrimiw
aa@ly armed?
127. This latest aggressive action of Israel takes
place against the unsettled and worsening situation in
the Middle East. There is a serious crisis in unfortu.
nate sovereign Lebanon, raising the spectre of a new
cantlist: the Palestinian people continue to be denied
thcright to a homeland of their own. We believe that it
is not yet too late to turn this dangerous course away
kom the precipice of maJor conflagration, which could
be disastrous not only for the Middle East but for
mankind as a whole. The Israeli aggressive act has
once again underlined the imperative necessity of
making serious efforts to achieve a durable peace
through a just and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle

131. The PRESIDENT (interpret&on
from
Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Poland,
whom 1 invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
132. Mr. FREYBERG (Poland): Sir, allow me at the
very outset to extend to you our heartfelt congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency
of the
Security
Council, the body which is entrusted
with the
most important
task of and primary
responsibility
for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

East problem.

128. Peace built upon manifest
inequity
is cphemeral. One nation’s
security
cannot be bolstered
at the
expense of that of other nations. In order to achieve
peace in the Middle East and beyond.
the rule of law
and justice
must prevail.
Israel must withdraw
from
the occupied Arab lands and recognize
the inalienable
national rights of the people of Palestine.
129.
where

Similarly.
southern
what is happening

You represent a country with which Poland maintains
friendly
relations
of close and constructive
co-operation that is being constantly
developed
in the interest
of both our nations and in the interest
of the entire
international
community,
May I express our recognition of and esteem for your record of distinguished
and
tireless work, for your diplomatic
skill and abilities in
discharging
the duties of your high office. We wish you
every success in your difficult
work.

Africa
is another
region
in the Middle East is being
14

133. 1 should like also to extend our congratulations
to your predecessor, Mr. Nlsibori of Japan, for the
excellent way in which he presided over the Council
last month. May 1 also convey, through you, our
gratitude to the members of the Council for giving me
the opportunity to address this body,

140. The arguments of the Israeli authorities con.
cerning the alleged threat to Israel’s security are
groundless and cannot deceive anybody, The nuclear
centre under construction in Iraq is not, as the
authorities of that country have repeatedly stated,
intended to serve military purposes. -This is also
confirmed by the declarations of experts of IAEA,
under whose control Iraq, a State party to t’ “reaty
on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear War!
, has
placed its nuclear development programme. As is
known, Israel, which has for years been in possession
of nuclear reactors, has not acceded to the aforemen.
tioned Treaty.

134. Poland has asked to be allowed to speak at this
meeting of the Council to express its strongest
condemnation of the flagrant act of aggression committed by Israel against Iraq. The bombing by the
Israeli Air Force of the Iraqi nuclear centre near
Baghdad constitutes an unprecedented act of international terrorism
and piracy
which casts a long
ominous shadow over the situation in the Middle East,
already so dangerously -aggravated by the aggressive
policy of Israel,

141, It would be pertinent also to recall here General
Assembly resolutions 34189 and 351157.
142. The international community-the
United Na.
tions-whose
opinion is reflected in the numerous
statements made here in this chamber, confirms the
profound concern of nations over this serious dovolopment in the situation and its grave consequences for
peace and security in the region,

135, Nothing can justify this, yet another successive
act of aggression. It once again forcefully proves that
the Israeli authorities have not, even for a single
moment, departed from their policy of diktat towards
the Arab countries, which has been pursued for years
with brutality and arrogance. For years this policy of
adventurism of the Israeli authorities has been makina
it impossible to find a just and lasting solution to the
Middle East crisis-a solution that would also respond
to-the vital interests of the Israeli nation itself.

143. Polish public opinion, Polish society and the
Polish Government deplore with indignation this act of
open aggression that constitutes a flagrant violation of
all norms of international law, and they lay the burden
of responsibility for all its consequences on the Israeli
authorities and those forces which aid and abet them in
their aggnssivo policy*

136. Throughout the years-long discussions devoted
to the dangerous trends in the development of the
situation in the Middle East. Poland has been consistently pointing to its grave implications for world
peace and security. We have been steadfastly emnha.
iizing that a comprehensive, just and lasting-peace in
that region cannot be established without the withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem, and without the achievement of a
jttst solution of the problem of Palestine,
on the basis
of the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the establishment of its
own independent State,

144. The continued Israeli acts of aggression, in
defiance of numerous resolutions of the General
Assembly and tho~Councii, require action of a rigorous
and decisive kind. My country supports the requests in
thls respect put forth by the latest victim of this policy
of aggression. We support the just cause of Iraq. The
adoption of these moasures would servo trio cause of
peace and security well.
145. The PRESIDENT: (Inrerpretarlon fro,n Spanish): 1 now call on tho Minister for Foroign A&s of
Iraq. who has asked to be allowed to speak at this
stage.

-13’7. Tho ensuring of independent statehood for the
Arab people of Palestine, in accordance with the
postulates of the PLO, its solo, legitimate ronresen.

146. Mr. HAMMADI

iative,
is a prerequisite
for such- a solution.
The
position of the socialist countries,
Poland included, on
the problem
of the Middle East is well known as are
their proposals
for a just and lasting settlement.

(Iraq): 1 should like to inform

the Council that, on the request of the Government
of
Iraq, the representatives
of the Islamic Group met this
afternoon
and debated the subject-matter
of this series
of Council meetings-namely,
the aggression
of Israel
against Iraq’s nuclear
installations-and
that at the
end of the debate the following
resolution
was adopted
unanimously:

138. The recent act of Israeli aggression
against Iraq
adds directly
to the further aggravation
of the already
exceptionally
tense and explosive
situation
in the
Middle East. threatening
as it does a conflagration
at
any moment.
139. It goes without saying that such dangerous
steps
cannot
but make prospects
for a settlement
more
distant.
In their results,
they can only diminish
security
in the region.

“Hovirtg
rr~el at United Nations Headquarters
on
I6 June 1981 at the request of the Republic of Iraq to
consider
the act of aggression
committed
by Israel
against the Republic
of Iraq,
15

“Havbrg heard the statement of Sheikh Sabah AlAhmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, on
&half
of the Council of the Lewue of Arab States,
-~
“Rccallittg
the position of the member countries
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on
strengthening the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of ;Ise of nuclear
weapons (resolution No. 33/12-P), as well as the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones in
Africa, the Middle East and South Asia (resoiutipn No. 32/12*P),
“Considering
the grave situation arising from the
premeditated attack on the Iraqi nuclear installations, devoted exclusively to peaceful purposes,

the various resolutions adopted by the
Islamic Conference in connection with Israel’s acts
of aggression against the Palestinian people and the
Arab countries,
“Recalltng

“4fJrming
that aggression entails international
responsibility, with the payment of prompt and
adequate compensation for Ihe damages suffered,

“1. Strongly
condemns
the premeditated and
unprovoked aggression by Israel as an act of State
terrorism and a blatant violation of the sovereignty
of a non-aligned country and a member of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference:
“2. Rcquesls that the international community
take the measures envisaged in the Charter to
prevent Israel from pursuing such acts in future;
that Israel pay prompt and adequate compensation for the damages suffered by
Iraq;
“3.

Demands

“4.
Rt@lrms
the inalienable right of all States
to apply and develop their programmes for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy for economic and
social development in conformity with their priorities, interests and needs;

Y’

“5.
AfJrttts
its solidarity with and support of
Iraq in its endeavours to exercise that inalienable
right and to resist Israeli aggression;
“6.
Req@rttts
the resolutions of the General
Assembly relating to Israeli nuclear armament and
demands that the international community make
Israel con~piy with the said resolutions;

“7. Pledges to work together during the forthcoming session of the General Assembly to achieve
the application by the United Nations of the
measures envisaged in the Charter to prevent Israel
from committing such acts of aggression and to
comply with the norms of international law, the
principles of the Charter and the provisions of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.”
The meeting

y
.~
_

-_
z
-.
_
~.f

rose at 6.30 puma

NOTES
I This statement was made at the 563rd meeting of tho Board
Ciovomors
of IAEA, the OM&I
records of which are issued
summary form.
1 A/341542, Polltlcal
Declaration,
para. 116.
J A/36/I 16, Political
Declaration.
para. 70.

’ Unlrrd Stares Trcarlrs and 0:hrr

vol. 3. Part 4, 1952 (United
States
Washington,
IX!.. 1955). p. 4985.

Internariotud

Oovommont

Of
in

Axreetnents,

Printing OMce.

z
‘.C

J,,dl+i$

i&dIyYIdJ,ih&

b .bL j'l &I

-a t,.s +.A

,JU .L I ,u

J’ :;r”
-y

,,,, ,dJl
$ ,I L’,yr

.,s u...Jl ..Yl -I,+. JA J&l
J’ p &I ivrll
yYI J-n

&
,I

tordWtY*bD1Lul)k
BRLCI~~mb%trRBab7n~~ILltl6YIU,
HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

~lblHQ~P1t~llldT1!fl!!JdttA~*ftN(IIn!H.
NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nattonr publicattons
ma) k obtained from bookstores and distributor5
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nation. Sales Section. New York or(icnev~.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATlONS

UNIES

Lc5 publtcatiotts
des Nations Uttier sent ctt ventc dans les ltbtairies et ler agencca dCpositaircs du
monde enticr. Ittformet-vnus
aupr&dr
votre lihrairrou
adresnt-vousa
: Nations Unier. Section
des vents. New York IIU Gethe.
