159 (II). Organization of a United Nations
postal service

159 (II). Organisation d'une administration postale des Nations Unies

The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary-General to make inquiries into the administrative, technical and financial implications of the organization of a United
Nations postal service and to make recommendations to the next regular session of the General
~mbly.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

L'Assemblee generale
Demande au Secrctaire general d'effectuer des
recherches sur les aspects administratifs, techniq ucs et financiers de ]'organisation d'une administration postale des Nations Unies, et de formuler des recommandations pour la prochaine
session ordinaire de I' Assemblce gcncrale.
Cent-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

160 (II). Tax Equalization

160 CII). Perequation des imp&ts

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles set forth in the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations1 and in resolutions 13 (1) 2 and
78 ( I)" adopted at the two parts of the first session of the General Assembly with respect to tax-

L'Assemblee generale
Affirme a nouveau les principes enonccs clans
la Convention sur les privileges et immunitcs de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies1 et clans les resolutions 13 (I) 2 et 78 (I)" adoptees au cours de la
premicre et de la deuxicme partie de sa premiere
session et relatives a !'imposition;
Considerant que pour realiser tant l'egalite
parmi lcs Etats Membres que l'cquite a l'egard des
fonctionnaires de !'Organisation, les Etats Membres doivent exonerer de l'impot national sur le
revenu les traitements et indemnites payes par
!'Organisation des Nations Unies; et
Constatant que certains Etats Membres n'ont
pas encore instituc cette exoneration,

ation;

Considering that in order to achieve both equity
among the Member States and equality among
the staff members of the Organization, Member
States should exempt from national income taxation salaries and allowances paid by the United
Nations, and
Noting that certain Members have not yet established this exemption,
Resolves:
1. That Members which have not acceded to
the Convention on Privileges and Immunities are
requested to take the neces;;ary legislative action
to do so in order to exempt their nationals employed by the United Nations from national income taxation;
2. That t:1e Secretary-General is requested to
prepare and submit to the next regular session of
the General Assembly a Staff Contributions Plan
in accordance with the recommendations of the
Advisory Committee (document A/396);
3. That, pending granting tax exemption,
Members are requested to grant relief from double taxation to their nationals employed by the
United Nations;
4. That the Secretary-General is invited to
omit from all future personnel contracts any
clause which binds the Organization to refund
national income taxation in the absence of annual
authorization by the General Assembly;
5. That, in order to achieve equality among
staff members, the Secretary-General is authorized to reimburse staff members for national taxes
paid on salaries and allowances received from the
United Nations during the years 1946, 1947 and
1948,and
1

See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly

Decide ce qui suit:
1. Les Etats Membres qui n'ont pas encore
adhere a la Convention sur lcs privileges et immunites sont invites a prendre !'initiative des mesures
legislatives necessaires a cet effet, de fac;on a exonerer de l'impot national sur le revenu leurs nationaux qui sont au service de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies;
2. Le Secretaire general est invite a etablir et
a soumettre a la prochaine session ordinaire de
I' Assemblcc gcncrale un barcme des contributions
du personnel, conformcment aux recommandations du Comitc consultatif ( document A/396);
3. En attendant d'accorder !'exoneration de
l'impot, les Etats Membres sont invites a exonerer
de la double imposition leurs nationaux qui sont
au service de !'Organisation des Nations Unies;
4. Le Secretaire general est invite a supprimer
a l'avenir, dans tousles eontrats d'engagemcnt du
personnel, toute clause qui obligerait !'Organisation a rembourser l'impot national sur le revenu,
a moins d'une autorisation spcciale de I' Assemblee gcnfrale, renouvelablc chaque annee;
J. Pour realiser l'egalitc des membres du personnel, le Secrctaire general est autorise a leur
rembourser le montant de l'irnpot national verse
par eux sur les traitements et indemnitcs qu'ils
auront pen;us de !'Organisation des Nations
U nies pendant les annees 1946, 194 7 et 1948;
'Voir lcs Resolutions adoptles par l' Assemblee glnlrale
pendant la premierc partie de sa prerniere session, resolution 22 ( [), page 25.
:·Ibid, page 14.
'Voi1 ks Resolutions adoptees par l"Assemblle glnerale
pe11d::rnt la secondc partic de sa premiere session, page 139.

during the first part of its first session, resolution 22(1),

va1e 25.

Ibid., page 14.
'See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 139.

65

6. That the Secretary-General is requested to
submit a report to the next regular session of the
General Assembly on the action taken under this
resolution.

6. Le Sccretairc general est invite a presenter
a la prochaine session ordinairc de l'Assemblee
gcnerale Lill rapport sur Jes mesures prises en execution de la prcsente resolution.

Hundred and twrnty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

161 (II). Provisional staff regulations and
staff rules
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the staff rules and amendments
thereto which he had promulgated to implement
the Provisional Staff Regulatiom ( d()( utn<"nt

A/435);

Cent-1•ingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

161 (II). Statut et reglement provisoire du
•
personnel
L' Assemblee generate
Prend acte du rapport du Secretaire general sur
le rcglement du personnel qu'il a ctabli et Jes
a mcnd<"mrnt~ qu'il a apportcs ace rcglement pour
la misc en application du Statut provisoire du personnel ( document A/ ·135) ;

Requests the Secretary-General to present, four
months prior to the third regular session of the
General Assembly, a codification of the staff rules
for the information of the Assembly;

Invite le Secrctaire general a presenter, quatre
mois avant la troisicme session ordinaire de l'Assemblcc generale, et pour !'information de cette
Assemblce, le tcxte codifie du rcglement du personnel;

Resolves that the Provisional Staff Regulations
relating to children's allowances and education
grants (regulations 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34) be
cancelled and superseded, with effect from 1 January 1948, by the amended regulations contained
in Annex A, and

Decide d'annuler Jes articles du statut provisoire du personnel relatif aux indemnitcs pour
charge de famille et aux indemnitcs pour frais
d'etudes ( articles 30, 31, 32, 33 et 34) et de Jes
remplacer,
compter du premier janvier 1948
par Jes artir:ks amendes qui figurent a !'annexe
..\, et

Resolves that the Provisional Staff Regulations
relating to appointment, probation and promotion
be amended by the addition of regulation 12 A
and that regulation 21 be revised, as contained in
Annex B.

Decide de modifier les articles du statut pro\ isoire du personnel relatifs aux nominations,
la pcriode de stage et aux promotions par !'addition de !'article 12A, et de reviser l'articlc 21
'nnformcment au texte figurant !'annexe B.

a

a

a

Hundred and twenty-first JJ/enary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Crnt-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

Annex A

STAFF

Annexe A

REGL 1LATIONS

XII. CHJLDREN's t\1,1,ow,\Nn:, \Nll Eot'('·\Tlo.,;
GRANl,;

STATUT DU PERSONNEL
'-~! L

biDEMNITf:s

l'Ol"R CHARGES DE l'AMILLE ET

I"IDE\I 1' rrh,

,,, ,t·1, FR.\Is o'i•:TPIJE

llt'!!,1tlatiu11 :NJ
Artie/,· :w
As from I Ja11u;iry 19 lU, f11ll-tinw 11w111hn., nf
:\ partir du 1IT pnvi<T 194H, lt-s rtH'Itlhres du
the staff, with the ,·xccptio11 of t!Hb<' ,p,-cificdly 1wrs01mcl n\,ulii·r\'lncnt cmploycs, ;1 !'exception dt:
excluded by resolution of tlw Gn1cral ,-\sq·mhly. 1T11x qui ,011t cxprrsscment ,·xclus par unc dsolushall be entith-d to .1 childr\'11', ;illow.1rn·,· of tio11 de l':\ssf'lllbl,'.,. g(ncral,·, ont droit a Lllll" in~US200 per annum i11 TTsJw<:t of c;1d1 child urnli-r d, 111nit{ JHHII' charges ck familk de 20ll dollars
the age of sixteen Y"ars, or. if tlw , I11ld i, in lull- a111fri,ains par an et par n1fant de moins d!' seize
time attendance at ;1 sch, ,o] nr a u1mTrsity ( 01 ,, 11' ou, s'il s'agit d'un n1lant qui frequente reguliesimilar educational iristitutio11), under thl' age of i n·111,·nt um· frole OU Ulll' universite ( OU un etabliseighteen or twc11ty-two )Wars JTspcctivl'ly; pro- S\'l)H'flt d'cnseigncment analogue), de moins de
vidC'd that, if both pareuts .ire nwmbcrs of the i dix-huit ou vingt-deux ans respectivcment, sous
staff of the United Nations. only 0111' allmvanu· r<'"Tvt· quc, si k pi-re t·t la mere sont tous deux
will be paid in respect of each of their children; ' 11wmhrc-, du p,-rsonncl de ]'Organisation des Naand provided further that, whn" th,· Sencta1 v- , tions LT nics. urn· sn1lt- indemnite sera vcrsfr pour
General deems it advis,1hlc. no allm,a11< ,. or ,;11 i d1a,un de !curs cnfants et sous reserve en outre
allowance of an amount othl'r· than $U S2ll0 qu", si k Senctaire general le juge opportun, ii
may be paid under special cinumst,mcc.,. as for po11rra, dans des circonstances particulieres, n'etrc
exam.pie, short-term assignment, or a,sigmm·11ts at verse aucunC' indemnitr' OU bien etre verse une induty stations where the levels of Unit1·d Natiom dnnnite d'un montant autre que 200 dollars am.esalary scales are fixed at kvcls ,.1ryi11g from th,·
ri,·ains, cornmc, par cxemple, clans le cas de nomiHeadquarters scale.
1u lions pour um· breve periode, ou de nominations
;\ des postes situfs clans des lieux ou les eehelles de
traitements de ]'Organisation des Nations Unies
snnt differentes de celks qui sont en vigucur au
-.;if'gc.
