S/PV.7715

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7715

th meeting
Tuesday, 14 June 2016, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-17197 (E)
*1617197*

S/PV.7715

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/531, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2292 (2016).
I now give the floor to Council members wishing to
make a statement after the vote.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland): At the outset, I would like to offer
my sincerest condolences to the representative of the
United States following the horrific attack in Orlando
on Saturday. This was a hateful act of terror against the
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, and
the United States has the fullest support of the United
Kingdom and, I hope, of the whole Council as it comes
to terms with this unspeakable tragedy.
Sadly, it is clearer than ever that we are all
threatened by terrorism and those who follow terrorist
ideologies. It is absolutely imperative that we fight
these threats together — that we fight them as a united
2/7

14/06/2016

Council. So I warmly welcome the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2292 (2016) today. As the penholder on
this issue, the United Kingdom has made it a priority
to take meaningful action against the illegal flow of
weapons to Libya. We do so as a sign of our support
for the Libyan Government of National Accord. It is
making progress, taking control of the machinery of
Government in Tripoli, and beginning to assert their
authority, but it is clear that such progress still faces
challenges. The existing arms embargo has not fully
stopped the flow of weapons.
Illicit weapons are undermining the peace and
security of the region. They are enabling terrorists to
murder, to maim, to bring yet more chaos to the people
of Libya and the region, who have suffered for too long.
So this resolution authorizes all Member States and
regional organizations to take specific and measured
steps in response. It enables us to interdict vessels on
the high seas off Libya when we believe that there are
arms going to or from Libya on board. It enables us
to inspect, seize and dispose of weapons and to divert
vessels to a suitable port to facilitate that disposal.
In adopting this resolution today, let us remember
that we have taken but one step. It is sensible,
proportionate and necessary. The Libyans need our
support, and I want to pay tribute to the courage of
the Libyan forces fighting and increasingly defeating
Da’esh in Benghazi, in Sirte and elsewhere. But Libya
faces a twin threat. Just as Da’esh continues to exploit
Libyan territory, criminal gangs continue to exploit the
fear of people seeking a safer future. The waters of the
Mediterranean are now synonymous with suffering; so
many people feel they have no choice but to flee, to risk
all they have, so that they might escape to safety.
So in adopting this resolution today, let us also
reassert our support for the European Union mission,
Operation Sophia, and all that it is doing to address the
migrant crisis. We fully support its efforts to build the
capacity of the Libyan coast guard, and as the British
Prime Minister made clear at the Group of Seven
Summit, we stand ready to provide an additional ship
to increase interdiction efforts further.
Let me close by thanking all the members of the
Council, including our European colleagues from Spain
and France, for their support for this resolution today.
Together, we have taken an important step forward
that will help secure the coast of Libya, that will limit
16-17197

14/06/2016

The situation in Libya

Da’esh’s freedom of movement, and that will ultimately
help tackle the migration crisis.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 2292 (2016). We wish
to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for all
its efforts leading to the adoption of this important
resolution. In addition, my delegation wishes to
highlight the following points.
First, we reiterate our full support for the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord in
Libya and its efforts to restore stability in that fellow
Arab State.
Secondly, enforcing the arms embargo in Libya
and preventing illicit arms from reaching extremists
and terrorists there are indeed vital goals. In fact, they
are central to efforts to eradicate the terrorist threat in
Libya. In that context, we again we wish to commend
the United Kingdom and the other European Union
members of the Security Council for their initiative in
proposing this resolution.
Thirdly, achieving success in countering terrorism
in Libya requires a comprehensive approach in
addressing the threat. Therefore, no form of support
for terrorists, including weapons, must be allowed to
reach Libya. At the forefront of this effort should be
the halting of the flow of terrorists to the country, as
well as curbing their flow from the country through the
Mediterranean to Europe.
It is noteworthy that today’s resolution requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on
the threat posed to Libya and its neighbours by Da’esh
and other terrorist groups. Accordingly, Egypt, acting
in close cooperation with its partners on the Security
Council, intends to strive to meet this challenge with
a view to strengthening the international anti-terror
system/regime as it pertains to Libya and making it
more comprehensive.
Fourthly, we reiterate our call on the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
to extend its support to Libyan national security
institutions, at the head of which is the Libyan National
Army, in their efforts to combat and eradicate terrorism.
The Army, as the sole professional military force in
existence in Libya today, should form the core of any
future Libyan armed forces. We also wish to warn
against the extreme danger of relying on any elements
in Libya that have or have had ties to extremism or

S/PV.7715

terrorism when it comes to setting up the national armed
forces or to providing security to the Government of
National Accord.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation did not prevent the
adoption of resolution 2292 (2016). When we began
working on the draft, we had the impression that this
initiative was supposed to bring order to the illicit
trafficking in weapons in Libya. That is why our
delegation joined the discussions, intent on creating an
additional effective filter in international waters of the
Mediterranean.
But we were totally disappointed by the approaches
of some colleagues when working on the document.
When matters of principle had to be addressed, which
requires diplomacy, they instead relied on ultimatums.
Indeed, some partners decided that they wanted to
see the Brussels decision to broaden the mandate of
the military maritime Operation Sophia approved at
any price. Furthermore, we saw unilateral, one-sided
approaches put forward regarding the key issue of a
political settlement in Libya that did not abide by the
provisions of the Skhirat Agreement, which is the core
of the inter-Libyan agreement and the joint Vienna
Communiqué.
This is a very dangerous trend because, in this
context, the undermining consequences of NATO’s
actions are being overlooked as even as they negatively
impact stability in the Mediterranean basin, North
Africa and in the Middle East as a whole. But we are still
disentangling the violations and broad interpretations
of resolution 1973 (2011) and the violations perpetrated
by NATO members in 2011.
Our decision not to hinder the adoption of the
resolution was based on two ideas. First, the resolution
sets forth procedures that do not go beyond the
framework of those agreed earlier by the Security
Council, namely, resolution 2182 (2014) on Somalia and
resolution 2240 (2015) on combating illegal migration.
We hope that approaches to obtaining the agreement
of flag State for planning inspections will indeed be
upheld in full, and not just in words. We are guided by
the clear provision of international maritime law that
only the flag State has jurisdiction in the high seas.
This reflects one of the most important freedoms of the
high seas — the freedom of navigation.
Secondly, we believe that requests for exemptions
from the arms embargo, in particular with respect to

16-171973/7

S/PV.7715

The situation in Libya

the provision of lethal weapons, will be submitted for
review to the Sanctions Committee, which applies the
principle of consensus. We shall scrupulously follow
the content and review of such requests most carefully.
With respect to the provision of lethal weapons for the
needs of the Government of National Accord of Libya,
we would welcome the establishment of viable national
armed forces with a central chain of command. However,
such forces do not exist today in Libya. Nevertheless,
due to the position of some delegations, the resolution
does not stress the goal of establishing united security
forces, which is of critical importance to restoring the
unity of the country and its State institutions. Everyone
knows how the United Nations is working towards
these ends.
Creating united forces is reflected in the joint
Vienna Communiqué, of 16 May, and is enshrined in
resolution 2291 (2016), of 13 June, which extended
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. Without an effective central Government, a
loyal army and police, Libyans will be unable to deal
with all of the challenges ahead.
The position adopted by the Security Council as
it drew up today’s resolution leads one to believe that
there is a hidden agenda behind the resolution that
will not unite long-suffering Libya. It is possible that
somebody is seeking a carte blanche so as to manage
the weapons flow into Libya as they see fit. Today,
that means helping some Libyans against others, which
makes a peaceful settlement to the crisis even more
remote. That is demonstrated, inter alia, by evidence
of a foreign military presence in Libya not approved
by the Security Council, as well as the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters into the country.
We need to find our position in this context. Are
we going to work together or not? Let us not forget that
there are forces in Libya that are loyal to General Haftar
which are effectively pushing back against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other armed
terrorist groups. It is inadmissible to ignore this fact.
The general philosophy of the resolution leads
us to believe that the sponsors are, frankly, not being
very sincere in their fight against ISIL and the terrorist
presence in Libya. We underscore that we are fully
committed to the full implementation of the Skhirat
Agreement. However, we must remember that this
document plans for the approval of the composition of
the Government of National Accord and the Parliament
4/7

14/06/2016

in Tobruk. Unfortuantely, in spite of our multiple
requests, that was not reflected in the resolution and
was simply ignored.
We call on all Member States to come together
in an effort to resolve regional conflicts and combat
terrorism and avoid trying to implement their own
agendas. We call on Member States to be united rather
than divided.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Preventing the flow of illicit weapons into Libya affects
the peace, security and stability of Libya and related
regions. China supports the internationalnternational
community in taking effective measures to implement
the provisions of the Council’s resolutions as they relate
to the arms embargo in Libya and, in particular, in terms
of severing the channels and networks used by terrorist
organizations to smuggle and acquire weapons.
It is China’s hope that countries will fully and
appropriately implement resolution 2292 (2016), comply
with the related principles of international law, and
respect the sovereignty, legitimate rights and interests
of flag States. The measures taken by countries in
implementing the resolution should not prejudice the
exclusive jurisdiction of the flag States over the related
vessels. The inspection of related vessels should be
undertaken only with the consent of the flag States and
in accordance with the resolution.
China hopes that the various Libyan parties will
resolve their differences as soon as possible through
negotiation, restore peace, security and stability to the
country, and combine their efforts in order to meet the
challenges in the security field.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to add my voice to the expressions of sympathy
and condolences conveyed through the United States
delegation to the victims of the mass shooting in
Orlando, which took so many innocent lives.
By voting in favour of today’s resolution 2292
(2016), Ukraine proceeded from the conviction that,
despite the introduction of the arms embargo on Libya
in 2011, the threats posed by the trafficking of arms and
ammunition to that country, as well as to the countries of
the region, are growing. In an atmosphere of insecurity
and political instability, armed groups operating in
Libya, including terrorist organizations like Da’esh
or Al-Qaida, still have access to the transfer of arms
delivered to Libya in violation of the arms embargo.
16-17197

14/06/2016

The situation in Libya

These arms are being used not only to destabilize
Libya, but to undermine peace and security in northern
Africa and beyond.
The coordinated international support to Libya
and the region to address the issue of the smuggling of
illegal arms is highly needed now. The trafficking of
arms not only to Libya but from Libya must be stopped.
In this context, Ukraine welcomes the 23 May decision
of the Council of the European Union to extend the
mandate of Operation Sophia by one year and to add to
its mandate the implementation of the United Nations
arms embargo on the high seas off the Libyan coast.
We also welcome the decision of the European Union to
contribute to the training of the Libyan navy and coast
guard, which we believe would strengthen counter arms
proliferation measures in the Libyan territorial waters.
Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Libya.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain voted in favour of resolution 2292 (2016) and
wishes to thank Security Council members for their
support for Operation Sophia to ensure compliance
with the arms embargo on Libya by sea.
The European Union supports the security of the
Mediterranean. We share a series of problems that
neither of the two coasts can deal with on its own:
terrorism, human trafficking and arms proliferation,
among others. Operation Sophia has been successful in
its first year of life and has responded to traffickers
who endanger the lives of thousands of people on a
daily basis.
Spain is one of the largest contributors to the
Operation. Last May, in agreement with the Government
of Libya, we started training coast guard officials.
With the authorization of the Security Council, we now
wish to improve the enforcement of the arms embargo
on Libya as its authorities have requested for some
time now and in accordance with the commitment it
undertook at the ministerial conference in Vienna in
May. We also believe that a strengthened embargo will
strengthen the authority of the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Unity already installed in
Tripoli.
Ultimately, Operation Sophia is only one illustration
of Europe’s commitment to Libya. We have offered our
cooperation to Prime Minister Serraj in other areas,

S/PV.7715

such as emergency humanitarian assistance, health care
and strengthening local institutions.
Spain has also cooperated with Libya in other
areas, such as the promotion of freedom of the press
and fighting hate speech through a series of seminars
for the Libyan media, organized with the cooperation
of UNESCO. The third such seminar was held in June
2015 in Madrid. We will closely follow the development
of the political situation in the coming months and are
ready to contribute to the Libya’s stability, always with
utmost respect for its national sovereignty.
The path we have chosen, as High Representative
Federica Mogherini said in this Chamber a few days ago
(see S/PV.7705), is of constant coordination between
the European Union and the United Nations to serve the
collective interest of the international community as a
whole. That will be our main objective as we implement
the resolution we have just adopted.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to
express our condolences to the delegation and people of
the United States over the horrendous acts of violence
that took the lives of so many innocent people in
Orlando.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2292 (2016) because it believes
that the threat posed by the presence of terrorist and
other armed groups to peace and stability in Libya and
throughout the region calls for a common effort of the
international community to take effective measures
against the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons in violation of the arms embargo. We believe,
indeed we are convinced, that illegal arms trafficking
is one of the main contributors to destabilization and to
the propagation of terrorism in the region.
In authorizing the interdiction of ships on the
high seas suspected of transporting arms to be used
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant or Da’esh
or other terrorist organizations in Libya, respect for
international law must be upheld, which includes
obtaining the consent of the vessel’s flag State prior
to any inspections. The authorities of those flag States
should cooperate with such inspections. We must
also bear in mind the need to not cause undue delay
to or undue interference with the exercise of freedom
of navigation in accordance with the relevant legal
instruments of the law of the sea. We believe that the
practice of interdicting vessels on the high seas off the

16-171975/7

S/PV.7715

The situation in Libya

coast of Libya with a view to combating the traffic in
arms and related materiel should not be extrapolated to
other possible cases, nor should such practice take place
in the territorial waters of Libya without that country’s
express consent.
We are convinced that the fight against terrorism
requires the effective implementation, without any
double standard, of Security Council resolutions that
prohibit the financing and transfer of arms to terrorist
groups, which are committing appalling crimes in the
Middle East and Africa in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights.
Moreover, our delegation is aware of the tremendous
challenges faced by the new Libyan authorities in this
transition phase with regard to the urgent need to
address the proliferation of weapons and the presence
of various armed groups, the majority of which are
operating outside of the effective control of the Libyan
State. Foreign terrorist fighters, as well as terrorist and
extremist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida, have continued to consolidate
their presence in Libya, exploiting the institutional
collapse and existing political divisions as well as the
absence of strict border controls resulting from the
armed intervention by certain NATO countries in 2011.
As indicated last week by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler (see S/PV.7706),
Libya is awash in weapons. There are approximately
20 million weapons in a country with only 6 million
inhabitants, which reach Libya illegally by land and
by sea. This is the alarming reality that is fuelling the
conflict and endangering the gains made in the context
of the political process as well as by the Government of
National Accord.
In this regard, Venezuela believes that it is
vital that the Libyan authorities implement a viable
plan that would enable the State to fully assume its
security functions as quickly as possible, including
the monopoly over the use of force provided for in the
relevant provisions of the Libyan Political Agreement.
This includes the development of national security
institutions, the demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, and the implementation of official
security-sector reform programmes. The international
community as a whole must support Libya in these
objectives.
The adoption of this resolution is taking place in
a decisive context in terms of making progress in the
6/7

14/06/2016

implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement, a
process promoted by the United Nations and that we
all supported. We reiterate that the implementation of
the Skhirat Political Agreement, of 17 December 2015,
is the only way of achieving a peaceful and sustainable
solution that could provide the necessary assistance
and support to Libyan State institutions, so as to enable
them to function smoothly and contribute to finding
a peaceful, negotiated political solution to the armed
conflict in Libya.
Lastly, we wish to reiterate our firm commitment
to the principle of full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of France.
As I did yesterday on behalf of the presidency of
the Security Council, I should like here, on behalf of
France, to once again express to our American friends
and partners our deep condolences and full solidarity
during this most difficult time.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2292 (2016), which is the result of the joint
initiative of the three members of the European Union
on the Security Council, with the United Kingdom as
penholder. Following the vote and the statements that
have just been made, I believe that there are several
salient points.
First, this document addresses primarily an urgent
security need. As violations of the arms embargo on
Libya are ongoing, fuelling instability in the country
and benefiting Da’esh and other terrorist groups, it
was imperative that the Security Council establish, as
expeditiously as possible, an adequate framework for
action providing the international community with
real and effective means of implementing the embargo
imposed by the Council, without prejudice, of course,
to the capacity of the Government of National Accord
to request exemptions thereto.
The resolution makes it possible to effectively
carry out, on the high seas off the Libyan coast,
inspections of vessels suspected of being engaged in
arms trafficking. This represents a significant step
forward in the implementation of the arms embargo in
Libya. It will contribute to the stability of the country
and to the security of neighbouring States and of the
region as a whole.
16-17197

14/06/2016

The situation in Libya

The international community must also work
to stem the flow of weapons to Libya by land and by
sea, weapons that, if not authorized by the sanctions
committee, represent a violation of the resolutions
of the Security Council. It is also imperative that all
parties increase their vigilance in this area.
Secondly, the document is well balanced. The
Chapter VII authorization under the resolution is
carefully set out. It would apply in very specific
contexts and does not call into question the law of
the sea, whose guiding principle remains the consent
of the flag State. The resolution also has as a goal the
implementation of the arms embargo, so as to support
the Government of National Accord. It also usefully
recalls that the Government can be the recipient of
legal arms transfers, with a view in particular to
strengthening those who, under full Government
authority, are combating terrorism.
Thirdly and finally, the document will immediately
be followed up with concrete action. As the Council is
aware, the European Union, on 23 May, made known
its intention to contribute to the strengthening of the

S/PV.7715

arms embargo in Libya by broadening the scope of
the mandate of operation Sophia of the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean. This commitment on the part of the
European Union and the support provided today by the
Security Council through the adoption of the resolution
bear witness once again to the leading role played by
the European Union in the quest for peace and stability
in Libya, primarily in the interests of the Libyan people
but also with a view to ensuring the security of the
countries neighbouring Libya, of the region and of
Europe. We deem this a most positive development.
I wish to conclude my statement by emphasizing the
success that the adoption of the resolution represents
for the Security Council. It makes clear once again
our capacity to come together to take the measures
necessary so as to effectively ensure international
peace and security for a reconciled and unified Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

16-171977/7
