214

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

proposed Conference _to ~ave an UJ?·_to-~ate assessment, by
priority, of the humanitanan, rehabihtat10n and re_settlement
needs of the refugees and returnees, and the ass1stan~e _required by the countries concerned to strengthen ex1stmg
services, facilities and infrastructure and, for that purpose,
to reallocate existing resources;
7. Calls upon the competent specialized ~genc~es and
organizations of the United Nations system, mcludmg the
development-oriented organizations, to provide all nece~sary co-operation and support to the Secretary-General m
respect of the report called for in paragr~ph 6 above, to be
prepared for the Conference to be held m 1984;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made to
cover the expenses involved in the preparation of the report,
as well as those for the organization of the Conference in
1984;
9. Appeals to the international community,. all Member
States, the specialized agencies and regional, mtergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide the
utmost support for the Conference with a view to offering
maximum financial and material assistance to refugees and
returnees in Africa;
10. Invites the executive bodies of the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental ~rganizations to bring the present resolution to the attentlon of
their members and to consider, within their respective spheres
of competence, various ways and means substantially to
increase assistance to African refugees and returnees;
11. Stresses that any additional assistance provided for
refugee-related projects should not be at the expense of the
development needs of the countries concerned;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
111 th plenary meeting
18 December 1982

37/198.

International campaign against traffic in drugs

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/ 13 2 of 14 December 1981,
in which it recognized the need, within the context of the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, 164 for an effective international campaign against traffic in drugs, and
36/168 of 16 December 1981, in which it adopted the Strategy and the basic five-year programme of action, 164
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/8.and 1982/9 of 30 April 1982,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 165
Reaffirming the need to improve regional and interregional co-operation and co-ordination, particularly in the
field of law enforcement, to eradicate illicit traffic,
Acknowledging that many countries, including developing countries, continue to divert substantial human, financial
and other resources to control international drug trafficking,
Recognizing, in particular, the dilemma of transit States,
which have no control over the production of and demand
for illicit narcotics, yet are seriously affected both at the
domestic and international levels by the movement of illicit
drugs,
164
See Officio.I Records of the Economic and Social Council, /98/,
Supplement No. 4 (EJl981/24), annex II.
165 A/37/530.

Noting the significant role of the international drug con~I
treaties in the development of effective countermeasures m
combating the illicit supply, demand and traffic in drugs,
Considering the important role of the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control in the implementation of
various drug control progr~mes_, partic_ularly in ~ev~loping
countries, and the necessity of mcreasmg contnbutlons to
the Fund to permit it to continue its most valuable work,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Calls upon Member States that have n?t yet done S?
to ratify the international drug control treaties and, untd
such time, to endeavour to abide by the provisions thereof;
3. Encourages Member States to contribute, or to continue to contribute, to the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control so that it may pursue its useful programmes
in the field of drug abuse control;
4. Urges organizations and programmes wi_thin ~e
United Nations system, as well as Member States with available resources and expertise, to continue to grant technical
and other forms of assistance, especially in the area of
training of law enforcement professionals, to co_untries most
affected by the illicit production of and traffic m drugs and
drug abuse;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, through the C~mmission on Narcotic Drugs, to explore all avenues leadmg
to further improving regional and international co-ordinati~n
of activities against drug trafficking and drug abuse, m
particular:
(a) To explore the feasibility of establishing, on a continuing basis, co-ordination mechanisms fo~ drug law enforcement in regions where these do not exist;
(b) To give adequate priority to measures designed to
alleviate the special problems of transit States;
(c) To consider convening in 1986 an interregional
meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to devote a special issue of the Bulletin on Narcotic Drugs, published by
the Division of Narcotic Drugs of the Secretariat, to an
analysis of the campaign against drug trafficking;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report, for review by the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session, on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "International campaign against traffic in drugs".
I 1Ith plenary meeting
18 December 1982

37/199.

Alternate approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Charter of the United Nations the
peoples of the United Nations declared their determination
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of
men and women and of nations large and small and to
employ international machinery for the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling also the purposes and principles of the Charter
to achieve international co-operation in solving international
