A/RES/55/76

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 109

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/597)]

55/76.

Fiftieth anniversary of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and World Refugee Day

The General Assembly
1.
Commends the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for its leadership and coordination of international action for refugees, and
acknowledges the tireless efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner to provide
international protection and assistance to refugees and other persons of concern and
to promote durable solutions for their problems during the past fifty years;
2.
Pays tribute to the dedication of United Nations humanitarian workers
and associated personnel, the staff of the Office of the High Commissioner in the
field, including local staff, who risk their lives in the performance of their duties;
3.
Reaffirms its support for the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner, in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions, on
behalf of returnees, stateless persons and internally displaced persons;
4.
Notes the crucial role of partnerships with Governments and
international, regional and non-governmental organizations, as well as of the
participation of refugees in decisions that affect their lives;
5.
Recognizes that, by virtue of its activities on behalf of refugees and other
persons of concern, the Office of the High Commissioner also contributes to
promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations, in particular those
related to peace, human rights and development;
6.
Notes that 2001 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees, 1 which sets out the fundamental concepts for
international refugee protection;
7.
Also notes that the Organization of African Unity has agreed that an
international refugee day may coincide with Africa Refugee Day on 20 June;

1

00 56395

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

A/RES/55/76

8.

Decides that, as from 2001, 20 June will be celebrated as World Refugee

Day.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

2
