VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of resolution 3 7/ 198 and that a meeting of heads of
national drug law enforcement agencies is convened in
1986;
I I. Also requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding, within the framework
of advisory services, interregional seminars to study the
experience gained by the United Nations system, in particular by the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control,
and by Member States in integrated rural development
programmes for replacing illegal crops;
12. Calls upon the specialized agencies and all other
relevant bodies of the United Nations system to participate actively in the implementation of the present
resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "International campaign
against traffic in drugs".
IOI st plenary meeting
I 4 December I 984

39/144.

National institutions for the protection and
promotion of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ l 23 of 16 December 1977,
33/46 of 14 December 1978, 34/49 of 23 November 1979,
36/ I 34 of 14 December 1981 and 38/ 123 of 16 December
1983,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Mindful also of the need to create conditions, at the
national, regional and international levels, for the protection and promotion of human rights,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 215 the International Covenants on
Human Rights 216 and other international human rights
instruments for promoting respect for and observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Conscious of the significant role which institutions at the
national level can play in protecting and promoting human
rights and fundamental freedoms and in developing and
enhancing public awareness and observance of those rights
and freedoms,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General; 21 7
2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and
independence of national institutions for the protection
and promotion of human rights, in accordance with
national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role that
national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of such national institutions;
4. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment or, where they already exist, the
strengthening of national institutions for the protection
and promotion of human rights;
5. Invites all Member States to take appropriate steps
to disseminate the texts of human rights instruments,
215 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 I 6 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

233

including international covenants and conventions, in
their respective national or local languages, in order to give
the widest possible publicity to these instruments;
6. Recommends that all Member States should consider including in their educational curricula material relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights
issues;
7. Also recommends that all Member States should
take appropriate steps to encourage the exchange of experience in the establishment of national institutions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in carrying out
public information activities in the field of human rights,
to give due attention to the role of national institutions
and non-governmental organizations concerned with the
protection and promotion of human rights;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request, in
the implementation of paragraph 5 above, according high
priority to the needs of developing countries;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and, as
appropriate, increase assistance in the field of human
rights to Governments, at their request, within the framework of the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
his reports and of further information received, to prepare
and submit to the General Assembly, through the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council, a consolidated report, for eventual publication as
a United Nations handbook on national institutions for
the use of Governments, including information on the
various types and models of national and local institutions
for the protection and promotion of human rights, taking
into account differing social and legal systems;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/145.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Charter of the United Nations the
peoples of the United Nations declared their determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and small
and to employ international machinery for the promotion
of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling also the purposes and principles of the Charter
to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Emphasizing the significance and validity of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 215 and of the International Covenants on Human Rights 216 in promoting
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
21 7 ,\!39 556 and Add. I

234

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

Recalling its resolution 32/ l 30 of 16 December 1977, in
which it decided that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system with respect to human
rights questions should take into account the concepts set
forth in that resolution,
Recalling also its resolutions 34/46 of 23 November
1979, 35/174 of 15 December 1980, 36/133 of 14 December 1981 and 38/124 of 16 December 1983,
Recognizing that the human being is the main subject of
development and that everyone has the right to participate
in, as well as to benefit from, the development process,
Reiterating once again that the establishment of the new
international economic order is an essential element for
the effective promotion and the full enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reiterating also its profound conviction that all human
rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent and that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion
and protection of both civil and political and economic,
social and cultural rights,
Reaffirming the importance of furthering the activities
of the existing organs of the United Nations in the field of
human rights in conformity with the principles of the
Charter,
Underlining the need for the creation of conditions at
the national and international levels for the promotion and
full protection of the human rights of individuals and
peoples,
Emphasizing that Governments have the duty to ensure
respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Taking note of the work done by the Working Group of
Governmental Experts on the Right to Development, as
reflected in its reports to the Commission on Human
Rights,21s
Underlining that the right to development is an inalienable human right,
Recognizing that international peace and security are
essential elements for the full realization of human rights,
including the right to development,
Considering that the resources which would be released
by disarmament could contribute significantly to the
development of all States, in particular the developing
countries,
Recognizing that co-operation among all nations on the
basis of respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each State, including the right of each
people to choose freely its own socio-economic and political system, and to exercise full sovereignty over its wealth
and natural resources, subject to the principles referred to
in article 1, paragraph 2, and article 25 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 219 is
essential for the promotion of peace and development,
Convinced that the primary aim of such international
co-operation must be the achievement by each human
being of a life of freedom and dignity and freedom from
want,
Acknowledging the progress so far achieved by the international community in the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Concerned, however, at the occurrence of violations of
human rights in the world.
Reaffirming that nothing in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights or in the International Covenants on

218 E/CN.41I983111 and E/CN.4· I 984 13 and Corr. I and :>.

Human Rights may be interpreted as implying for any
State, group or person the right to engage in any activity or
perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the
rights and freedoms set forth therein,
Affirming that the ultimate aim of development is the
constant improvement of the well-being of the entire population, on the basis of its full participation in the process
of development and a fair distribution of the benefits
therefrom,

I. Reiterates its request that the Commission on
Human Rights continue its current work on the overall
analysis with a view to further promoting and improving
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
question of the Commission's programme and working
methods, and on the overall analysis of the alternative
approaches and ways and means for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the provisions and concepts of
General Assembly resolution 32/ 130 and other relevant
texts;
2. Affirms that a primary aim of international co-operation in the field of human rights is a life of freedom, dignity and peace for all peoples and for each human being,
that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interrelated and that the promotion and protection of one category of rights should never exempt or
excuse States from the promotion and protection of the
others;
3. Affirms its profound conviction that equal attention
and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, protection and promotion of both civil and
political and economic, social and cultural rights;
4. Reaffirms that it is of paramount importance for the
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms
that Member States should undertake specific obligations
through accession to, or ratification of, international
instruments in this field and, consequently, that the standard-setting work within the United Nations system in the
field of human rights and the universal acceptance and
implementation of the relevant international instruments
should be encouraged;
5. Reiterates once again that the international community should accord. or continue to accord, priority to the
search for solutions to mass and flagrant violations of
human rights of peoples and individuals affected by situations such as those mentioned in paragraph I (e) of General Assembly resolution 32/130, paying due attention also
to other situations of violations of human rights;
6. Reaffirms its responsibility for achieving international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and
expresses its concern at serious violations of human rights,
in particular mass and flagrant violations of these rights,
wherever they occur;
7. Expresses concern at the present situation with
regard to the achievement of the objectives and goals for
establishing the new international economic order and its
adverse effects on the full realization of human rights, in
particular the right to development;

8. Reaffirms that the right to development is an inalienable human right;
9. Reaffirms also that international peace and security
are essential elements in achieving the full realization of
the right to development;
210 See resolution 2201\ A (XXI). annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Recognizes that all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are indivisible and interdependent;
11. Considers it necessary that all Member States promote international co-operation on the basis of respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
each State, including the right of each people to choose
freely its own socio-economic and political system, and to
exercise full sovereignty over its wealth and natural
resources, subject to the principles referred to in article I,
paragraph 2, and article 25 of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, with a view to
resolving international problems of an economic, social
and humanitarian character;
12. Expresses concern at the disparity existing between
the established norms and principles and the actual situation of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
world;
13. Urges all States to co-operate with the Commission
on Human Rights in the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms;
14. Reiterates the need to create, at the national and
international levels, conditions for the full promotion and
protection of the human rights of individuals and peoples;
l 5. Reaffirms once again that, in order to facilitate the
full enjoyment of all rights and complete personal dignity,
it is necessary to promote the rights to education, work,
health and proper nourishment through the adoption of
measures at the national level, including those that pro220 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1984, Supplement No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I). chap. II, sect. A.

235

vide for workers' participation in management, as well as
the adoption of measures at the international level, including the establishment of the new international economic
order;
16. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
take the necessary measures to promote the right to development, taking into account the results achieved ~y the
Working Group of Governmental Experts on the Right to
Development, which is engaged in the study of the scope
and content of the right to development, and welcomes the
decision of the Commission in its resolution 1984/ l 6 of 6
March 1984 220 that the Working Group should continue
its work with the aim of submitting as soon as possible a
draft declaration on the right to development;
I 7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report containing information on the progress made by the Working
Group of Governmental Experts on the Right to Development of the Commission on Human Rights in the drafting
of a declaration on the right to development;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms".

101st plenary meeting
I 4 December I 984
