General Aseembly-Thirtieth Seuion

94

Expresses its deep appreciation to the Govemment
and people of Mexico for acting as host to the World
Conference of the International Women's Year.
·
2441 st P1enary meeting
15 December 1975
3519 (XXX). Women's participation in the
strengthening of international peace and security and in the struggle against colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and ali forms of foreign
domination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3276 (XX·IX) of 10 December 1974,
Considering the report of the World Conference of
the Intemational Women's Year, 47 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975, in particular the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and
Their Contribu,tion to Development and Peace, 1975,48
the World Plan of Action for the lmplementation of
the Objectives of the lnternational Women's Year49 and
the resolutions contained in the report of the Conference,50
· Appreciating that the Conference emphasized the
important role women must play in the strengthening
of initernational peace and security and in the expansion of co-operation among States, irrespective of their
social and economic systems, based on the principies
of peaceful coexistence in accordance with the Charter
of ithe United Nations,
Endorsing the statement of the Conference that intemational co-operation and peace require the achievement of national liberation and independence, the preservation of sovereignty and territorial integrity, the
elimination of colonialism aod neo-co1onialism, foreign
aggression and occupation, apartheid and racial discrim'ination in all its forms, as well as the recognition of
the dignity of peoples and their right to self-determination,
Noting with satisfaction the opinion expressed by
the Conference that peace requires that women as well
as men should reject any type of intervention in the
domestic affairs of States, openly or covertly carried
out by other States or by transnational corporations,
and that women as well as men should also promote
respect for the sovereign right of a State to establish its
own economic, social and political system without political and economic pressures or coercion of any type,
Taking into account the view of the Conference that
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of Stares111
confirms, ínter alía, the obligation of all States to promote the implementation of general and complete disarmament, to use the funds thus saved for economic and
social development and to provide part of these funds
for the needs of the developing countries,
N oting with satisfaction the positive changes which
have taken place during the last few years in intemational relations, such as the elimination of the dangerous sources of war in Viet-Nam and the results of the
' 1 Unitcd Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1.
"lbid., cbap. I.
" lbld., cbap. TI. sect. A.
Gil !bid., chap. IIT.
i1 Rei,o)ution 12111

fXXJX).

Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
and noting also the importance of deepening the process
of international détente and strengthening an intemational just peace based on full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and the interests of all States,
large and small,
Emphasizing the grave concern that in sorne regions of the world colonialism, apartheid, racial discrimination and foreign aggression continue to exist
and terriitories are still occupied, which represents a
most serious infringement of the princii-es of the Charrer of the United Nations and of human rights of both
.men and women, and of the peoples' right to selfdetermination,
1. Realfirms the principies promulgated in the DecIaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and Their
Contribution to Development and Peace, 197 5;
2. Realfirms that the strengthening of intemational
peace and security, co-operation among ali States irrespective of their social and economic systems, based
on the principie of peacep¡I coexistence, and the elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism, neocolonialism, apartheid, all forros of racism and racial
discriminaition, alíen domination and foreign aggression
and occupation are indispensable for the safeguarding
of the fundamental human rights of both men and
women;
3. Calls upon all Govemments, intergovernmental
and non-govemmental organizations, particularly women's organizations and women's groups, to intensify their
efforts to strengthen peace, to expand and deepen the
process of international détente and make it irreversible, to eliminare completely and definitely ali forms of
colonialism and to put an eod to the policy and practice of apartheid, ali forms of racism, racial discrimination, aggression, occupation and foreign domination;
4. Urges all Governm.ents to take effective measures towards bringing about general and complete disarmament and convening the World Disarmament Conference as soon as possible;
5. Expresses its solidarity with and its assistance
for women who contribute towards the struggle of the
peoples for their national liberation;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3520 (XXX). World Conference of the
lntemational Wom&i's Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975 International Women's Year,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1849 (LVI) and 1851 (LVI) of 16 May 1974 on
the convening of an international conference during the
lntemational Women's Year as a focal point of the intemational observance of the Y car,
Recallinf,f further its rcsolution~ 3276 (XXIX) nnd
3277 (XXIX) oí 10 J>cn~mhcr 11'74 ll'i wrll 11s lirn-
