United Nations

A/RES/57/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 103

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/550)]

57/182. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/203 of 22 December 1995, 51/69 of 12 December
1996, 52/100 of 12 December 1997, 53/120 of 9 December 1998, 54/141 of
17 December 1999, 55/71 of 4 December 2000 and 56/132 of 19 December 2001,
Recalling also the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”, 1 and the proposed actions and initiatives to overcome
obstacles and challenges thereto,
Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 2 and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session are important contributions to the
advancement of women worldwide in the achievement of gender equality and must
be translated into effective action by all States, the United Nations system and other
organizations concerned, as well as by non-governmental organizations,
Stressing the importance of strong, sustained political will and commitment at
the national, regional and international levels for achieving full and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session rests primarily at the national level and that strengthened efforts are
necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced international cooperation is
essential for the effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session,

_______________
1

Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2

02 55033

A/RES/57/182

Welcoming the increased attention to the situation of women and girls and the
integration of a gender perspective in the work of the United Nations, in particular
in the outcomes of major conferences, special sessions and summit conferences and
their follow-up processes, and reaffirming its commitment to building on progress
achieved in this respect,
Welcoming also the attention given to the situation of women and girls and the
integration of a gender perspective in the outcomes of the International Conference
on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to 22 March
2002, 3 the Second World Assembly on Ageing, held in Madrid from 8 to 12 April
2002, 4 the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly, held in New
York from 8 to 10 May 2002, 5 and the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002, 6
Emphasizing the importance of the decision taken by the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 2001/41 of 26 July 2001, to devote the coordination
segment of one of its substantive sessions, before 2005, to the review and appraisal
of the system-wide implementation of agreed conclusions 1997/2 on mainstreaming
the gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations
system, adopted by the Council on 18 July 1997, 7
Noting with concern that the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto 8 have not yet entered into force,
Reaffirming the primary and essential role of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in promoting the advancement of women and gender
equality, while noting the open debate on peacekeeping and gender held in the
Security Council on 25 July 2002, 9
1.
Reaffirms the goals, objectives and commitments contained in the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action 2 and also in the political declaration and further
actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-third special session; 1
2.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the follow-up to and progress made in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly; 10
3.
Calls upon Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, within their respective mandates, and all relevant actors of civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to continue to take effective action to
_______________
3
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
5
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
6
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolutions 1 and 2.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/52/3/Rev.1),
chap. IV, para. 4.
8
Resolution 55/25, annexes I–III, and resolution 55/255, annex.
9
See S/PV.4589 and Corr.1 and S/PV.4589 (Resumption 1).
10
A/57/286.

2

A/RES/57/182

achieve full and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as elaborated in the
above-mentioned documents;
4.
Strongly encourages Governments to continue to support the role and
contribution of civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations and
women’s organizations, in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
5.
Calls upon Governments and all other relevant actors to continue to
integrate a gender perspective in the implementation of and follow-up to recent
United Nations conferences, summits and special sessions and in future reports on
this subject;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to include in his annual and quinquennial
reports on the follow-up to the United Nations Millennium Declaration 11 an
assessment of the progress made in promoting the goal of gender equality, in
particular in relation to the development goals set forth in the Millennium
Declaration, and recommendations to improve the measurement and coverage of
indicators so that progress towards gender equality can be evaluated over time;
7.
Welcomes the convening of the World Summit on the Information
Society, to be held in Geneva in 2003 and in Tunis in 2005, and encourages
Governments and all other stakeholders to integrate a gender perspective in the
preparatory processes and outcome documents;
8.
Reaffirms its decision that the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on the Status of Women, in accordance with
their respective mandates and with General Assembly resolution 48/162 of
20 December 1993 and other relevant resolutions, constitute a three-tiered
intergovernmental mechanism that plays the primary role in overall policy-making
and follow-up and in coordinating the implementation and monitoring of the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
9.
Also reaffirms that the follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on
Women and the twenty-third special session will be undertaken within the
framework of an integrated and coordinated follow-up to major international
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields;
10. Invites the Economic and Social Council to continue its efforts to ensure
that gender mainstreaming is an integral part of all activities in its work and that of
its subsidiary bodies, building upon agreed conclusions 1997/2 adopted by the
Council on 18 July 1997, 7 and in this regard welcomes the inclusion of the issue of
gender mainstreaming in its agenda, the consideration of annual progress made in
gender mainstreaming and the attention given to gender perspective in the outcomes
of the 2002 substantive session of the Council;
11. Encourages the Council to request the regional commissions, within their
respective mandates and resources, to intensify efforts to build up a database, to be
updated regularly, in which all programmes and projects carried out in their
respective regions by organizations or bodies of the United Nations system are
listed, and to facilitate the dissemination of information on such programmes and

_______________
11

See resolution 55/2.

3

A/RES/57/182

projects, as well as the evaluation of their impact on the empowerment of women
through the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action;
12. Welcomes the contribution of the Commission on the Status of Women in
the follow-up and review of the future implementation of the commitments made in
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session, reaffirms that the Commission will continue to play a central role in
this regard, and encourages Governments, the relevant specialized agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system and civil society to continue to
support its work;
13. Recognizes the importance attached to the regional and subregional
monitoring of the global and regional platforms for action and of the
implementation of the outcome of the twenty-third special session by regional
commissions and other regional or subregional structures, within their mandates, in
consultation with Governments, and calls for the promotion of further cooperation
in that respect among Governments and, where appropriate, national machineries of
the same region;
14. Also recognizes that sustained political will and commitment at the
national, regional and international levels are essential elements for the full and
accelerated implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of
the twenty-third special session;
15. Further recognizes that adequate mobilization of resources at the
national and international levels, as well as new and additional resources for the
developing countries, including the least developed countries and countries with
economies in transition, from all available funding mechanisms, including
multilateral, bilateral and private sources, will also be required;
16. Acknowledges that the creation of an enabling environment at the
national and international levels, including through the full participation of women
at all levels of decision-making, is necessary to ensure the full participation of
women in economic activities, and calls upon States to remove obstacles to the full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session;
17. Reaffirms that, in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
strategic objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session, the United Nations system should promote an active
and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective, including through the
work of the Division for the Advancement of Women and of the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and the maintenance
of gender units and focal points;
18. Also reaffirms that United Nations bodies that focus on gender issues,
such as the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Development Fund
for Women, the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women and the United Nations Children’s Fund, have a critical role to play in the
implementation of the objectives of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, and recognizes that gender
specialists throughout the United Nations system also have an important role to play
in this regard;
19. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by all relevant
organizations of the United Nations system in promoting the role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution;
4

A/RES/57/182

20. Recognizes the important role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peace-building, the importance of their equal participation and
full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security and the need to increase their role in decision-making with regard to
conflict prevention and resolution, and urges the United Nations system and
Governments to make further efforts in this regard and to take steps to ensure and
support the full participation of women at all levels of decision-making and
implementation in development activities and peace processes, including conflict
prevention and resolution, post-conflict reconstruction, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peace-building, as well as through the integration of a gender perspective into
those United Nations processes;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all United Nations
personnel and officials at Headquarters and in the field, especially in field
operations, receive training so that they mainstream a gender perspective in their
work, including gender impact analysis, and to ensure appropriate follow-up to such
training;
22. Requests all bodies that deal with programme and budgetary matters,
including the Committee for Programme and Coordination, to ensure that all
programmes, medium-term plans and programme budgets visibly mainstream a
gender perspective;
23. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women 12 to include information on measures taken to
implement the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as well as the Beijing
Platform for Action, in their reports to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women under article 18 of the Convention;
24. Welcomes the entry into force of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 13 and urges
States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to consider signing,
ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
25. Urges Member States to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto,8 in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to disseminate the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session as widely as possible in all the official languages of the United Nations;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to integrate a gender perspective in
his reporting to the General Assembly, in order to support gender-sensitive policy
formulation;
28. Further requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on the Status of
Women on follow-up to and progress in the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session with an assessment of progress made in mainstreaming a gender perspective

_______________
12
13

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 54/4, annex.

5

A/RES/57/182

within the United Nations system, including by providing information on key
achievements, lessons learned and best practices, and to recommend further
measures and strategies for future action within the United Nations system;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference
on Women and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
‘Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century’ ”.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

6
