186

General As..<1embly- •·ortietb Session

-------·---·-----··· - - - - - - - - - - - = - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Recognizing that substantial international assistance is
required for the implementation of a number of reconstruction and development projects,
l. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the Security
Council and the Secretary-General for international assistance to Mozambique;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
economic assistance programme for Mozambique;
3. Also expresses its appreciation for the assistance provided to Mozambique by various States and regional and
international organizations and humanitarian institutions;
4. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided
to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing needs;
5. Appeals to the international community to provide
adequate food aid to Mozambique to prevent further starvation and malnutrition;
6. Draws the attention of the international community
to the two areas for immediate action - the supply of
crude oil and petroleum products and the supply of basic
inputs and consumer goods for the agricultural sector that are critical for the functioning of the economy;
7. Also draws the attention of the international community to the additional financial, economic and material
assistance identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General 166 as urgently required by Mozambique;
8. Calls upon Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other governmental and nongovernmental organizations to provide financial, material
and technical assistance to Mozambique, wherever possible in the form of grants, and urges them to give priority
to the inclusion of Mozambique in their programmes of
development assistance;
9. Urges Member States and organizations that are
already implementing or negotiating assistance programmes for Mozambique to strengthen them;
l 0. Strongly appeals to the international community to
contribute to the special account for Mozambique established by the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
11. Invites the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization-to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance
to Mozambique, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
financial, technical and material assistance to
Mozambique;
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions and other bodies concerned, and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session
169 See Official Records of the Economit and Social Council, I 985, Supple·
ment No. 9 (£/1985/29), para. I I 'i.
170 A/40/441, scn. XV

of 1986, of the current status of the special programme of
economic assistance for Mozambique;
(c) To prepare, on the basis of sustained consultations
with the Government of Mozambique, a report on the
development of the economic situation and the implementation of the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December I 985

40/233. Economic assistance to Vanuatu
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/198 of 17 December 1984 on
economic assistance to Vanuatu, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the
necessary resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Vanuatu,
Recalling also its resolutions 31/ 156 of 21 December
1976, 32/185 of 19 December 1977, 34/205 of 19 December 1979, 35/61 of 5 December I 980, 37 /206 of 20
December 1982 and 39/212 of 18 December 1984,
relating to the special needs and problems of island developing countries,
Noting the difficult problems faced by island developing
countries, owing mainly to their smallness, remoteness,
constraints in transport, great distances from market
centres, highly limited internal markets, lack of natural
resources, heavy dependence on a few commodities,
shortage of administrative personnel and heavy financial
burdens,
Taking into account the fact that Vanuatu is an island
developing country, that it is a geographically remote
archipelago with a small population, that it has demographic disadvantages, that its dependence on imports is
overwhelming and that it has a scarcity of adequate transportation and communications links, all of which pose
special development problems, making the provision of
services difficult and entailing very high overhead costs,
Noting that the Committee for Development Planning,
as stated in its report on its twenty-first and resumed
twenty-first sessions, of which the Economic and Social
Council took note in its decision 1985/182 of 25 July
1985, reached the conclusion that Vanuatu qualified for
inclusion in the list of the least developed countries on the
basis of the existing criteria and in the light of the available
data, 169
Noting further the damage caused by two major cyclones
in January 1985 and the resulting additional constraints
on the economic development of Vanuatu,
l. Calls the attention of the international community
to the summary report of the Secretary-General; 110
2. Also calls the attention of the international community to the projects listed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, 171 endorsed by the Assembly in resolution 39/198,
which still require funding;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Vanuatu;
4. Also expresses its appreciation to those States and
organizations which have provided assistance to that
country;
171 A/39/388, annex.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committ~_

--5. Further calls the attention of the international community to the special problems confronting Vanuatu as an
island developing country with a small but rapidly growing
and unevenly distributed population, a severe shortage of
development capital and declining budgetary support from
present donors;
6. Invites the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
expand their current and future programmes of assistance
to Vanuatu, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of
assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available to help that country;
7. Also invites the Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme, the International Labour
Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the World Health Organization.
the World Bank, the International Telecommunication
Union, the World Meteorological Organization, the International Maritime Organization and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the
special needs of Vanuatu and to report the decisions of
those bodies to the Secretary-Genera! by 15 July 1986;
8. Decides to include Vanuatu in the list of the least
developed countries;
9. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, in the light of the above decision and the desire of the Government of Vanuatu to
o ~ a round-table conference of donors, to give all the
necessary assistance to Vanuatu for the preparation and
organization of that conference;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Vanuatu;
(b) To keep the situation in Vanuatu under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1986, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for Vanuatu;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation in Vanuatu and in organizing international assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/234.

Assistance to Nicaragua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/8 of 25 October 1979, 35/84
of 5 December I 980, 36/213 of I 7 December 198 1, 371
157 of 17 December 1982, 38/223 of 20 December 198'.l
I 72 A/40/436

and 39/204 of 17 December 1984 concerning assistance
for the reconstruction of Nicaragua,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Nicaragua, 172
Noting with satisfaction the support that Member States,
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of Nicaragua for the reconstruction of the
country,
Bearing in mind that, in recent years, the Nicaraguan
economy has been adversely affected by various events
and natural disasters, such as drought, the intense rains
and floods of 1982 and a sequence of natural disasters in
June, July, October and November 1985,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government
and people of Nicaragua, the economic situation has not
returned to normal and continues to worsen,
Deeply concerned that Nicaragua is experiencing serious
economic difficulties directly affecting its development
efforts,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
2. Expresses its appreciation also to the States and
organizations that have provided assistance to Nicaragua;
3. Urges all Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of Nicaragua;
4. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system to continue and to increase their assistance in this
endeavour;
5. Recommends that Nicaragua should continue to
receive treatment appropriate to the special needs of the
country until the economic situation returns to normal;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/235. Special economic assistance to Guinea
The General Assembl_v
Recalling its resolution 39/202 of 17 December 1984, in
which it appealed to the international community to contribute generously, through bilateral and multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development
of Guinea,
Noting that the persistence of unfavourable climatic
conditions in the northern part of the country has led to
enormous losses in crop and livestock production,
Deeply concerned by the fact that Guinea continues to
suffer serious economic and financial difficulties arising
from a marked balance-of-payments deficit, onerous
external debt charges and the massive return of formerly
exiled persons,
Taking into consideratwn the objectives of Guinea's
Interim Programme of National Rehabilitation for the
period 1985-1987, whose implementation continues to be
hampered by the lack of necessary resources,
Noting with satisfaction the considerable efforts made by
the Government and people of Guinea to ensure the country's reconstruction, rehabilitation and development, despite existing constraints,
Noting that the Government of Guinea, in collaboration
with the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and othrr
