S/PV.8696

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8696th meeting

Friday, 20 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft/Mr. Barkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aljarallah
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-42313 (E)
*1942313*

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and
Ms. Rajaa Altalli, co-Founder and co-Director of the
Center for Civil Society and Democracy.
Mr. Pedersen is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: One year ago, many believed that
the Syrian conflict was winding down. Yet the past 12
months have seen a steady stream of violence punctuated
by escalations that continue to this day across many
areas of Syria, such as the north-west, the north-east
and south. Proscribed terrorist groups have also not
been defeated and continue to pose a major security
threat. All of that serves as a constant, grim reminder
that the need for a comprehensive political process,
as mandated by the Security Council in resolution
2254 (2015), is more pressing than ever. Today, let me
start by updating the Council on one aspect of that
process — the Constitutional Committee.
On 25 November, the small body of the Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee convened
for its second session. Before arriving in Geneva. I
had asked each co-Chair to put forward proposals
for an agenda for the second session, in line with the
terms of reference and core rules of procedures. On
21 November, the co-Chair designated by the opposition
Syrian Negotiations Commission sent me a proposed
work plan with 10 constitutional headings, as well as an
agenda focusing on the preamble to the Constitution and
basic principles of the Constitution. On 25 November,
the co-Chair designated by the Syrian Government
2/21

20/12/2019

proposed an agenda regarding national pillars, that is
to say, national pillars of concern of the Syrian people.
At the same time, the co-Chair designated by the
Government insisted that constitutional issues could not
be discussed until those national pillars were discussed.
For his part, the Syrian Negotiations Commission
co-Chair stated that national pillars could be discussed,
provided that that would occur within the context of the
agreed terms of reference and core rules of procedures
or within an agenda of basic constitutional principles.
From 25 through 29 November, I sought, in line
with my mandate and consistent with the Syrian
leadership and ownership of the process, to facilitate
consensus between the co-Chairs and bring their
viewpoints closer together. We had serious discussions
in that regard. Different formulas were put forward
that might have enabled both sides to table and discuss
the issues of interest to them within the scope of the
Constitutional Committee’s mandate. By the end of
the week, however, it was clear that consensus would
not be reached and that the meeting of the small body
was not possible. During that recess, I remain focused
on facilitating agreement on an agenda for the next
session of the small body. To that end, I hope that I
will soon be able to consult directly with the Syrian
Government in Damascus, as well as with the Syrian
Negotiations Commission.
My team also remains in contact with the middle
third civil society delegation and I stand ready to
support them along the lines I outlined in my most recent
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8674). I have also met
with international stakeholders with regard to that and
all other aspects of the process. This past month, I met
with the Foreign Ministers of Russia, Turkey, Italy,
Jordan and Algeria, as well as senior officials from
the United States, France, Iran and Germany, and they
all expressed support for my mediation efforts. I hope
agreement can be reached promptly on an agenda that
falls in line with the terms of reference and core rules of
procedure of the Constitutional Committee. As things
stand, and absent an agreed agenda, I see no reason to
convene another session of the small body.
When I last briefed the Council, we had just
concluded a successful opening session of the
Constitutional Committee. That second session was
obviously very different in both substance and tone, but
disagreement on the agenda is typical for any political
process. I do, however, believe that there are several
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

lessons that we can draw from the experience of the
second round. Let me highlight three experiences.
First, the Constitutional Committee is and will
remain fragile. Progress depends on the Syrian
Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission,
the two sides whose agreement made the creation of
the Constitutional Committee possible, allowing their
members to work professionally on the constitutional
issues and without dissociating themselves from the
work of those nominated. The Constitutional Committee
needs to be nurtured and genuinely supported if it is to
succeed. That is the responsibility of the Syrian parties.
International stakeholders also have a supporting role
to play. I know I can count on the support of the Council
in that regard.
Secondly, any proposed agenda must comply with
the terms of reference and core rules of procedure
agreed between the Government and opposition. That
means that all issues are open for discussion within the
Committee, without preconditions and without making
considerations on one issue when its outcome depends
on the resolution of another issue. It also means that
issues should be framed and fall under a constitutional
heading. The Constitutional Committee is mandated
by agreement to prepare and draft the constitutional
reform as a contribution to the political settlement. If
the Constitutional Committee is to deliver on that, it
must focus on its constitutional mandate.

S/PV. 8696

remain committed to actively contributing to the efforts
of the working group that was set up to deal with that
issue. In this context, I met with senior officials from
Russia, Turkey and Iran in Nur-Sultan last week and,
along with discussions on other issues, I stressed the
need to move beyond the one-for-one exchanges and to
see the release of children, women and the sick on a
meaningful scale.
De-escalating violence and a nationwide ceasefire
should underpin a wider political process. Northwestern Syria has seen a deeply troubling escalation
of violence in recent days. Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller briefed the Council in detail yesterday (See
S/PV.8694) on the terrible suffering of civilians there.
The devastating humanitarian cost of a full-scale
military offensive for the 3 million people living in
north-western Syria is a price that they simply cannot
afford to pay. All sides must de-escalate urgently.
Civilians also continue to suffer in north-eastern
Syria, where the security situation remains volatile,
even if it is calmer relative to the days and weeks after
Turkey first launched its intervention. It is crucial
that the various ceasefire understandings negotiated
among actors there be respected and lead to a sustained
de-escalation in violence. The security situation in
southern Syria also remains turbulent and should
be addressed.

Thirdly, the second round only underscores the
need for a broader and comprehensive political process.
The Government and the opposition reaffirmed that
when they agreed in the terms of reference and core
rules of procedures on the need for a broad political
process moving forward to build trust and confidence
and implement resolution 2254 (2015). Indeed, I
believe that, while the Constitutional Committee
cannot solve the crisis, it can help foster the trust and
confidence among the parties that can open the door to
a broad process. Such a broad process can equally feed
positively into the work on constitutional issues.

Countering Security Council-listed terrorist groups
is also imperative through an approach that is
cooperative, ensures the protection of civilians and
respects international humanitarian law and human
rights law. As always, while the security situation is
the most devastating threat, Syrians are also facing
increasing economic hardship, including as a result
of commodity shortages and entrenched poverty. A
broader process must ultimately address that too. A
broader process should respect and ultimately restore
Syria’s sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
independence, and such a process should achieve longlasting, real and genuine reconciliation.

I believe that a meaningful, wider political process
will be one that delivers tangible actions, such as
progress on the release of detainees and abductees, and
clarification on the fate of missing persons. It remains
a matter of great frustration for me that there has not
been meaningful movement on that issue. My Deputy
and I will continue directly engaging with the Syrian
parties, as well as with all the relevant actors. We also

A broader process must also be inclusive. We
continue to consult with the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board on the concerns and priorities of diverse Syrian
women and their perspectives on a sustainable and
inclusive political solution. Syrian civil society should
be fully included in any broader process. Ultimately,
the process should help develop a safe, calm and
neutral environment that sees the safe, voluntary and

19-423133/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

dignified return of refugees to their places of origin
or places of their choosing; an environment in which
a new constitution, adopted by popular approval, can
be genuinely reflected in institutions and in practice;
and an environment in which inclusive, free and fair
elections can take place, which include the diaspora
and which are administered under the supervision of
the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Many of these issues touch upon constitution-making,
and some could be discussed under a constitutional
rubric, but a constitution-making process itself is not
likely to resolve them in a way that meets the urgent
and legitimate concerns of the Syrian people. I remain
convinced that the steps-for-steps model could help
unlock practical progress — steps that build trust
and confidence among Syrians and between Syrians
and the international community, undertaken in a
reciprocal fashion. I continue to press on this in all my
engagements with the Syrian parties and international
stakeholders. I continue to offer my good offices in that
regard, and I continue to support the convening of a
new international format to bring together the will of
the key players.
This is my last briefing of my first year as Special
Envoy. When I first briefed the Council (see S/PV.8475),
I said that my priorities were a sustained dialogue
with the Syrian Government and the opposition, the
launch of the Constitutional Committee as a door
opener, a wider dialogue with civil society, action on
detainees, abductees and the missing, and international
discussions in support of a political solution. Those
remain my priorities, but it is now time to update them.
The Committee has been launched but needs to
work expeditiously and continuously to produce results
and continue progress. I appreciate my open and direct
dialogue with both Syrian parties, but if we are to take
it to the next level, we will need to address the full array
of issues. We must enable de-escalation leading towards
a nationwide ceasefire, as well as a cooperative, lawful
approach to countering proscribed terrorist groups. As
part of the dialogue, we must generate concrete action
on detainees, abductees and missing persons.
I think that all of that could take shape for the
benefit of all Syrians through a steps-for-steps approach,
and I think that a key part of this is for international
discussions to deepen and for a new international
format to take shape to underpin the process. We know
that none of this will be easy, and I will continue to
4/21

20/12/2019

count on the full engagement of the Syrian parties and
the full support of the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Altalli.
Ms. Altalli: When I was 12-years-old, my father
Jries Altalli, who is a retired teacher and the sole
provider of my family, was abducted by the political
security branch in Damascus. He was tortured for one
year in that branch, transferred to the Adra prison and
subsequently to the notorious Tadmor prison. After nine
years, on 16 November 2000, my father was released
through a presidential pardon.
This story is the story of thousands of Syrians from
before and during the conflict. It is hard to describe
the suffering that Syrian women, men, girls and boys
have experienced in the past nine years. Shall I talk
about the bombing, starving to death under siege,
chemical weapons, forced demographic changes or the
indiscriminate shelling of houses, hospitals and schools?
More than half of the population has been displaced,
either internally or forced outside the country. Tens of
thousands have been arrested and tortured.
The Syrian Government is a principal party,
together with many parties, that is responsible for the
situation in Syria. Yet the Syrian crisis is approaching
its ninth year and, on the fourth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), now is the time to
end the suffering of Syrians. I call upon the Security
Council, on behalf of the silent majority of Syrians, to
work together and with Syrians to find a sustainable
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015). Syrian
non-governmental organizations, such as the Center for
Civil Society and Democracy, and our partners believe
that a political solution is not only urgent and necessary,
but also possible. Therefore, I put before the Council
today a six-point road map to end the Syrian tragedy.
First, all hostilities must end across the entire Syrian
territory, including sexual and gender-based violence.
Secondly, we must improve the conditions of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees,
support them and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
aid by all parties. An independent United Nations
committee must be formed, with the participation of
Syrian civil society, to supervise the voluntary and safe
return of refugees and IDPs to their places of origin or
the places that they choose to go.
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, a specialized gender-sensitive committee
must be formed, under the auspices of the Security
Council, to address all matters concerning Syrian
detainees to oversee treatment and overcome the
negative effects of detention for all detainees in Syria,
to support the release of all detainees and kidnapped
people, reveal the fate of detainees and the forcibly
disappeared, and provide all necessary support to those
who have been detained and abducted, as well as to
their families.
Those first three points are intended to build the
confidence of Syrians not only in the political process,
but also in the Security Council.
Fourthly, we seek the formation of an international
working group of permanent members of the Security
Council to support the efforts of the Special Envoy for
Syria, Mr. Pedersen, in the comprehensive political
process, including the constitutional process, and to
provide a safe, neutral and conducive environment,
including by restructuring security and military
agencies in accordance with the principles of
international human rights. All that will pave the
way for free and fair elections under United Nations
supervision in 2020-2021.
Fifthly, we must support the achievement of a
political agreement among the various parties, with
the direct participation of Syrian women and civil
society, in accordance with the following criteria: the
establishment of justice and accountability mechanisms
that guarantee the victim’s rights; the separation of
powers and the peaceful reallocation of powers based
on the outcome of the negotiations; guarantees of
full human and women’s rights and the safeguarding
of all freedoms, including the freedoms of religion,
expression and association; enabling the formation
of political parties and civil society organizations in
Syria; and building a common Syrian identity based
on diversity by ensuring the rights of Syrians from all
communities, religions, gender, races and ethnicities.
Sixthly and finally, we must plan and prepare for
sustainable development and reconstruction in Syria,
including an effective Syrian national action plan on
women, peace and security, based on resolution 1325
(2000) and its subsequent resolutions. Young people
must also be included on the basis of resolution 2250
(2015). The implementation of those plans can start as
soon as the agreement on transition is reached.

S/PV. 8696

I implore Council members to work together as
a united Security Council to achieve those measures
and to take action to end the suffering of millions of
Syrians. We look to the Council to support the efforts
of Syrian civil society and Syrian women peacebuilders
by listening to their voices, directly and permanently, at
all United Nations meetings about Syria.
After everything that has happened in Syria, I feel
fortunate to have been able to visit my father many
times in prison and grateful for his release after nine
years of incarceration. Today, 19 years later, I come to
the Security Council to ask for its help in securing the
release of all detainees in Syria. It should give thousands
of Syrian children a chance to see their parents again.
It should give those Syrian children the ability to feel
joy in their hearts as we stand on the threshold of a
new year.
The President: I thank Ms. Altalli for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to express our appreciation
to Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his excellent and
exhaustive briefing. We would also like to thank
Ms. Rajaa Altalli for her presentation.
A few months ago, we all witnessed a glimmer of
hope for the brotherly people of Syria, in particular, and
for the international community as a whole — a glimmer
of hope in the agreement on the definitive lists for the
Constitutional Committee and the holding of the first
round of its Syrian-owned and Syrian-led meetings in
Geneva, facilitated by the United Nations. That was an
essential step forward in the peace process and also laid
the groundwork for other very important milestones,
as set out in resolution 2254 (2015), more specifically
the drafting of a constitution and the holding of free
and inclusive elections in Syria by virtue of said
constitution, under United Nations supervision and
with the participation of all Syrians, including those
residing abroad.
Despite the difficulties encountered during the
second round of Constitutional Committee meetings
as a result of disagreement on the agenda owing to
differences of opinion on the priorities and the details,
we still hope that, thanks to the support of Special Envoy
Pedersen, the Syrian parties will reach an agreement on
the issue and subsequently on understandings on the

19-423135/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian constitution, as well as other political elements
set out in resolution 2254 (2015). We call on the Syrian
parties to be mindful of the interests of our brotherly
Syrian people and undertake efforts to ensure that they
achieve their legitimate aspirations through a political
agreement endorsed by all components of Syrian
society. Such an agreement would preserve the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria.
It is clear that there are differing opinions among
the various stakeholders who have suffered for eight
years because of the bitter and bloody conflict. That
is normal and predictable. However, what worries us is
that accelerated military developments on the ground
are affecting the political process and the work of the
Constitutional Committee, in particular. The political
process must be accompanied by confidence-building
measures among the parties to ensure its sustainability
and success. The most important of those measure
is achieving real and tangible progress on the issue
of missing persons and detainees. The international
organizations concerned must be allowed to visit prisons
and detention centres. Here we note that, in June, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on
persons reported missing during armed conflict, which
must be implemented throughout conflict areas in the
world, including in Syria. We reaffirm how important
it is to bring those who are responsible for committing
serious crimes in Syria to justice and to ensure that
there is no impunity for any injustices, as sustainable
peace cannot be achieved without justice.
With respect to the acceleration of military
operations in north-western Syria, of greatest concern
to us is the intensity of the escalation — the price of
which will be a greater number of civilian casualties.
We therefore once again condemn the targeting of
innocent civilians by any party, including attacks by
Security Council-designated terrorist groups on civilian
populations and in populated areas. At the same time,
we reiterate that even if operations are for counterterrorist purposes, their actors, like any other party to
the conflict, are in no way exempt from their obligations
under international law, including compliance with the
principles of distinction, proportionality, caution and
the protection of civilians and civilian facilities.
We recall the earlier warning by the United
Nations that any massive-scale military operation in
Idlib governorate could lead to the worst humanitarian
disaster of the twenty-first century. In this regard,
6/21

20/12/2019

we call for an urgent ceasefire across all of Syria, as
provided for in the relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2401 (2018). In this regard, we
condemn Israeli’s repeated attacks on the sovereignty
and territory of Syria, which also constitute violations
of the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 350 (1974) on the disengagement between the
Israeli and Syrian sides. Speaking of Israeli violations,
I would reiterate that the Golan is Syrian Arab territory
occupied by Israel, the occupying Power. The seizure
and annexation of territory by force is unacceptable and
violates the Charter of the United Nations, the principles
of international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, and, in this context, resolution 497 (1981).
In conclusion, given that this is the last scheduled
meeting on the Syrian political process in which the
State of Kuwait is participating as a member of the
Security Council, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Mr. Pedersen for the efforts he has made
since taking office earlier this year. We assure him of
the State of Kuwait’s full support, which will continue
even after our membership in the Council comes to an
end. We wish him every success in his difficult mission
to facilitate a political process aimed at restoring
stability and security in Syria, the brotherly Arab
country with a long-standing history and culture for
which we maintain the deepest affection, appreciation
and respect.
Furthermore, I would be remiss if I failed to extend
my thanks to all members of the Council for the cordial
reception they extended to us yesterday and for their
praise for my country, Kuwait, for the role it has played
throughout its two-year term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. We are extremely
grateful for the support and cooperation we found in
this Chamber, which enabled us to work together to
achieve our common goals.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Altalli for
their briefings.
We are deeply disappointed that the Syrian regime
has, at the last meeting of the Constitutional Committee,
yet again deployed its strategy of obstruction, delay and
tactical games. That is all the more disappointing after
the first round was more successful than many had
expected. Unfortunately, it is a pattern that we have seen
all too often over the past years — by creating artificial
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

discussions on agenda items, the regime wants to avoid
any real and substantive debate. Unfortunately, that
goes hand in hand with repeated statements by Bashar
Al-Assad, in which he disassociates himself from the
Constitutional Committee. We therefore strongly urge
the Syrian regime to stop obstructing and finally fully
commit to the constitutional process.
The current situation illustrates that the launch
of the Constitutional Committee is merely a first step
towards a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
Nevertheless, we remain convinced that its meetings
can be helpful to build some trust and therefore become
a door-opener for the broader political process, as
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). However, in order
for that to happen, all sides need to seriously engage.
The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
in itself is not the political transition that was called for
in resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We need a genuine political
process under the auspices of the United Nations that
will lead to actual change in Syria and a post-conflict
order that fulfils the legitimate hopes of the Syrian
people for peace and security.
Germany is the second-largest bilateral donor in
terms of humanitarian assistance to Syria. However,
when it comes to the issue of reconstruction, we remain
steadfast in our position. Germany and other States
members of the European Union will only assist in the
reconstruction of Syria when a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition is firmly under way.
Ms. Altalli’s briefing was a stark reminder that
every time we speak about the Syrian conflict, we must
not forget its root causes. It was, first and foremost, the
Syrian regime’s policy of brutal violence, repression
and persecution that caused this conflict, and this policy
is still keeping Syrian internally displaced persons
and refugees from returning home. The Syrian regime
has arbitrarily detained tens of thousands of innocent
Syrians merely because they dared to make use of
their freedom of expression. The Syrian regime has
tortured thousands of innocent Syrians to death merely
because they dared to ask for political reform and
freedom in Syria. Calling ordinary citizens terrorists
in order to create the pretext for their arrest and torture
is outrageous.
Arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence, forced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings of detainees
continue, even in so-called reconciled areas. The

S/PV. 8696

Syrian regime’s systematic use of the worst methods
of torture is sickening — even children continue to be
among the victims. The Syrian regime must stop such
acts immediately.
Since our meeting at the beginning of August
dedicated to the issue of detainees and missing persons
(see S/PV. 8593), there has unfortunately been no
progress on ending these gravest of human rights
violations. On the contrary, in recent months, there
have once again been credible reports on an increased
number of detainees being transferred to the infamous
Sednaya military prison in order to be executed without
a fair trial. At the same time, the Astana working group
on detentions and abductions in the Syrian conflict
has unfortunately not been able to agree on a prisoner
exchange and has not advanced on the issue. However,
meaningful progress on this issue is crucial in order
to build confidence. The Syrian regime must therefore
finally inform the families of the tens of thousands of
missing persons of the fate of their loved ones, grant
the United Nations or the International Committee of
the Red Cross unconditional access to all detention
facilities under its control, allow persons in custody
access to medical treatment, and release all political
prisoners and arbitrarily detained prisons, starting
with incarcerated minors and the sick. We also call on
Russia and Iran to use their influence over Damascus
in this regard.
I shall now turn to the situation in Idlib. We are
deeply concerned about the ongoing military attacks,
including air strikes, in the so-called de-escalation zone
of Idlib and remain extremely worried about a potential
large-scale military offensive in and around Idlib. We
reiterate our call for a genuine and lasting ceasefire, the
protection of civilians and adherence to international
humanitarian law. We condemn the recent air strikes
and ground-based strikes by Syrian regime forces and
their allies, which resulted in further civilian casualties.
Strikes against civilians and civilian infrastructure
are inexcusable; they are a violation of international
law and have to be part of the investigation by the
Commission of Inquiry. The Syrian regime and its allies
must comply with their obligations under international
law and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
We are concerned by the presence and attacks
of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other United Nationsdesignated terrorist groups in Idlib, and we agree that
the role of terrorist organizations in Idlib must be

19-423137/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

addressed. However, the fight against terrorism does
not justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
I would like to say a final word about the situation
in north-east Syria. The risk of a further destabilization
of the whole region persists, and we therefore call upon
all actors in the north-east to immediately implement
a lasting ceasefire and halt all military operations.
We are concerned by the increased use of improvised
explosive devices in residential neighbourhoods and
local markets that have mainly been carried out in areas
under the control of Turkish forces and affiliated armed
groups. We deplore the loss of human lives and strongly
condemn any indiscriminate attack on civilians.
The risk of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) resurging and committing terrorist acts in the
region and beyond remains indubitably real. We are
committed to ensuring the defeat of ISIL and other
United Nations-designated terrorist groups.
We also reject any resettlement of Syrian refugees
into north-east Syria — or into any other part of Syria,
in fact — that is not a safe, dignified, and voluntary
return to the homes of those refugees or violates the
rights of the local population.
We remain concerned about a deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in north-east Syria and reiterate
our call to all parties to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for all Syrians currently in need
of it.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Rajaa Altalli
for their briefings. I particularly wish to commend
Ms. Altalli for her unwavering commitment to making
the voice of Syrian civil society, the voice of the
suffering silent majority and the voice of women, who
must be heard and able to participate in discussions and
decisions concerning their country on an equal footing
with men, heard.
I wish to review two points. First, on the ground,
there must be a freeze at the fronts. This is crucial to
provide a relief to an exhausted and bleeding population.
France is extremely concerned about the resumed
attacks by the regime and its allies in the North-West,
which now shows signs of a major attack and claimed
16 civilian victims yesterday. We continue to closely
follow the situation and strongly warn against such
an attack, which would only strengthen the terrorist
8/21

20/12/2019

group, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, against whom we must
unite our efforts. I therefore hope to clearly reiterate the
call to end hostilities that France has already made on a
number of occasions in the Chamber.
As winter begins, the attacks will revive the
humanitarian catastrophe against which the United
Nations has repeatedly warned. In this regard, I
reiterate, as I did yesterday, that France strongly
condemns the indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, in particular medical
facilities (see S/PV.8694). War has rules that must be
respected. The fight against terrorism is a priority but
does not justify violating international humanitarian
law. To be effective and produce lasting results, the
fight against terrorism must be done while respecting
the law, which imposes a moral, legal and operational
imperative on all parties.
We remain vigilant with regard to the situation
in the north-east, where hostilities must not resume.
The resumption of fighting would jeopardize at great
sacrifice the results achieved by the international
coalition with local partners. Furthermore, this could
not only strengthen Da’esh and create conditions for a
new humanitarian crisis.
France is also concerned about the deterioration
of the situation in the south-west a year and a half
after its reconquest by the regime. The security
situation continues to deteriorate month after month,
with chronic instability illustrated by the increase in
attacks and assassinations. Nor has the humanitarian
situation improved at all. Public services remain
nearly non-existent, and the Syrian regime continues
to impose unjustifiable restrictions to humanitarian
access. France calls on the Council to be particularly
vigilant with regard to the evolution of the situation.
Secondly, with respect to the political process,
it is more urgent than ever to get it back on track for
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The Syrian regime’s obstructions to the continuation
of the work of the Constitutional Committee are
unacceptable. This obstruction is contrary to the rules
of engagement previously agreed upon by the parties
through the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen. It confirms once again that the regime
continues to refuse to engage genuinely and in good
faith in a political process after more than eight years
of destructive war.
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We support the Special Envoy and urge him to
continue his active efforts to unlock the situation. The
Astana guarantors must also put pressure on the regime.
Finally, should the next session of the Committee find
itself in a similar situation to the last session, we call
on the Special Envoy to make it clear to the Security
Council in his next briefing.
As Mr. Geir Pedersen pointed out in his briefing,
the Constitutional Committee is only one element of
a broader process aimed at implementing all elements
of resolution 2254 (2015). France reaffirms its full
support for the Special Envoy’s efforts in this regard.
We encourage him to make similar progress on the
establishment of a secure and neutral environment,
which is essential for holding credible elections under
the supervision of the United Nations in which all
Syrians, including refugees and displaced persons,
must participate. Only by guaranteeing these conditions
of security and neutrality will the Syrians be able to
reclaim their future in the forthcoming elections.
Progress must also be made on the release of
detainees. The lack of progress on detainees at the
last meeting of the Astana guarantors underlines, once
again, the need to change the scale and method and give
the United Nations a free hand in the matter. We must
listen to the pressing demands of the people who dare
to overcome their fear, taking to the streets of Dara
once again to call for the release of their loved ones,
and we must not forget how the Syrian conflict began
in early 2011.
Without credible progress, France and the European
Union’s position on reconstruction and sanctions will
remain unchanged. It will also remain illusory to expect
a dignified, safe and voluntary return of refugees
without a global agreement, including real political and
security guarantees, without which refugees will fear
for their lives. Finally, it is essential to ensure the safe
and unhindered access of the United Nations to observe
and accompany returns on the ground, which has not
been the case to date.
It is in all our interests to put Syria back on the path
to peace and stability. In order to move forward, we
need the efforts of all and to recreate unity within the
Council. France calls on all members of the Council to
demonstrate unity and responsibility in order to move
forward on the path to a political settlement and also
to respond to the immense humanitarian needs of the
Syrian population by supporting the draft resolution

S/PV. 8696

renewing the mechanism for cross-border assistance
presented by humanitarian penholders (S/2019/961).
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I once again thank
the Special Envoy for all the work his team is doing and
thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli for being in the Chamber today
and sharing her story. I am very sorry for the suffering
that she and her family have experienced.
Like others, we thank the Special Envoy for his
tireless efforts aimed at bringing peace to Syria, but the
breakdown of talks during the second Constitutional
Committee meeting is extremely disappointing. As
we all know, if these long-awaited meetings are going
to succeed, they require serious engagement and
commitment from all sides. We support Mr. Pedersen’s
position that the Government and opposition Chairs
need to agree on an agenda before a third round of the
Committee can be convened. We regret attempts by
the Syrian authorities to introduce conditions widely
accepted as unnecessary to intentionally stall the talks.
We call on these authorities to respect the rules of the
Committee and return to negotiations.
We are also concerned that the Syrian authorities
appear to be disassociating themselves from the
Constitutional Committee in official statements and
in the media, suggesting that the Syrian delegation
represents, “the point of view of the Syrian regime
but is not the regime itself”. I would therefore like to
ask the Syrian representative to allay these concerns
by reaffirming to the Council that its delegation
to the Constitutional Committee is indeed the
“Government delegation”.
We understand that Mr. Pedersen is not able to
share the full details of the negotiations and progress
towards the reopening of talks during his briefings,
not least because of time constraints, but we do believe
that there would be merit in considering other means by
which Mr. Pedersen could keep the Council apprised of
the details.
I once again thank Ms. Altalli for her briefing
and would like now to turn to what she told us. The
United Kingdom has always been clear that the political
process should reflect a broad and diverse cross-section
of Syrian society. We will need to remain mindful that
a successful political settlement in Syria goes well
beyond the Constitution. It is crucial that all elements
of resolution 2254 (2015) be taken forward in tandem.
That includes creating conditions for refugee return,

19-423139/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

preparations for free and fair elections in 2021 and the
release of detainees.
We are therefore deeply concerned to hear of the
arrest of 174 people who returned to Homs from the
Rukban internally displaced persons (IDP) camp, which
happened despite having obtained clearance from the
Syrian authorities and guarantees that they would be
exempt from persecution. The Syrian authorities and
Russia need to stay true to their word and respect the
promises they have made.
On torture, I do not think that I can put it better
than the German representative did. These are truly
horrific cases. They are unacceptable and need to stop.
We support the Special Envoy in advancing all the
other baskets of the political process. I would like to
reiterate that the United Kingdom will not consider
providing any reconstruction assistance without a
credible, substantive and genuinely political process
being firmly under way.
I would now like to turn to Idlib. We remain
extremely concerned about the continued air strikes
there. We note reports on 2 December of attacks on
the markets of Saraqib and Maarat Al-Numan, which
killed at least 14 civilians. Attacks on hospitals, such
as in the Al-Qah IDP camp on 20 November, and
other civilian infrastructure are inexcusable and run
counter to the Geneva Conventions and international
humanitarian law. Furthermore, it is unbelievable that
the Syrian authorities would conduct more such attacks
given the ongoing board of inquiry investigation. The
United Kingdom looks forward to the board’s update to
the Council.
We welcome the fact that the ceasefire in north-east
Syria continues, broadly, to hold, but we are concerned
about reports of an attack near a school in Tell Rifaat,
held by the Kurdish People’s Protection Units, which
killed at least 10, including eight children. We call
on all parties involved to respect the ceasefire and
their obligations towards civilians under international
humanitarian law.
I would like to say a few words about Syrian
refugees. Syrians have a right to return to their
homes voluntarily, in safety and dignity, in line with
international humanitarian law. We support the United
Nations judgement that conditions in Syria are not yet
conducive to safe and dignified return.
10/21

20/12/2019

Finally, the United Kingdom, as a member of the
Global Coalition against Da’esh, is proud of its role
in the successful fight to liberate the territory held
by Da’esh in Syria and Iraq. We remain committed to
securing the enduring defeat of Da’esh. Much remains
to be done, and we cannot lose sight of the threat they
pose, even without territory. The group’s dangerous
and pervasive ideology needs to be eliminated.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Pedersen for his
briefing and renew our full support for his efforts to
bring about greater rapprochement, reconciliation and
dialogue among the Syrian Government, the opposition
and civil society. We recognize the significant obstacles
and challenges that have been overcome in order to
reach the current situation. We urge him to continue,
without wavering, along that path — sometimes with
very sharp curves — towards broad political renewal in
the Syrian Arab Republic in order to restore hope of a
better future to a people beset by nine years of conflict.
We are grateful for the participation of Ms. Altalli,
whose perspective as a woman and an activist confirms
the important role that women can and must play in the
political process in Syria.
The Dominican Republic regrets that it has not
been possible for the small group to reach an agreement
on the agenda for its deliberations in the framework of
the second meeting of the Constitutional Committee.
We hope that, in the not too distant future, both parties
will be able to agree on common points to guide their
discussions and proceed with a new round of meetings.
We support the points just made by Ambassador
Pedersen as immediate steps to be taken to that end.
We are fully convinced that this process must be
Syrian-led and -owned. We therefore understand that,
as the guarantor of the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), the Security Council has the responsibility
to continue to urge the parties to show the greatest
possible degree of commitment and flexibility in order
to promote its full implementation. After so many
years of waiting, and so much mutual distrust, it is
essential that both the Government and the opposition
participate in those meetings empowered to carry out
their functions with the understanding that the current
situation is a point of no return in the Syrian peace
process. They need our robust support.
I would like to highlight some very specific aspects
with regard to the issue we are considering today.
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

First, we reiterate our conviction that the only
way to resolve this very complex conflict is on the
basis of dialogue and political negotiation. There is no
military solution that can open the door to sustainable
national reconciliation.
Secondly, as the political process gains momentum
and moves forward, it is critical to build intra-Syrian
trust and confidence with concrete gestures from all
the parties involved. Respecting ceasefire agreements,
ending all arbitrary detentions, including those of
health workers, and releasing arbitrarily detained
persons are some of the measures that must continue
to be implemented. We recognize the achievements of
the working group within the framework of the Astana
guarantors, and we urge them to aim for more ambitious
outcomes in this area.
Thirdly, my delegation believes that all refugee
returns must be voluntary, safe and dignified, and
take place within the framework of internationally
established guidelines. Refugees should be allowed to
return to their places of origin or of choice, have their
basic subsistence and documentation needs met and be
offered prospects for a better future in their country.
As this is the last meeting scheduled in the December
programme of work, I would like to express my deepest
gratitude to the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial
Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their excellent
work as non-permanent members of the Council and
for their spirit of collaboration and fellowship, and to
the President for conducting our work in a professional
and transparent manner. I thank and congratulate one
and all.
Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing
on the political situation in Syria. We welcome his
dedicated efforts and those of his Office in carrying
out his mandate. We also thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli for
her briefing and statement.
At the Council’s previous briefing on the
political situation in Syria (see S/PV.8664), South
Africa welcomed the launch and first meeting of
the Constitutional Committee, held in Geneva, and
expressed our hope that it would lead to tangible progress
towards a sincere constitution-building process. We
welcome the convening of the second round of talks
by the small body of the Constitutional Committee and
note the need for building blocks to be put in place to
achieve progress on substantive matters. We encourage

S/PV. 8696

all parties to recommit to the Constitutional Committee
as an effective and essential part of the Syrian political
process. In addition, my delegation urges the various
parties to make every effort to work together, with the
support of the Special Envoy, to find agreement on a
realistic agenda, before the start of the next round of
talks, to guide the work of the Committee. While the
Constitutional Committee is part of a larger political
process designed to bring peace and stability to Syria,
it is a vital one that must be supported.
With regard to the other components of the political
process, and as a way to buttress the Constitutional
Committee’s process, there is a need to build trust
and confidence among the various parties and
communities. Actions in that regard, at all levels of
society and Government, including through the release
of civilian detainees, would contribute to healing and
reconciliation. We, as South Africans, know that trust
and confidence among parties is an essential component
of any negotiation and hope that actions that build on
those principles will be of benefit to all. The only longterm solution to the current crisis in Syria is through
an inclusive, Syrian-led dialogue that is reflective of
the voice of the Syrian people and will safeguard the
universal rights and fundamental interests of all Syrian
society. In that regard, we call on all parties to fully
implement resolution 2254 (2015) as the blueprint for a
long-term political solution in Syria.
South Africa believes that the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria cannot be addressed
independently of each other. The continuation of
violence and the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation negatively affect the political process. In the
same vein, progress in the political sphere will support
efforts towards ensuring that all Syrians are able to
live in a safe, secure and prosperous environment, free
of violence and terrorism. The Council met yesterday
(see S/PV.8694) to discuss the humanitarian situation
in Syria and try to find consensus on the renewal of
the cross-border assistance programme. We remind all
Council members of their duty to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and their moral imperative to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people. South Africa calls on all Council
members to make every effort to find a compromise
and reach consensus to ensure that the mandate of that
vital, life-saving humanitarian assistance programme
is renewed.

19-4231311/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First, I
wish to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
Because of the strong sunlight behind me, I cannot see
him very well. However, I hope that light is a sign of a
brighter future for the political process in Syria.
The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
is a good start for the Syrian political process, with both
the large body of the Constitutional Committee and the
45-member small body initiating their work in the time
since late October. China welcomes such progress and
appreciates Special Envoy Pedersen’s mediation efforts,
as well as the constructive participation of all Syrian
parties. At the same time, there are differences among
the Syrian parties in the Constitutional Committee.
Although that is inevitable, we hope that all parties will
maintain political dialogue through the Constitutional
Committee to enhance mutual understanding and trust.
China supports Special Envoy Pedersen’s work
to build on the achievements that have already been
made, in accordance with the Syrian-led and Syrianowned principle and resolution 2254 (2015), and to
continue to advance Syrian political process. Attention
should be focused on maintaining the independence of
the Constitutional Committee’s work — there should
be no outside interference or imposition of arbitrary
time limits. Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity should be fully respected and
the legitimate demands of the Government of Syria
heeded. Syria cannot be divided or fragmented. We
expect the members of the Constitutional Committee
to put the interests of Syria and its people first and
participate in the dialogue with political will and the
spirit of compromise.
China welcomes the new round of the Astana
dialogue that was convened last week in Nur-Sultan
by Russia, Iran and Turkey, and hopes that it will
help the Syrian parties to bridge their differences and
build consensus.
The eradication of terrorist forces is a necessary
security precondition for the Syrian people to be able to
return to a peaceful and orderly life. Countries should
continue to act in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law to combat
all forms of terrorism with uniform standards. The
problem of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria has come
to the fore — Idlib has become a breeding ground for
terrorism, the risk of terrorism spreading across northeastern Syria is increasing and there is still a possibility
12/21

20/12/2019

of a resurgence of the Islamic State. Such developments
threaten peace and security in Syria, the Middle East
and the world. All parties should avoid taking actions
that undermine counter-terrorism achievements and
instead try their best to work together and earnestly
explore the issue of how to bring the terrorists to justice.
We recommend that the Secretariat pay close attention
to the counter-terrorism developments in Syria and the
flow of terrorists there, while proceeding to establish
a terrorist database and providing timely and relevant
information to the countries concerned so that they can
solidify the conditions necessary for the next step in
resolving the issue of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as other problems.
While advancing the Syrian political process,
the international community should also work to
improve the economic and humanitarian situation
in Syria through efforts to address and alleviate the
humanitarian crisis in the country in a comprehensive,
objective and balanced manner. Syria is currently
facing economic sanctions, oil shortages, damaged or
run-down infrastructure, insufficient resources for
reconstruction and other difficulties, all of which have
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis on the ground and
had an extremely adverse effect on the lives of the
Syrian people.
The large number of refugees has also exerted
economic and social pressure on Syria’s neighbouring
countries and become a destabilizing factor in the
region. There should not be any political preconditions
attached to the provision of humanitarian supplies
to Syria. Humanitarian relief operations in Syria
should be carried out with increased communication
and coordination with the Syrian Government
and with respect for the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
China wishes to reiterate its support for the Syrian
political process and stands ready to play a constructive
role in the early restoration of peace, stability and
development in Syria. At the same time, all parties
should make a joint effort to contribute to the Syrian
political process, help build mutual trust and work
towards the same goal through compromise. China does
not support the holding of discussions on the Syrian
human rights issue in the Security Council, or the use
of human rights issues to impose pressure on Syria or
make accusations against it. Such actions are not in line
with the mandate of the Security Council, and neither
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

are they conducive to creating a good atmosphere for
advancing the Syrian political process.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing. Let me also thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli,
Co-Founder and Co-Director of the Center for Civil
Society and Democracy, for her input.
Poland has underlined many times that any
sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria requires
a genuine political transition negotiated by the Syrian
parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process.
We agree with the Special Envoy that the future of
Syria belongs to the Syrian people and them alone.
The work of the Constitutional Committee could be the
beginning of a meaningful process in that regard. We
urge all parties, including the authorities in Damascus,
to engage in good faith in the work of the Constitutional
Committee. In that context, let me also underline the
importance of civil society in the process of achieving
sustainable peace and justice in any country.
All parties to the conflict need to engage in
confidence-building measures. In that connection,
let me stress again that the Syrian war has brought
unspeakable suffering to the whole country. Thousands
of people remain in arbitrary detention. Moreover,
thousands remain missing and their relatives deprived of
any information on their fate, as our briefer mentioned.
We call for their release, particularly children, women
and the elderly. Progress in that area would help raise
confidence among the parties and greatly contribute to
the efforts to reach lasting peace in Syria. It is one of
the most important confidence-building measures.
The most vulnerable groups in Syria, including
people with disabilities, the elderly, women and
children, have to be under special protection. In that
regard, as discussed yesterday with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (see S/PV.8694),
we condemn any attacks on medical facilities and
their personnel anywhere in Syria. International
humanitarian law is crystal clear. It requires all parties
to the conflict to strictly distinguish between civilians
and combatants and to take constant care to spare
civilians in the conduct of military operations.
I want to recall that we fully support the right
to a safe return of Syrian refugees who have fled
their homes. We believe that a durable solution
should guarantee the safe, sustainable, dignified and
voluntary return of Syrians to their country of origin

S/PV. 8696

in accordance with international law and the principle
of non-refoulement. We fear that the conditions for the
voluntary repatriation of Syrian refugees, as defined by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, are not in place. In addition, we reiterate
that we will be ready to assist in the reconstruction
of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and
inclusive political transition, negotiated by the Syrian
parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), is firmly under way.
As this is probably the last time that I take the
floor on the subject of Syria in the Chamber during
Poland’s term on the Security Council, I would like to
thank Mr. Pedersen for his tireless efforts and assure
him of my country’s full support even once it has left
the Council. Allow me also to say that serving in the
Security Council has been an honour, privilege and
unique and enriching opportunity. I would like to thank
my fellow members of the Council for their support,
friendship and excellent cooperation. I would like to
thank the Security Council Affairs Division for its
invaluable assistance. Special thanks also go to the
interpreters, security staff and engineers. We all have
worked incredibly hard over the past two years. I also
thank my colleagues from the Polish Mission for their
support and excellent performance in the Security
Council and pay tribute to their commitment and
dedication. Finally, I wish every success and best of
luck to the incoming members of the Security Council.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is a bright day today,
but it is a pity that Mr. Heusgen is not here to see the
curtain be opened.
On a more serious note, we thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing and
Ms. Rajaa Altalli for being here with us today.
My delegation is following closely the development
of the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee, facilitated by the United Nations. The
launching of the Committee, the adoption by consensus
of a code of conduct and a set of initial procedural
practices, as well as the agreement on the small drafting
body, are indeed commendable advances. We note that
the second session of the Constitutional Committee,
last November, did not really go as planned. Obviously,
we regret that it was not possible to convene a meeting
of the 45 members of the small drafting body. However,
my delegation believes that this is part of an ongoing

19-4231313/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

process, which we all knew would be far from easy.
Disagreements will always arise in such processes,
but the most important thing is that dialogue and
consultations among the relevant parties continue.
Compromise and flexibility are required. With
patience, the objective of a final result that is good
for the people of Syrian can be reached. That should
be the main objective. Indonesia sincerely wishes that
the two co-Chairs of the Government and opposition
delegations will soon agree on the agenda and move
forward with the next session. I would like to highlight
a further three pertinent points.
First, it is critical for the international community,
particularly Council members, to continue supporting
the work of the Constitutional Committee. That
includes supporting Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in his
efforts to facilitate the process, including the reaching
of consensus among the members of the Committee.
We hope that the members of the Committee can
concentrate on their work, without unnecessary external
interference that could jeopardize the ongoing process.
We concur with what Mr. Pedersen underlined in his
remarks, namely, that the Constitutional Committee
must be consistently nurtured. It is not an easy word or an
easy task. The success of the Constitutional Committee
at this stage is important in order to build trust and
confidence, which are badly needed on that issue, and,
as Mr. Pedersen also mentioned, to ultimately open the
door for broader political processes that we hope will
be beneficial for the people of Syria. We in the Council
should continue to support that effort.
Secondly, Indonesia reiterates the importance for
all parties to reaffirm their strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. It is a necessary foundation
for advancing the political process within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015).
Thirdly, in the absence of a political solution, the
situation in Syria will continue to deteriorate, and we
should not let that happen. Many Council members have
voiced their grave concerns about the humanitarian
situation in Syria, urging that we should immediately
end the suffering of the civilians in need. Again, the
only sustainable solution to the crisis is through an
inclusive, Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Only they
will decide their own future.
14/21

20/12/2019

We appreciate the various dialogues supporting the
United Nations-facilitated political process in Syria. We
also appreciate the involvement of various stakeholders
who would see peace in that area. The constructive
approach needs to continue and be enhanced. The
international community has its own role to play in
assisting Syria in overcoming the crisis, and the Council
also has a responsibility to help alleviate the hardship
of millions of civilians in Syria. Hopefully, we will
fulfil that responsibility today by adopting the draft
resolution on the cross-border mechanism. Inshallah.
On another note, we would like to echo
Ms. Wronecka’s statement. I do not know whether
the timing is right, but I was informed that this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council — hopefully.
This being the last scheduled open meeting of the
Council for this year, Indonesia would like to extend
its appreciation to all our colleagues and the outgoing
members — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Peru,
Poland and our neighbour in the Chamber, Kuwait — for
their strong cooperation and commitment to maintaining
international peace and security. We have worked
closely this past year, and it has been a great pleasure to
work with all the Permanent Representatives, mission
staff, experts and political coordinators, who have
done quite a lot in pursuing the mandate and quest
of the Council to ensure peace and security. Once
again, we extend our best wishes to all colleagues. We
look forward to working with the incoming members
beginning on 1 January. A merry Christmas and happy
New Year to all.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We support his efforts
and his commitment to arriving at a political settlement
in Syria. I would also like to thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli.
I would like to speak on two points, the first
of which is the Constitutional Committee and
confidence-building measures. There seemed to be
new momentum on the Syrian political track after the
establishment of the Constitutional Committee. There
was hope that after nine years of conflict Syria would
take a first step towards peace. We regret that the
Committee in its second session was unable to reach
an agreement on the agenda. The Syrian Government
appears to have little interest in an inclusive process.
We hope that the parties will seize the opportunity of
the next session of the Constitutional Committee, to be
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

held in Geneva soon. The degree of good faith of the
Syrian authorities will be evaluated based on its results.
The fact is that the Committee’s work can be a first
step in the political process only if the parties are fully
committed to it. We call on States with influence on
the Syrian authorities to bring it to bear. However, the
political process is not limited to the Constitutional
Committee. Belgium considers transitional justice
extremely important. It is the job of the various
stakeholders to arrive at a common understanding
of the facts in a transparent manner and on an equal
footing so as to ensure that reconciliation can take
place. Reconciliation is not an isolated process but the
culmination of a long and arduous path that the parties
will have to walk together, in a process where trust
must be established. Every month the Special Envoy
has reminded us of the importance of establishing those
confidence-building measures. Thousands of Syrians
are still being arrested and arbitrarily detained. We
once again call on Syria to take account of the crucial
importance of this dossier as a symbol of good faith.
Secondly, the reality of the situation on the
ground is bleak. In the north-east, thousands who
were displaced during the Turkish incursion are still
displaced. In the north-west, we are receiving reports
indicating the launch of a new offensive in Idlib this
very morning, after having previously been informed
of an escalation in the violence in early December. We
call on all the parties to establish a national ceasefire
as soon as possible, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). The Government has a special responsibility to
establish a safe, secure, stable and calm environment in
Syria and to guarantee an absence of armed conflict.
That also requires the protection of legal rights and
ensuring that no one is pursued, repressed or forcibly
conscripted into the army.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the latest developments in the political process in the
Syrian Arab Republic and thanks Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his comprehensive briefing. We also thank Ms. Rajaa
Altalli, the representative of Syrian civil society, for
her briefing.
Мy delegation once again welcomes the launch
of the work of the Constitutional Committee on
30 October in Geneva, which was commended by
the whole international community, 20 months after

S/PV. 8696

the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi on
30 January 2018, which led to the decision to establish
the Committee. Those developments, resulting from the
mediation efforts and good offices of the Special Envoy,
which led to the conclusion of an agreement between
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Syrian Negotiations Commission on the composition
of the Constitutional Committee, are very encouraging
signs and a glimmer of hope for a resumption of the
peace process.
Мy delegation also welcomed the holding on
11 December in Nur-Sultan of the fourteenth round of
the Astana talks, which brought together Iran, Russia
and Turkey, the guarantors of the Astana process,
the Syrian Government and opposition, and Jordan,
Lebanon, Iraq and the United Nations as observers. In
the joint statement that paved the way for the meeting,
the guarantors of the Astana process confirmed their
ongoing commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. They also
expressed their concern about the increase in terrorist
activities in Idlib governorate and their willingness
to cooperate to eradicate terrorist groups in Syria,
including the Islamic State, the Al-Nusra Front and
other groups that the United Nations has designated
as terrorist.
We noted with regret the difficulties encountered
during the discussions in Geneva on 29 November
during the Constitutional Committee’s second session
and the failure to hold a meeting of the 45-member
Committee owing to a lack of agreement on the agenda
between the Government and the opposition. In that
context, Côte d’Ivoire urges all the parties to continue
to work constructively to continue the talks. We also
call on all regional and international stakeholders
to uphold their commitment to the political process
and support it firmly. We appeal to the parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities throughout Syrian territory,
continue confidence-building measures such as the
reciprocal or unilateral release of detainees, and ensure
the protection of civilians in the Idlib de-escalation
zone and the surrounding areas.
Côte d’Ivoire calls on the Syrian parties to prioritize
dialogue and the interests of the Syrian people and to
resume the work of the Constitutional Committee with
a view to holding the fair, credible and transparent
elections that can ensure lasting peace and stability
in Syria and the region. We urge the Security Council
to give full support to the efforts of Special Envoy

19-4231315/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

Pedersen to reach a political settlement to the Syrian
conflict, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015).
Since this is the last scheduled public meeting that
my delegation will take part in before the end of my
country’s term, on behalf of Ambassador Léon Adom,
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United
Nations, President Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire,
and the Ivorian Government and people, I would like to
convey a message of profound gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for their invaluable support to
Côte d’Ivoire during these two years. We also wish to
warmly thank Secretary-General António Guterres and
all members of the Secretariat for their valuable support
throughout our term, especially during Côte d’Ivoire’s
presidency of the Security Council in December 2018. I
would be remiss if I did not conclude by extending our
deep appreciation for the fruitful collaboration between
my delegation and the other outgoing members of the
Council and wishing every success to the incoming
members. Côte d’Ivoire has been honoured to participate
in the work of the Security Council during the past two
years and will continue to share its experience, values
and principles in the other bodies of the United Nations.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Madam President, for convening this
briefing, as well as Ms. Altalli and Mr. Pedersen
for their comprehensive briefings this morning. We
commend Mr. Pedersen for his hard work and prudence
in seeking to bring the parties closer to an inclusive
political solution. The impact of the Syrian conflict
on its population and on regional stability leads us to
reaffirm the urgent need to make progress in the process
that the United Nations has been supporting. The
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015) must continue to guide our efforts.
We are therefore concerned about the developments
described this morning by the Special Envoy, which
point to the limited progress made in the second round
of the work of the Constitutional Committee, which is
attributable to an apparent lack of willingness on the
part of the Syrian Government. This situation is not in
keeping with the high expectations of the international
community with respect to the work of the Committee,
which is expected to draft a new Constitution that
will lay the political and institutional foundations for
sustainable peace.
16/21

20/12/2019

We note the sense of urgency to record tangible
results on this issue because of the negative impact on
the credibility of the process if there are further delays
in such basic understandings as the finalization of the
Committee’s agenda and its work plans. We encourage
the parties, especially the Syrian authorities, to show
genuine flexibility and commitment, with a view to
finding points of convergence that will lead to a better
climate of understanding. We note the central role of
the Special Envoy in this regard, as facilitator and
consensus builder, and underline the broad support that
the international community should therefore give him.
We believe it is essential that, in addition to the
efforts made within the Constitutional Committee, we
promote the adoption of confidence-building measures
that will contribute to a more favourable environment
for Syrian reconciliation. In particular, we expect
more substantive developments in the identification of
missing persons, the handing over of mortal remains,
and the release of detainees and missing persons.
Another great challenge is to address the serious
situation that millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons are facing, which requires not only
the availability of financial resources, but primarily
political will, to ensure their safe and dignified return
within internationally accepted parameters.
We also stress the need to avoid an escalation of the
conflict that would undermine the chances of reaching
a political settlement. The prospects for achieving
sustainable peace in Syria, such as the aforementioned
Constitutional Committee, depend to a large extent on
preventing Idlib from figuring in the playing out of a
new humanitarian tragedy.
We reaffirm Peru’s full commitment to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Syria. In
this regard, any de-escalation or other arrangements, as
well as the presence of foreign forces, must always be
of a provisional nature and must not lead to a de facto
partition of the country.
As some of my colleagues before me have done,
we assume that this is probably the last meeting of the
month under the presidency of the United States and
the conclusion of our participation in the Security
Council. In this context, I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, and your entire team for your
outstanding performance in conducting our work in
December. I also express our best wishes for success to
the delegation of Viet Nam in its upcoming presidency
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in January, as well as to the newly elected members
who will join the Council in 2020 — Estonia, the
Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Peru wishes to thank all the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat for their ongoing support,
cooperation and friendship during these two intense
years in our shared efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. It has been a privilege
for Peru to participate in the Security Council.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the United States for convening
today’s meeting and congratulate it on its presidency in
December. We also thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen
for his update on the political process in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We renew once again our highest
consideration for his admirable efforts as facilitator of
the Constitutional Committee. We also thank Ms. Rajaa
Altalli for her briefing.
With regard to the work of the Constitutional
Committee in Geneva, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea regrets the lack of progress made since the
first round of discussions and encourages the various
delegations to overcome the divergences that made it
impossible to adopt the agenda of the second meeting
at the end of November. In this context, the convening
of a third round of negotiations is indispensable for the
achievement of positive and tangible results that serve
the interests and aspirations of the Syrian people.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is optimistic and hopes that common ground
can be found to bridge the gap between the parties
and that they will participate objectively in the work
of the Committee. We recall the need for there to be
no external interference, as this is a fully sovereign
and Syrian process that must be guided by the search
for consensus exclusively among the national parties
meeting in Geneva. If the political process is to move
forward decisively, there must be no forces that seek to
undermine the process of reconciling the Syrian people
and amending their Constitution.
We agree that the threat of external interference
clearly contradicts resolution 2254 (2015). In this
regard, my Government continues to rely on the good
offices and leadership of the United Nations to support
this process, putting an end to attempts to block the
work of the Committee. We reiterate once again that
the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic must be fully respected

S/PV. 8696

throughout this process. We welcome the joint statement
of the fourteenth round of consultations of the Astana
guarantors in their determination to support the work of
the Committee and other key issues that could restore
peace and stability in Syria.
We must remain cognizant of the need for the
Committee to work constructively, which requires
action by all to prevent tensions in the north-west from
hindering its efforts. Furthermore, we again emphasize
the importance of confidence-building measures as a
means to energize the political process. As we have
been reiterating, large-scale reciprocal releases of
detainees and abductees could certainly serve as an
important step in this regard.
On a different note, and following my colleagues
who have spoken before me, from this month’s
programme of work, I understand that this is the last
regular meeting in which the delegation of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea is participating as a non-permanent
member of this great body. In this regard, we would
like to thank the delegations of the French Republic, the
United Kingdom, the People’s Republic of China, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America
for their continued dedication to maintaining the
active role of the Security Council in the promotion
of international peace and security assigned to it by
the Charter of the United Nations. We also thank all
our fellow non-permanent members, including those
we are leaving behind, for having intentionally and
constructively contributed and continuing to contribute
to the fulfilment by the permanent members their
great task.
To the new non-permanent members that will
assume their mandates on 1 January, we wish them
success in their respective terms. We leave the Council
with the hope that it will continue to work in a spirit of
consensus and wisdom to resolve the heated conflicts
and threats that our beloved world is currently facing.
We thank everyone, including the staff of the
Secretariat and of the Security Council Affairs Division,
as well as the interpreters and conference technicians,
for providing us all with the necessary support and for
having taught us a great deal. I would be remiss if I did
not also thank the diplomatic staff and the personal and
local experts of the Permanent Mission of Equatorial
Guinea for the work, contributions and sacrifices they
have undertaken for our country here in New York,
especially given that Equatorial Guinea had never

19-4231317/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

before served a term on the Council. We are very proud
of them all.
Finally, I would like to say that as we approach
the end of our term on the Security Council, over the
past two years Equatorial Guinea has tried with great
pride, willingness and determination to live up to the
trust that everyone has placed in us, to serve and be
useful to the world and humankind in our quest for
lasting peace and security and to contribute to efforts
to the peaceful resolution and settlement of conflicts
and disputes in order to make the world a better place
for all of us. All of that is inspired by the peaceful
and supportive nature and devotion of the people and
institutions of Equatorial Guinea, and above all by the
political will and political philosophy of His Excellency
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, on behalf of whom I once again
convey our thanks to all departments of the United
Nations for their cooperation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his comprehensive
briefing. We listened with interest to his ideas about
the methodology for facilitating a Syrian settlement.
We also listened to the statement by Ms. Rajaa Altalli.
Russia remains committed to the principle of
pursuing a peaceful settlement to the Syrian crisis
by political and diplomatic means. In the interests of
advancing that process, the Constitutional Committee
was established under the auspices of the United Nations
and began its work on 30 October in Geneva. The
creation of the Committee, with the critical assistance
of the Astana format, is an undeniable achievement for
the Syrian people. As the Special Envoy noted earlier,
no one expected the Committee’s work to be easy. For
the first time, Syria’s two opposing camps have come to
the negotiating table, where they will discuss the future
of their country, a future that will take into account
the interests of every sector of Syrian society. That is
a great responsibility and a difficult task. During the
second round of dialogue in Geneva, the parties tried to
reach agreement on the principal approaches for their
future efforts. We hope that the divergent views they
have expressed will enable them to better prepare for
the next meeting.
We believe it is counterproductive to overdramatize
the situation and designate guilty parties. It is important
to give Syrians an opportunity to understand how to
18/21

20/12/2019

proceed to reach an agreement among themselves.
The pivotal principle of the work of the Constitutional
Committee is enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015) and
presupposes the facilitation of a political process led and
owned by the Syrians themselves. The Special Envoy
should help them to do that, and we in our turn are
ready to support his efforts. We must neither pressure
the Syrians nor burden their efforts with unrealistic
time frames. They are embarking on a dialogue on
fateful issues that cannot be resolved overnight. For
our part, we will encourage a constructive approach
by all the parties. To that end, we are continuing our
collaboration within the Astana framework with our
partners from Iran and Turkey. On 10 and 11 December
in Nur-Sultan we took part in the Astana format’s
fourteenth international meeting on Syria, with the
constructive participation of delegations from Iraq,
Jordan and Lebanon as observers. The meeting resulted
in the adoption of a joint statement of whose content
members may be aware. It was also stressed that all
the activities of the Astana guarantor countries will
be based on the strictest respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Besides the political track, the Astana discussions
cover other aspects of the situation in Syria, such as
the strengthening of confidence-building measures
and the humanitarian situation, including the delivery
of humanitarian assistance throughout Syria without
discrimination, politicization or the imposition of
preconditions. The Astana format working group is
continuing its efforts to ensure the release of forcibly
detained persons. In that connection we would like to
point to something that many have overlooked, which
is that on 21 November the Syrian authorities, with
the mediation of Russian military personnel, released
120 detainees in a significant humanitarian act also
designed to build confidence. The current turn for the
better in the work on a political settlement sets the stage
for concrete measures for providing comprehensive
humanitarian assistance and aid in Syria’s postconflict reconstruction.
We would like to point out that representatives of
the Syrian Government and civil society, as well as the
Syrian opposition, including the part of it that controls
the armed groups, are all participating in the work of the
Constitutional Committee. It means that all who have a
genuine interest in the process of determining Syria’s
political future have joined that peaceful process. And
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

yet the Syrian people continue to be threatened by
outright thugs and terrorists such as the militants from
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which the Security Council
has designated a terrorist organization, and who have
entrenched themselves in Idlib. The terrorists in Syria
must be got rid of once and for all.
We want to emphasize once again that Syria is one
of the key States of the Middle East and an integral part
of the Arab world. It cannot be artificially wrenched
out of its overall regional context. In that connection,
we urge for restoring Damascus to the family of Arab
countries as soon as possible, which will help to rebuild
harmony among Arabs and improve the situation in the
Middle East. That is a natural and objective process that
is progressing despite external opposition. We call on
all who are genuinely interested in establishing peace
in Syria to join our efforts in a constructive spirit.
In conclusion, I would like to thank those of my
colleagues who are leaving the Security Council — for
many of whom today’s meeting will be their last, or at
least their last in this cycle — for their collaboration
over the past two years. We have travelled far and
accomplished much. I would also like to thank them for
the friendship we have found and to wish them the very
best. And I wish everyone happiness for Christmas and
the New Year.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Ms. Altalli for sharing her personal story
with the Security Council today. It is really important
for the Council to hear about her work and that of
the other human rights defenders who work at great
personal risk. Their efforts on the behalf of all Syrians
are courageous and valuable. We deeply value and
support the voices of representatives of Syrian civil
society, particularly with regard to women’s roles in
the political process. I would also like to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for his briefing today and for his
leadership this year.
Thanks to the determination of Special Envoy
Pedersen, the willingness of the Syrian parties to step
forward and the support of the international community,
especially the small group and Turkey and Russia, we
witnessed a notable political breakthrough after almost
two years of negotiations. Following the successful
October launch of the Constitutional Committee, the
United States and many on the Council believed that there
would be momentum to move towards the creation of a

S/PV. 8696

constitutional reform package, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). However, the delegation of the Al-Assad
regime entered the second round of negotiations with
preconditions, which stalled any progress. The regime’s
call for agreement on a set of national pillars not only
represented barefaced propaganda, it also violated
the spirit of the Constitutional Committee’s rules of
procedure and obstructed the work of an important
diplomatic initiative, an initiative supported by the
United States, our small group partners and the
Astana group.
In the new year, the Council must fully support
the Special Envoy’s efforts to facilitate the work of
the Committee. As a sign of support in that regard, the
United States calls for the Office of the Special Envoy
to circulate formal written summaries of the most
recent round of the Committee’s meetings in November.
We call for similar reports to be issued after all future
meetings. With written reports in hand, the Council
can bolster Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to hold
representatives accountable and, we hope, bring an end
to the obstruction and delays. However, if Damascus is
not serious about the Constitutional Committee’s work,
the Council should reconsider whether the Committee
is a viable mechanism for producing the reforms called
for in resolution 2254 (2015). Beyond the issue of the
Committee, in 2020 we expect to see progress on
two specific goals of resolution 2254 (2015) that will
support progress in the political process, a nationwide
ceasefire and the immediate unilateral release of
civilian detainees, especially women, children and
the elderly.
The Al-Assad regime and its supporters — Russia
and Iran — should commit to an immediate nationwide
ceasefire. This week, ongoing hostilities continue to kill
civilians, destabilize the region and threaten to destroy
any progress made by the Constitutional Committee.
There must be no Christmas offensive in Idlib, and any
attack on civilians or civilian infrastructure must cease.
The United States also calls on the Al-Assad
regime to ensure the immediate unilateral release of
civilians whom it continues to hold in detention centres
and prisons without just cause and who are even
subjected to torture. At this moment, we are displaying
photographs in the lobby of our Permanent Mission,
dedicated by the Syrian Network for Human Rights to
several of the approximately 128,000 Syrians who have
been unlawfully detained and, in many cases, tortured
and killed by the Al-Assad regime. I want to reflect just

19-4231319/21

S/PV.8696

The situation in the Middle East

briefly on one of the human stories behind the images
in our windows.
Leila, a paramedic with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, was shot by a Government sniper and then
arrested — not once, but twice — for providing
material support to terrorists. She was subjected to
daily beatings in regime detention. What was her
crime? It was providing medical care to individuals
injured while peacefully protesting for reform. This is
simply outrageous.
Sadly, Leila’s story is all too common, and although
individuals like her remain dedicated to providing
medical assistance to all in need, they are unable to
safely return to Syria for fear of being targeted by the
regime. We must see the mass release of those who
have been arbitrarily detained. I want to be clear today
that there will be no lasting peace until the regime’s
inhumane and destructive behaviour against the
Syrian people is reversed and accountability measures
are established.
The United States firmly believes that achieving
those goals in the next 12 months will yield meaningful
progress towards an end to the conflict and a
sustainable, negotiated peace. We are eager to work
with every member of the Council to reach those goals
and advance all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015) in the
coming year.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing.
A few days ago, the fourteenth round of the Astana
process meetings took place. Its final communiqué
confirmed respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Syria, as well as cooperation with
the Syrian Government until the terrorist groups on its
soil are eradicated. The communiqué also rejected the
illegal seizure of oil fields in Syria and reaffirmed the
right of Syria to retake possession of them. While we
thank the two guarantors — Russia and Iran — and the
host State of Kazakhstan for contributing to the success
of that round of meetings, we reaffirm the need to
ensure that all parties honour the outcome of the Astana
process, in particular the eradication of armed terrorist
20/21

20/12/2019

groups, ending all forms of illegal military presence
and supporting the political process. We deplore that,
to date, the Turkish regime has had scant interest in
honestly and seriously honouring those commitments.
On 29 November, the second session of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee took place,
wherein no meetings among parties to the intra-Syrian
dialogue were held. Furthermore, no agreement
was reached to decide on the agenda. It was an
unfortunate occurrence for which responsibility falls
on the delegation of the so-called the High Negotiations
Committee, which came to the discussions with
a set of preconditions characterized by obstinacy,
misinformation, procrastination and contravention to
the terms of reference, principles and rules of procedure
of the Constitutional Committee on which the parties
had agreed.
The delegation of the so-called High Negotiations
Committee came to discussions also supported by a
hostile media campaign that contravened what had been
agreed upon in the code of conduct. It was very clear
that the goal of that delegation was to seriously obstruct
the launching of the work of the Committee from the
very outset and to distort the facts by accusing the other
parties of doing so. The Governments of certain States
were complicit in that fabricated media campaign
through statements made by their officials and the way
in which their national media outlets portrayed the
second round of meetings to prompt the delegation of
the so-called High Negotiations Committee to practice
disinformation and take a hostile stance towards other
participants in the Constitutional Committee. Of
course, those Governments are the same ones that have
been hostile towards Syria for nine years.
Despite all that, the Syrian national delegation
withstood these flagrant and substandard acts of
manipulation and constructively adhered to the
principles of cooperation. We learned from members
of the national Syrian delegation that they had
repeatedly offered to enter the meeting room so that
both sides could present their positions. However,
the other party rejected that proposal and insisted on
imposing preconditions and put forward views and
terms of reference that had been imposed upon them
pre-emptively.
The vision of the Syrian national group was based
on creating an opportunity to build trust among the
parties to the dialogue and to engage in discussions
19-42313

20/12/2019

The situation in the Middle East

on everything involving Syria’s future. In that regard,
we learned that the ideas of the members of the Syrian
national group, which they presented very openly and
transparently, were based on national pillars that should
enjoy the support of all Syrian citizens, including
renunciation of terrorism, extremism and violence;
the rejection of any aggression or occupation; and
the struggle against the adverse consequences of the
economic embargo imposed on the Syrian people. In
that regard, we reiterate that the Syrian national group
has sufficient freedom and flexibility to make the
proper decisions required during the course of intense
and serious consultations among its members so as to
arrive at positions and present constructive prospects
to settle any issue before the Constitutional Committee.
My delegation listened with great interest to the
briefing by Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. Accordingly, the Syrian Arab
Republic reaffirms the need to support Mr. Pedersen’s
efforts to facilitate the work of the Committee, ensure
its independence and that it is exclusively Syrianowned and Syrian-led, and support the two co-Chairs
of the Constitutional Committee to ensure that they can
guide the meetings in an effective way, in accordance
with agreed parameters and the critical components of
the rules of procedures for these meetings.
We have heard statements by the representatives
of certain States members of the Security Council, in
particular the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, France and Germany, that clearly reflect
an interventionist policy with regard to domestic
Syrian issues. It is all too clear that the Governments
of these States, as well as the Turkish regime and other
parties, will not stop blatantly interfering in Syrian
affairs, whether by continuing to support the terrorist

S/PV. 8696

group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Idlib, extending
support to its allies, conducting direct acts of military
aggression on Syrian territory or imposing unilateral
coercive economic measures on the Syrian people. We
want to ensure that the situation is clear to all. Those
Governments will not stop the playing same negative
roles and will continue to exert political and economic
pressure on Syria.
I urge all present to recall that those who attack
the Syrian Government here in the Security Council
are the representatives of States whose military forces
are occupying areas of Syrian territory and whose
Governments are imposing an economic blockade
that is suffocating the Syrian people. Those States are
preventing reconstruction and recovery, obstructing
the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes and occupying oil and gas fields in
Syria. They have publicly declared how much they love
Syrian oil, that they have seized it and will do whatever
they wish with it. Can we therefore reasonably expect
any positive results from the involvement of those
Governments or the Turkish regime in building a future
for my country or ensuring the well-being and security
of the Syrian people?
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic has
adhered and will continue to adhere to an independent
national policy in line with the interests, beliefs and
sovereignty of the Syrian people. Once again, that leads
us to call on certain members to refrain from exploiting
the Security Council as a tool to exert pressure on the
work of the Constitutional Committee, which must be
able to operate independently so as to meet the needs
and aspirations of the Syrian people, reassuring them of
their Constitution and their future.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-4231321/21
