A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/91
28 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.2)]
51/91.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on
the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, as well as its
subsequent resolutions on the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
Concerned by the growing frequency and severity of disputes and
conflicts concerning minorities in many countries, and their often tragic
consequences, and concerned also that persons belonging to minorities are
particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter alia, population
transfers, refugee flows and forced relocation,
Considering that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
contribute to political and social stability and peace and enrich the cultural
heritage of society as a whole in the States in which such persons live,
Noting that the Working Group on Minorities of the Subcommission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities held its second
session from 30 April to 3 May 1996 and that its report will be made available
to the Commission on Human Rights,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an increasingly important role
to play regarding the protection of minorities,

97-76969

/...

A/RES/51/91
Page 2

1.
General;1

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-

2.
Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons
belonging to minorities may exercise fully and effectively all human rights
and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination and in full equality
before the law in accordance with the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities;
3.
Urges States and the international community to promote and
protect the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration, including through the
facilitation of their participation in all aspects of the political, economic,
social, religious and cultural life of society and in the economic progress
and development of their country;
4.
Recognizes that respect for human rights and the promotion of
understanding and tolerance by Governments as well as between and among
minorities is central to the protection and promotion of the rights of persons
belonging to minorities;
5.
Urges States to take, as appropriate, all the necessary
constitutional, legislative, administrative and other measures to promote and
give effect to the principles contained in the Declaration;
6.
Appeals to States to make bilateral and multilateral efforts, as
appropriate, in order to protect the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in their countries, in
accordance with the Declaration;
7.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request
of Governments concerned, qualified expertise on minority issues, including
the prevention and resolution of disputes, to assist in existing or potential
situations involving minorities;
8.
Welcomes the activities of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights relating to the promotion and protection of the rights of
persons belonging to minorities and, in accordance with his mandate, calls
upon him to promote the implementation of the Declaration and to continue to
engage in a dialogue with Governments concerned for that purpose;
9.
Requests the High Commissioner to continue his efforts to improve
the coordination and cooperation of United Nations programmes and agencies
which deal with minority issues in activities related to the promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
10.
Urges all treaty bodies to give due regard, within their
respective mandates, to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to minorities;
11.
Calls upon States to continue to include in their reports to
treaty bodies, in accordance with the relevant conventions, information on

1

A/51/536.
/...

A/RES/51/91
Page 3

measures taken for the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to minorities;
12.
Calls upon all special representatives, special rapporteurs and
working groups of the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give
attention, within their respective mandates, to situations involving
minorities;
13.
Encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
continue to contribute to the promotion and protection of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution
under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
