V.

Resolutioos adopted on tbe reports of tbe Second Committee

2. Commends the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for the
dispatch and effective, co-ordinated manner with which
they established the joint venture called for in General
Assembly resolution 33/88;
3. Notes with satisfaction the progress made by the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in assisting the
Governments of the region, on behalf of the United
Nations Environment Programme, in implementing the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
4. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme to continue to provide support to the joint
venture with a view to helping ensure that the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office continues to carry out
its additional responsibilities at a level commensurate
with the pressing needs of the region;
5. Invites the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to examine at its eighth
session the possibility of including Djibouti, Guinea and
Guinea-Bissau in the Iist of countries which receive assistance through the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian
Office in implementing in the Sudano-Sahelian region the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on
this matter;
6. Urges all Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system, other intergovernmental bodies,
prívate organizations and individuals to respond favourably, bilaterally or through the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, the Consultative Group for
Desertification Control or any other intermediary, to
requests for assistance from the Governments of the
Sudano-Sahelian region in combating desertification;
7. Also notes with satisfaction the efforts made by
the specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system concerned
with the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, especially through the Interagency Working Group, to ensure
complete effectiveness of assistance provided to the
fifteen countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region for the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification;
8. Requests the Goveming Council of the United
N ations Environment Programme to continue to report
annually to the General Assembly, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the implementation in the
Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification.
107th plenary meeting
18 December 1979

34/188.

lnternational co-operation in the field of the
environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,

129

Having considered the report of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its seventh session, 133
Noting the statement made on 29 October 1979 by
the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, 134
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 / 56 of 2 August 1979 on intemational cooperation on the environment,
Noting the results of the high-level meeting on the
protection of the environment, held at Geneva from 13
to 15 November 1979, within the framework of the
Economic Commission for Europe,
Taking into account the note by the Secretary-General
on international conventions and protocols in the field
of the environment, 135
Mindful of possible adverse effects on the marine
environment as a result of off-shore mining and drilling,
Noting the progress achieved at the Third United
N ations Conference on the Law of the Sea with regard to
protection and preservation of the marine environment,
Affi1ming that environmental considerations should
be viewed in the context of national plans and priorities
and development objectives of all countries, in particular
the developing countries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its seventh session;
2. Notes with appreciation the progress achieved by
the United Nations Environment Programme in the
development of a system-wide, medium-term environment programme and the sustained co-operation of the
organizations of the United Nations system in this
regard;
3. Invites the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to pursue its work on the
technical aspects of environmental assessment and the
integration of environmental factors in the development
process;
4. Requests appropriate multilateral financial institutions to consider, within the framework of the over-all
financing of projects in developing countries, at their
request, the costs of the studies that might be required
on the environmental aspects of such projects;
5. Stresses the need for the United Nations Environment Programme to increase the resources available
for its projects in the developing countries, in accordance
with their requirements and priorities, bearing in mind
the need for regional balance and environmental problems arising from under-development and poverty, as
well as the balance between global and regional programmes as identified in the relevant decisions of the
Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
6. W elcomes the collaboration of the United Nations Environment Programme with the Intemational
Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources and the World Wildlife Fund in the development
of guidelines to help Govemments in the management of
their living resources through the formulation of a world
conservation strategy, to be launched in March 1980;
7. Invites Member States, as appropriate, to ratify
and implement the international conventions and pro188 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/34/25).
13• /bid., Thirty-fourth Session, Second Committee 24th meeting, paras. 1-25.
'
135 A/34/296.

130

General Assembly

tocols designed to protect the environment in every
respect and further urges Governments to promote the
conclusion of such conventions and protocols;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme to co-operate fully in the preparatory process
for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, to be held in 1981;
9. Welcomes the establishment of the Regional
Trust Fund for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea
against Pollution and the Trust Fund for the <:onventi?n
on International Trade in Endangered Spec1es of Wild
Fauna and Flora;
10. Appeals to all Governments to contribute_ or
increase their contribution to the Fund of the Umted
Nations Environment Programme so as to meet the
approved target set by the Governing Council in its
decision 6/13 of 24 May 1978. 130
107th plenary meeting
18 December 1979
34/189.

Acceleration of the transfer of real resources
to developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, c~mtaining the Declaration and the Programn:e of Achon ~n
the Establishment of a New Intemahonal Econom1c
Order and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,
Recalling a/so its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, in which it, ínter alía, called for an
increased, predictable, continuous and increasingly assured flow of concessional financia} resources for development on more favourable terms and conditions,
Recalling further its resolutions 3489 (XXX) of 12
December 1975, 31/174 of 21 December 1976, 32/
181 of 19 Decémber 1977 and 33/136 of 19 December
1978 on the acceleration of the transfer of real resources to developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 129 (V), adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its fifth session, held at Manila from 7 May to 3 June
1979,137
Deeply concerned at the fact that the recent performance of the developed countries, taken as a group,
with respect to the 0.7 per cent target of offi.cial development assistance has not increased substantially despite repeated commitments to increase progressively
and substantially their official development assistance,
Noting with satisfaction that a few developed countries have attained and in sorne cases exceeded the target of O. 7 per cent,
Convinced of the urgent necessity of a considerable
and sustained increase in the transfer of real resources,
both concessional and non-concessional, to developing
countries and improved access of those countries to
188 See Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/33/25), annex l.
111 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nat1ons publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part
one, sect. A.

Thlrty-fourth Sesslon

capital markets, in support of their development objectives and priorities,
Convinced also that such transfer of real resources to
developing countries consti!utes an important contribution to a balanced and eqmtable process of global economic development,
Bearing in mind that substantial consultations are
needed to implement fully paragraph 1O of General
Assembly resolution 33/ 136,
1. Takes note of the background report of the
Secretary-General on increased transfer of real resources, 138 prepared by the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Endorses the agreed conclusions o~ the trans~er
of resources in real terms to developmg countnes
reached on 31 January 1979 by the Committee of ~he
Whole Established under General Assembly Resolutton
32/ 174;1"9
3. Endorses the decisions and recommendat!ons
contained in resolution 129 (V) of the United N attons
Conference on Trade and Development; 137
4. Affirms, in this connexion, the importanc~ of the
question of a review of the present system of mternational financia] co-operation in the context of world
trade and development and co~sideration o~ w~ys and
means in this context to make 1t more eflecttve m contributing to the development of devel?ping count~ies,
which is now on the agenda, in~e~ alta, of t~e m~th
session of the Committee on Inv1S1bles and Fmancmg
Related to Trade, urges all States members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to consider actively this question with a view to reachin~ satisfactory decisions, taking into account, inter aba, the
proposals of the Group of Seventy-seven, 1 • 0 and requests
the Trade and Development Board to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on progress
made on this question;
5. Urges that steps should be taken for the full _and
expeditious implementation of the recommendat1ons
made by the Development Committee at its 6th me~~ing,
held at Manila on 3 October 1976, 141 so as to fac1htate
access of developing countries to prívate capital markets
and help overcome obstacles impeding access of developing countries to those markets, including any pres~nt
administrative or institutional obstacles, and that capital
market countries should consider establishing programmes to provide technical assistance to developing
countries seeking access to prívate capital markets;
6. Calls upon all countries, in particular developed
donor countries, and multilateral development inst1tutions to implement on an urgent basis the agreed conclusions and the decisions and recommendations referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, with respect to
bis report on increased transfer of real resources, to engage in further and intensified consultations with Governments and within the United Nations system on the
expansion of the volume of resource transfers to deA/34/493 and Corr.1.
Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/34/34), part one, para. 13.
uo See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
annex I.C, document TD/L.197.
141 See Intemational Monetary Fund, Annual Report 1977
(Washington, D.C.), appendix ID, press communiqué of the
Joint Ministerial Comm1ttee of the Boards of Govemors of the
World Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources
to Developing Countries (Development Committee), para. 6.
13s

139
