UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/2
17 January 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3491st meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 January 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
prevailing in and adjacent to the United Nations Protected Areas in Croatia",
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
"The Security Council, which has begun its consideration of the
Secretary-General’s report of 14 January 1995 submitted pursuant to
resolution 947 (1994) (S/1995/38), has learned with concern of the position
adopted by the Republic of Croatia on the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Croatia beyond 31 March 1995,
as set out in the letter from the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Croatia to the Secretary-General of 12 January 1995 (S/1995/28). It is
particularly concerned about the wider implications of this development for
the peace process throughout the former Yugoslavia.
"The Security Council reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia within its internationally
recognized borders. It understands the concerns of the Croatian Government
about the lack of implementation of major provisions of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Plan for Croatia. It will not accept the status quo becoming
an indefinite situation. It believes, however, that UNPROFOR’s continued
presence in the Republic of Croatia is of vital importance for regional
peace and security, and that the United Nations in general and UNPROFOR in
particular have a positive role to play in achieving the further
implementation of the Peace-keeping Plan and bringing about a settlement
which ensures full respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Croatia. It recalls the important role UNPROFOR plays in helping to
sustain the cease-fire in Croatia, facilitating humanitarian activities and
international relief work, and supporting implementation of the Economic
Agreement of 2 December 1994 (S/1994/1375).
"It is in that perspective that the Security Council hopes that
discussions over the weeks ahead will lead to a re-examination of the
position now taken in relation to the continuing role of UNPROFOR in the
Republic of Croatia.

95-01363 (E)

170195

/...

S/PRST/1995/2
English
Page 2

"Meanwhile, the Security Council calls upon all parties and others
concerned to avoid any action or statement which might lead to an increase
in tension. It welcomes the conclusion, under the auspices of the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, of
the Economic Agreement of 2 December 1994, and urges the parties to
continue, and accelerate, its implementation; it notes the need for
adequate international financial support, and encourages the international
community to respond to this need. It calls for the intensification in the
coming weeks of all these efforts to consolidate this achievement and to
bring about a political settlement in Croatia, and it also calls upon the
parties to cooperate with these efforts and to negotiate in earnest to that
end.
"The Security Council affirms its commitment to the search for an
overall negotiated settlement of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States there
within their internationally recognized borders, and stresses the
importance it attaches to the mutual recognition thereof.

-----
