UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/868
10 August 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 10 AUGUST 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period 1 to 27 July 1999.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-23315 (E)

100899

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/868
English
Page 2

Annex
Monthly report to the Security Council
on the operations of KFOR

1.
Over the reporting period (1-27 July) there have been significant changes
in the size, composition and movement of forces, and the strength of KFOR has
increased by approximately 50 per cent since the last report. As of 27 July,
the total number of troops in theatre was 42,784.
2.
Canada, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the
Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America have completed their
deployment into theatre. The Danish advance party is currently deploying
together with the Portuguese contingent. Belgium and Norway are still to
deploy. Deployment is expected to be complete by late September.
3.
A large number of both partner and non-partner nations are scheduled to
participate in KFOR. The Russian Federation has currently deployed 3,017 out of
a final total of 3,600. The Russian elements that temporarily left SFOR to go
to Pristina airport have now returned to Bosnia to resume their normal tasks.
To date, the final Russian boundaries within Multinational Brigades (MNBs)
North, South and West are still under discussion, but Russian troops are already
conducting joint patrols with other KFOR troops. The United Arab Emirates
currently has 100 troops on the ground. Finland should complete its deployment
by the end of August, and Austria and Sweden will deploy in September and
October 1999, respectively.
Security
4.
The situation in Kosovo remains very tense and volatile, and this continues
to cause difficulties in providing security for ethnic minorities. There have
been random, isolated actions against KFOR personnel, as well as continued
reports of reprisals by ethnic Albanians against minorities, which has caused a
significant exodus of the Serb minority. The most serious incident occurred in
Gracko on 23 July when 14 Serbs were killed. Areas where Serbs and Albanians
are physically separated, but still close to each other, represent places where
the situation can quickly turn violent and may pose a threat to KFOR personnel.
There has been an increase in the attacks on symbols of Serb culture, such as
Orthodox churches.
5.
As of 27 July, a total of 194 civilians had been killed since the entry of
KFOR into Kosovo. Of this total, 73 were of Serb origin (37.6 per cent),
72 Albanian (37.1 per cent), 5 Gypsy (2.5 per cent) and of unknown ethnic origin
(27.8 per cent). Twenty-one persons have been detained on suspicion of these
murders.
6.
KFOR works closely with the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and
has jointly established the United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre
(UNMACC) to maintain visibility on the mines and the unexploded ordnance threat
in Kosovo. Upon entry into Kosovo and prior to establishment of UNMACC, KFOR
/...

S/1999/868
English
Page 3

organized a Mines Action Centre, which has since been augmented by United
Nations personnel and has now become UNMACC. This is now fully functional and
charged by the United Nations with demining the region. It accomplishes this
task using civilian contracted demining teams. KFOR is principally conducting
mission-essential mine and unexploded ordnance clearance, including clearance of
essential civilian infrastructure and public buildings.
7.
Separately, the UCK has formally stated that all UCK mines laid during the
conflict have been removed. Negotiations continue between the Serbs and KFOR on
the best time for VJ soldiers to return and remove their minefields in
conformity with the Military Technical Agreement of 9 June 1999. In general,
although progress is good, there remains a significant amount of clearing and
demining to be completed.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
8.
By K+7 (28 June) UCK was to establish secure weapon storage sites,
registered and verified by KFOR. UCK was also to establish, by that date,
assembly areas for their personnel. UCK is assessed as mostly compliant on the
limitation to carry weapons and use uniforms only within those assembly areas.
9.
After K+30 (21 July), all UCK personnel not of local origin should have
left Kosovo, but this has been assessed as not fully accomplished. Also by the
same date, all heavy weapons, 30 per cent of all small arms and all ammunition
should be stored in the weapons storage sites. It is assessed that UCK has so
far not complied fully with the K+30 deadline, and has resorted to cross-border
smuggling of weapons. It should be kept in mind that many of the figures on UCK
weapon holdings came from UCK sources. It is clear that not all ammunition has
been stored. KFOR is assessing these omissions through the Joint Implementation
Commission process. Sixty per cent of UCK weapon holdings should be in storage
sites by K+60 (20 August), and all UCK weaponry by K+90 (19 September). By the
same date, all UCK forces are to have completed demilitarization and are to
cease wearing either military uniforms or UCK insignia. Overall, therefore, the
UCK declaration of total weapon holdings handed to KFOR on K+30 is assessed as
falling short of their actual overall holdings. However, progress is being
made, and the slow rate of turn-in of weapons may be attributed to poor
communications within UCK.
10. Serb security forces have complied with the terms of the Military Technical
Agreement. There is, however, a suggestion that some MUP elements may have
remained in Kosovo, in Serb areas, to monitor the situation.
11. Joint Implementation Commission meetings have been held regularly every
week at KFOR headquarters. These focus exclusively on KFOR-UCK issues and have
not included negotiations with VJ. Attendance includes COMKFOR, KFOR Brigade
Commanders, the UCK "Chief of General Staff" and his seven "Zone Commanders".
Cooperation with international organizations
12. KFOR continues to provide humanitarian assistance to the international
organizations/non-governmental organizations on a daily basis and upon request,
focusing on transportation, distribution of food, medical support,
/...

S/1999/868
English
Page 4

re-establishment of support services, and the protection and escorting of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
13. Throughout Kosovo, the MNBs have provided support to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by logging, reporting and subsequently
preventing interference with sites of suspected war crimes.
14. Five detention centres for common law criminals are being guarded by KFOR
forces.
15. KFOR has been providing assistance with the collection and assessment of
applications for the Kosovar Police Service, and has also helped with
construction and other preparation work for the new Kosovo Police School.
Although there is some way to go before the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) can assume full responsibility for the
policing of the province, joint KFOR/UNIP patrols have already started.
16. In order to ensure effective and sustainable control, KFOR MNBs have
deployed checkpoints on the main border-crossing points from Kosovo to the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania, primarily to prevent the
illegal traffic of weapons and military equipment. Helicopter-borne
reconnaissance and quick reaction force missions have also been conducted in
western Kosovo against smuggling and looting operations across the Albanian
border. KFOR remains concerned over the lack of proper immigration controls, a
situation that allows Albanian nationals to indulge in criminal behaviour in
Kosovo. Once United Nations border security units are in place, they will
assume responsibility for border security; however, KFOR support to UNMIK in
anti-smuggling/looting operations will continue.
17. KFOR is strongly supporting UNMIK by providing support for the interim
civil administration until UNMIK assumes full responsibility. KFOR is
represented at all levels of civil administration and works closely with UNMIK
civil administrators. Daily coordination meetings have been established. KFOR
assisted UNMIK in setting up the UNMIK Situation Centre in Pristina. This
provides a vital crisis management and information hub for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and a continuous communications link to
KFOR. KFOR also provides representatives to work directly with the senior UNMIK
civil administration officer at each administrative level. KFOR and UNMIK
representatives hold assessment meetings every 14 days to identify any problems
with the transfer of responsibilities.
18. KFOR continues to provide assistance throughout Kosovo to reconstruct
various infrastructure systems. KFOR troops are currently involved in such
tasks as sanitation disposal, securing water supplies, bridge operations, power
restoration, manning fire trucks, reconnoitring basic infrastructure systems,
and many others. The road systems throughout Kosovo are rapidly returning to
pre-conflict condition, and most areas are accessible to truck traffic. Rail
transportation has resumed, and non-governmental organizations are starting to
use trains for transporting bulk goods and building supplies. Pristina Airport
is currently handling mainly military traffic, but is also capable of handling
limited civil traffic. KFOR is also working with non-governmental
organizations, through UNMIK, to repair schools and have them ready to open by
/...

S/1999/868
English
Page 5

the beginning of September. The largest project accomplished by KFOR with
respect to civil military cooperation is the Urban Task Force Coordination Unit
"Working Groups on Urban Issues". This provides a local clearinghouse for all
projects and assessments, to facilitate coordination and eliminate costly
duplication.
Outlook
19. Since the deployment of KFOR, the initial exodus of Serbs has been reduced
as the result of KFOR efforts to provide a secure environment. The main aims of
KFOR have been the restoration of law and order and the protection of the Serb
and other minorities, together with the demilitarization of UCK. The killings,
looting and arson of the first days following the VJ/MUP withdrawal have shown a
tendency to diminish over the last 15 days, and KFOR patrols strive day and
night to prevent these actions from happening. However, notwithstanding KFOR
efforts, acts of harassment and crime between ethnic groups continue to happen,
affecting mostly the Serb population. KFOR will continue to work in close
cooperation with UNMIK to address these and other issues to maintain peace and
stability in Kosovo.

-----
