S/PV.7553

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7553rd meeting

Monday, 9 November 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-35592 (E)
*1535592*

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi and Uganda to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, Minister for External
Relations and International Cooperation of Burundi,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Bujumbura, the technology permitting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, and given the seriousness
of the situation and the requirement that the Security
Council act and not look aside, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; Mr. Adama Dieng,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide; Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Al
Hussein, Mr. Dieng and Mr. Lauber, who are joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva,
Jordan and Bujumbura, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I take this opportunity to remind speakers of the
President’s intention to use flashing lights on the
microphones to prompt speakers to bring their remarks
to a close, as we have a number of participants in
this meeting and it is an important issue. I therefore
encourage speakers to make concise statements.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in Burundi.

2/14

09/11/2015

One year ago, on 5 November 2014, the Security
Council held its last discussion on the United Nations
Office in Burundi (see S/PV.7295) before it closed at
the end of the year at the request of the Burundian
Government. In the briefing given to the Council, the
then-Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, underlined our
hope that the groundwork laid by Burundian authorities
to preserve stability and consolidate democracy would
not be reversed during the 2015 electoral cycle.
Today, one year later, Burundi finds itself in a
deep political crisis and rapid escalation of violence
that has serious implications for stability and ethnic
harmony in Burundi, as well as for peace and security
in the region. The political, economic, social and
security gains that came out of the landmark Arusha
Agreement are already at risk. The killing, on 22 May,
of Zedi Feruzi, a key opposition figure, marked the
beginning of a troubling pattern of politically motivated
assassinations and attacks. Neither the conclusion of
Burundi’s legislative and presidential electoral cycle
this summer nor the inclusion of some key opposition
figures in the governing coalition calmed the situation,
which has instead grown more troubling. As the High
Commissioner for Human Rights will further elaborate,
the number of reported human rights violations and
casualties is rising by the day and spreading beyond
Bujumbura.
In the capital the situation is currently very tense.
Several neighbourhoods, especially those perceived
to have opposed President Nkurunziza’s third term,
experience nightly exchanges of gunshots and grenade
explosions. Traumatized residents frequently discover
mutilated bodies, victims of executions. Just this
morning, at least two people were killed in a grenade
attack in the Musaga neighbourhood in Bujumbura. On
7 November, at least nine people, including a United
Nations staff member, were killed when unknown
gunmen opened fire inside a bar in the Kanyosha
neighbourhood in Bujumbura. The bar was alleged
to have been a previous meeting venue of anti-thirdmandate demonstrators. Saturday’s incident is the
second time within a month that a staff member of the
United Nations family in Burundi has been killed. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights will provide
other examples of human rights violations and killings.
In this very tense environment, inflammatory
and chilling public statements from authorities have
provoked concern and alarm in Burundi, the region

15-35592

09/11/2015

The situation in Burundi

and beyond. In a 29 October speech, the President
of the Senate, Mr. Révérien Ndikuriyo, told local
administrators to be ready and to set their emotions
aside if a signal were given to the police to “go to
work”, which has been widely interpreted as implying a
pre-planned operation. He also said that “plots of land
are about to be available”.
On 2 November, President Nkurunziza gave
armed civilians five days to surrender their arms or
face being dealt with as “enemies of the nation”. The
President said that the police have the right to use “all
available means” to find illegally possessed arms.
While police forces do have the right and responsibility
to maintain law and order many incidents, described as
crackdown activities appear to cross the line into extrajudiciary attacks, striking fear among the residents
of some neighbourhoods. Consequently, we have
received reports that the President’s ultimatum has
prompted a large number of people living in affected
neighbourhoods to flee their homes, ahead of the
deadline this past weekend.
Many recent statements have also been interpreted
as having an ethnic dimension, contrary to the spirit of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, which
ended Burundi’s civil war. The Secretary-General has
strongly condemned such dangerous incitement.
The crisis in Burundi is political at its core and
cannot be resolved by a security clampdown. It is not
credible to claim that a small group of criminals or
traitors are behind the current violence. The problem is
much deeper, and therefore more worrying. To address
the deteriorating situation, Burundian leaders will need
to address the political deadlock that preceded and
transcended the summer elections. In that regard, the
Government of Burundi has established a commission
for inter-Burundian dialogue, said to be open to all
except those implicated in the failed coup d’état on
14 May.
While the United Nations in general supports
national dialogue efforts, the Commission will not be
able to make progress in the tense security context
where members of political parties and civil society are
frequently found dead on the streets. With many media
outlets closed down since spring and opposition leaders
abroad afraid to return home, the Government has not
established the conditions for credible and inclusive
political dialogue. We encourage the Burundian
authorities to do so as quickly as possible.

S/PV.7553

On 17 October, the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council agreed on a multi-pronged approach
to address the situation in Burundi. It included
increasing the number of its human rights observers
and military experts and the initiation of contingency
planning for the possible deployment of an African-led
mission in the country. The Peace and Security Council
also gave its strong support to the resumption of a
political dialogue in Kampala or Addis Ababa, with the
facilitation of Uganda.
The United Nations is in close consultation with the
African Union Commission on how to provide technical
and logistical assistance and expertise to advance the
implementation of the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council. We have also offered
to provide support and assistance to the Ugandanled facilitation under the rubric of the East African
Community (EAC). In the coming days, the SecretaryGeneral will announce the appointment of a Special
Adviser who will lead and coordinate United Nations
efforts in support of Burundi. The Special Adviser will
work closely with the AU, the EAC and other partners
to prevent a further escalation of the conflict and to
build peace in Burundi.
The sharp deterioration of the political and security
situation is happening at a time when the mandate of the
current political mission — the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi — is ending. There
is clearly a need for continuing political engagement
and presence on the ground to support Burundi during
these difficult times. But that requires a mandate
from the Security Council and the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi.
Burundi finds itself at a critical juncture. A
political solution must be found to resolve the crisis
before it spirals out of control and affects peace and
security regionally. We hope that all international
partners, particularly those in the region, speak with
one voice in urging and supporting Burundi to find a
political settlement to the crisis. The Secretary-General
calls on all Burundian parties, inside the country and
abroad, to cease immediately the propagation of hate
speech, to renounce violence and to engage in good
faith with the ongoing facilitation of the East African
Community. The United Nations is prepared to do what
we can do support a credible and inclusive dialogue that
can address the deep political challenges the country
currently faces. We must all work to ensure that it takes
place and succeeds.

15-355923/14

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al-Hussein: I regret to report my deepening
concern with regard to the increasingly grave human
rights crisis in Burundi. In addition to the rising death
toll, I must alert the Security Council to warning signs
of further escalation, including potentially very serious
regional repercussions. The country is at another crucial
and extremely dangerous tipping point, and I believe
that Member States and the Council can intervene
effectively to prevent the repetition of past horrors.
Within Burundi, and particularly in Bujumbura,
there have been increasing numbers of extrajudicial
killings documented in recent months, including
multiple alleged political assassinations. At least 240
people have been killed since protests began in April,
with bodies dumped on the streets on almost a nightly
basis. There have been hundreds of cases of arbitrary
arrests and detention in the past month alone, targeting
members of the opposition, journalists, human rights
defenders and their families, people attending the
funerals of those who have been killed and inhabitants
of neighbourhoods perceived to be supportive of the
opposition.
I am glad to note that the intervention of my
Office, in cooperation with the Burundian authorities,
resulted in the release of 340 detainees last month.
However, people who express divergent views from
the Government continue to live in a climate of intense
fear. The abduction and murder just three days ago
of 25-year-old Welly Nzitonda, son of a well-known
human rights defender, Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, is one
very recent and painful example. During an attempt
on his life in August, Mr. Mbonimpa was himself
badly wounded. His son-in-law, another human rights
defender, was killed last month.
Many credible allegations of torture have been
documented, notably at a locality in Bujumbura run
by the national intelligence service. Violations have
also been reported on the part of the national police
and by the heavily armed police unit that was created
in September “to fight against acts of terrorism”.
The Imbonerakure militia, associated with the ruling
party, continues to terrorize the population, sometimes
in collaboration with the police, and perpetrates
human rights abuses with total impunity. Specific
neighbourhoods have been locked down by police, with
reports of gun battles. Unidentified, but apparently

4/14

09/11/2015

well armed and organized, individuals opposed to the
Government are also committing killings.
Fear of the violence and the spectre of more
bloodshed are driving ordinary Burundians out of their
homes. There are now well over 280,000 internally
displaced persons and refugees across the Great Lakes
region. To make matters worse, it is reported that
armed groups are recruiting in some refugee camps in
neighbouring countries and that agents of the Burundi
Government are also present to identify opponents.
Those and other signs of a suddenly escalating
regionalization of the crisis lead me to emphasize that
host countries must ensure that the camps are duly
protected and remain civilian in nature.
President Nkurunziza announced the opening of a
process of national dialogue in September. However, I
regret to report that to date it has fallen short of the
truly inclusive discussion that would effectively put the
country back on a path to peace. Repeated killings of
opposition leaders and human rights defenders and their
families sharply undermine the Government’s verbal
commitments to reconciliation, as do recent requests
for the arrests of members of the opposition and human
rights defenders in exile in Europe and a tone of intense
hostility in public statements.
Last week, as we just heard from the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, President Nkurunziza set
an ultimatum for Burundians to hand in all weapons,
warning that those who would not do so would be dealt
with as enemies of the nation. That ultimatum has led
many Burundians to flee their neighbourhoods for fear
of police sweeps and crackdowns. Earlier today, one
policeman and four civilians were reportedly killed in
the Musaga neighbourhood of Bujumbura.
Recent inflammatory remarks by members of the
Government have suggested that this crisis, which has
involved targeting people for their perceived political
affiliations, could increasingly taken on an ethnic
dimension.
The President of the Senate recently ordered
local authorities to identify, “elements which are not
in order”, and to report them to the police to be dealt
with. He also called on the police to get ready to “finish
the work”. Phrases such as those recall language that
this region has heard before and should not be hearing
again. They could signal the imminence of much worse
and more widespread violence.

15-35592

09/11/2015

The situation in Burundi

The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
recently, and rightly, reaffirmed that anyone who
incited or engaged in acts of mass violence in Burundi
may be subject to prosecution by her Office. I strongly
support her statement.
The crisis in Burundi has been escalating for many
months. The resulting loss of life, economic collapse,
increasing hunger and mass displacement do not
only threaten peace and stability in the country, but
also across the region. The individuals responsible,
regardless of rank, position or political affiliation,
must be held to account. All possible influence must
be brought to bear to halt what may be an imminent
catastrophe.
None of us can forget the waves of killings
that generated such horrific loss of life and mass
displacement in the region two decades ago. I believe
that the strong interventions of many officials and
States in recent days may have great influence. I urge
neighbouring countries in the Great Lakes region
to step up their attempts to promote a credible and
inclusive political dialogue in Burundi and to ensure
that border areas and refugee camps in their respective
national territories are not used by any actors to fuel
the conflict.
I welcome the investigation to be carried out
in Burundi by the African Commission on Human
and Peoples’ Rights, as well as the African Union’s
efforts to address impunity by placing 100 human
rights observers on the ground. It is essential that the
international community is able to respond swiftly
and decisively if events deteriorate further. I urge
the Burundi Government to sign a memorandum of
understanding with the African Union for its human
rights observers to operate in Burundi, as well as to
allow the African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights to do its work and make its report public as soon
as possible.
Moreover, although the efforts of Burundi’s
neighbours and regional partners will be essential,
I also believe it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to address a situation of profound concern,
well known for many months, and which could lead to
even greater carnage. I appeal to the Council to keep
Burundi at the top of its agenda and to explore all
possible options to prevent further violence, including
steps to freeze the assets of those who would incite or
who incite or engage in violence, and possible travel
bans. The Council may also wish to consider involving

S/PV.7553

Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to stop
the ongoing violence and prevent a regional conflict.
The Government of Burundi should be apprised of
the very serious consequences that will ensue if it fails
in its duty to protect all Burundians regardless of their
political opinions or other affiliations. I also ask the
Council and all Member States to give financial and
political support to the efforts of the African Union to
conduct human rights investigations in Burundi and to
assist the cause of peace. My Office will be discussing
how best to provide our support to the African
Commission investigation this week.
It is essential that an all-inclusive dialogue take
place among all stakeholders in Burundi in accordance
with the Arusha Agreement, which put an end to 12
years of massacres and warfare. The dialogue should be
led in coordination with the mediation process.
The urgent disarming of the Imbonerakure militia
and all those who illegally possess arms must figure
high on the agenda. Against the longstanding claims by
the Government that armed militias do not exist within
the Imbonerakure, there is indisputable evidence
to the contrary. If the Government has any hope of
reining in the violence, it needs to begin by disarming
the Imbonerakure and ensuring that police and the
national intelligence service members who have been
responsible for human rights violations are brought to
book. It is also vital that all opinion leaders realize that
speech that incites violence must be avoided at all cost.
What is needed is leadership and strong voices calling
for restraint, accountability and real reconciliation.
The current crisis has already undone much of
Burundi’s recent political, economic and social progress.
The international community, in particular the Council,
contributed significantly to those gains. But their main
driver was public confidence in the stability and safety
of the country. The Government must urgently take
public and concrete steps to restore such confidence,
which is essential to preventing recourse to violence
and to returning Burundi to the path of peace, national
harmony and development.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dieng.
Mr. Dieng: I thank the President of the Security
Council, Mr. Matthew Rycroft, for convening this
meeting and for extending an invitation to me to

15-355925/14

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

09/11/2015

brief members on the situation in Burundi from the
perspective of my mandate.

citizens. To do so is both dangerous and irresponsible,
and it is prohibited under international law.

I last briefed the Council on the situation in Burundi
last May, following my visit to Burundi. I observed
then that, although the crisis in Burundi was primarily
political in nature, some senior Burundian leaders were
manipulating the issue of ethnicity to advance their
political interests. I warned that, if they continued to do
so, the result could be an increase in violence in which
individuals could be targeted based on their political or
ethnic affiliation.

If there was ever a time for President Nkurunziza
and his Government to display responsible and
courageous leadership, it is now. For the sake of all
Burundians, we need the Government to commit to
restoring peace and security through dialogue and to
take a series of concrete steps to de-escalate the current
crisis. At the same time, this responsibility does not lie
with Burundi’s Government alone; the international
community, in particular the East African Community,
the African Union and the United Nations have an
indispensable role to play in restoring peace to Burundi.

Unfortunately, that is what has happened. The
country appears to be on the verge of descending into
violence that could escalate to atrocity crimes. The
ongoing efforts to promote dialogue have not succeeded
in bringing the Government and the opposition to
common ground.
The violence and human rights violations reported
during the recent period include the assassination of
senior members of the security forces and high-profile
individuals affiliated with both the ruling party and
the opposition, as well as targeted killings of ordinary
civilians.
We are also witnessing the continued militarization
of opposition political parties and actors, both inside and
outside Burundi. Those supporting the opposition have
carried out targeted killings across the country. The
violence has escalated tensions and further destabilized
the country. My Office has received reports of civilians
fleeing from areas perceived to be sympathetic to the
opposition for fear of attacks.
I was alarmed by the speech given on 29 October
by Révérien Ndikuriyo, the President of the Senate, in
which he used inflammatory and threatening language.
Some of the language used was very similar to that used
before and during the genocide of the Tutsi in Rwanda,
during which Hutu moderates and others were killed, in
particular the repeated use of the word gukora, which
means “to work” in Kirundi and was used to incite
people to commit genocide in Rwanda in 1994. This
speech adds to the fear that ruling-party officials may
be preparing the ground for widespread violence in
Burundi.
It is therefore critical that the President and the
senior leadership refrain from making or uttering
any statement that could be considered as inciting
populations to commit crimes against their fellow

6/14

In its October communiqué, the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council expressed its determination
to impose sanctions against those perpetrating violence,
called for the deployment of additional human rights
monitors, including by the African Union Commission,
to investigate the ongoing violations, and requested the
African Union Commission to develop contingency
planning for the potential deployment of a peacekeeping
mission to protect civilians. This strong commitment
must be followed through with action and supported by
the international community.
To deter further violence, the Security Council
should take urgent measures to prevent the situation
from escalating, including by providing full support
to the immediate implementation of the decisions of
the African Union Peace and Security Council. The
deployment of African Union human rights monitors
could be a key deterrent against human rights violations
and abuses. The Council could urge the Government
of Burundi to finalize negotiations with the African
Union on the presence of these monitors, so that they
can be deployed, have unrestricted access and carry out
their mandate without hindrance.
Another essential factor that would contribute to
preventing the situation from escalating further is the
taking of measures that could act as a deterrent by
putting in place measures to hold accountable those who
may commit acts of violence and incite violence. The
persistent accountability gap and prevailing impunity
for ongoing serious human rights violations and
abuses, including discourse that constitutes incitement
to violence, is fuelling the crisis in Burundi. Such
measures could include the immediate establishment
of a commission of inquiry to investigate the ongoing
violations, as recommended by the African Union. It is

15-35592

09/11/2015

The situation in Burundi

also important to remind Burundi that, as a State party
to the International Criminal Court, those inciting
or engaging in atrocity crimes will risk criminal
prosecution.
Burundi is at a crossroads, and the international
community needs to wake up to this reality. No one
should underestimate what is at stake. The civil war
between 1993 and 2005 cost over 300,000 lives and
displaced more than 1 million people in Burundi. The
country’s history and that of its neighbour Rwanda
have shown the tragic consequences of failing to act
when leaders incite or fail to contain violence. Beyond
the possible human toll, a return to conflict would put
the Arusha Agreement at risk and have destabilizing
consequences for the entire region. We should act
before it is too late. The United Nations has invested
heavily in Burundi and cannot fail to take appropriate
action now. I urge the Security Council to send a clear
and united message to the Government in Bujumbura
that it has an obligation to sit down with the opposition
to address their differences peacefully. The Council
should also call on all actors to renounce the use of
violence. Only a sincere and constructive dialogue can
avert the impending catastrophe in Burundi.
I should also invite the Council to urge the
Government to bring to justice all perpetrators of
human rights violations and crimes being committed.
My Office and other experts and institutions have
stressed that without unity in the Council on the
situation in Burundi, and the action that must be taken
to reverse the current crisis, Burundi may slide back
into a chaos with which we are all too familiar. Given
the clear information we have about the gravity of the
situation, we will not be able to claim, if a full-scale
conflict erupts, that we did not know. The international
community has a responsibility to protect Burundians
and to prevent the commission of atrocity crimes.
The President: I thank Mr. Dieng for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: I welcome the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on my first visit to Burundi in my
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The objective of my
visit is to establish direct contact with the Government
of Burundi and other key stakeholders to gain a firsthand understanding of the current political situation
and to learn of the Government’s plans on how to
address it. I am also exploring opportunities for the

S/PV.7553

future engagement of the PBC and the contributions
that the Commission could make to ease tensions.
Today was the first day of my visit, and I would
like to give a brief account of the meetings with
representatives of the Government, the United Nations
country team, the Special Envoy of the African
Union and members of the diplomatic community. I
had open and substantial discussions with the second
Vice-President of Burundi as well as with the Minister
of External Relations and International Cooperation.
Those talks focused on the security situation, efforts
to initiate the political dialogue among Burundians, the
socioeconomic situation of the country, and partnership
with regional and international actors. I encourage
the Government to intensify its engagement with the
international community, namely, with the East African
Community, the African Union, the European Union,
bilateral partners and, of course, the United Nations
system.
I also expressed the hope that the Government
would engage in an inclusive and genuine dialogue
process in order to restore trust among the Burundian
people. I encouraged my interlocutors to accept offers
of international assistance or de-escalation measures
such as the disarmament of armed groups. I also
expressed my concern about inflammatory rhetoric
that could incite hatred among different groups of
Burundian society. Both the second Vice-President
and the Minister reiterated the Government’s interest
in continued cooperation with the PBC Burundi
configuration.
The continuing violence, insecurity and ongoing
human rights violations appear to be key concerns for
my United Nations interlocutors, who have highlighted
that the situation negatively impacts the operations
of the United Nations in Burundi. Let me express my
deep regrets over the deaths of two United Nations
staff members who have fallen victim to this violence
within the past three weeks. I should also like to seize
this opportunity to commend the work of the United
Nations team on the ground, which is working under
difficult circumstances.
Tomorrow and on Wednesday, I will meet with the
First Vice-President and the Minister of the Interior
of Burundi, as well as with different stakeholders,
including civil society actors, political parties, the
Inter-Burundian Dialogue Commission and the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission. I will also meet with
representatives of international financial institutions.

15-355927/14

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

09/11/2015

An audience with the President of the Republic is
scheduled for Wednesday.

countries, including Tanzania, Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda.

As I continue consultations, I will reiterate my
appeal to all stakeholders to refrain from violence, both
physical and rhetorical. I will further discuss the impact
of the current situation on the economy of Burundi. I will
then continue my mission to Uganda, where I will meet
with the Minister of Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga,
who has been charged by President Museveni with
facilitating the dialogue among Burundians mandated
by the East African Community. On Friday, I will meet
representatives of the Government of Tanzania, the
World Bank and the East African Community in Dar es
Salaam before returning to New York.

Even as the Security Council meets here, the
security situation continues to deteriorate. Initially
concentrated in the capital, Bujumbura, insecurity and
armed violence have spread recently to some localities
of the interior. Targeted assassinations of political and
military figures, extrajudicial killings, acts of torture
and other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,
arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions, clashes between
police and armed elements, the regular discovery
of corpses in the streets in some neighbourhoods,
among other manifestations, have become the almost
daily lot of the Burundian population. I also note with
deep concern the inflammatory statements issued by
political leaders. However such statements may be
explained away, they are simply unacceptable in view of
the painful past of the Great Lakes region, which, more
than any other region of the continent, has suffered the
pangs of mass violence.

Upon my return to New York, I will prepare a
report that will outline, inter alia, peacebuilding
challenges emerging from the current situation, as well
as opportunities and priorities for the PBC engagement
in 2016. The report will be shared with the members
of the PBC Burundi configuration at the debriefing on
18 November, as well as with the Security Council, as
per established practice and in line with the advisory
role of the PBC. The report will also inform the work
plan for PBC engagement in Burundi in 2016.
The President: I thank Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António (spoke in French): We greet all those
who have spoken before me, as well as the Ambassador
of Uganda, who shall speak later. At the outset, on
behalf of the African Union, allow me to express our
sincere gratitude to the Security Council for giving
us this opportunity to speak at this crucial moment in
the history of Burundi. The full text of our statement
will be made available to Council members, given the
limited time at our disposal.
I take this opportunity to reiterate the deep gratitude
of the African Union to the East African Community
and the leaders of the region, including those of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and all
our bilateral and multilateral partners.
We note with concern that, since April, the peace
that was hard won by Burundians is being put to the
test. Burundi faces a serious political and security
crisis, marked by increasing violence and serious
violations of human rights. In addition, more than
200,000 Burundians have taken refuge in neighbouring

8/14

The Government of Burundi has reported on its
efforts to restore security throughout nation, particularly
in the so-called protest districts of the capital. While the
Government estimates that it has recovered over 90 per
cent of the weapons held by civilians in the course of
its disarmament operations, it is clear that these efforts
have not yet succeeded in restoring calm on the ground.
On the contrary, we are witnessing, both on the part
of the Burundian Government and of some of those
contesting the President’s third term, a hardening of
positions and methods, as well as a serious resurgence
of violence.
Faced with the growing deterioration of the
political and security situation, and the real threat of
a widespread confrontation in Burundi, the African
Union has stepped up its initiatives to bring peace and
stability to that still-fragile country. The Peace and
Security Council, at its meeting held on the sidelines
of the 25th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Head
of State of the African Union, held in Johannesburg in
June, agreed on a road map articulating actions that
it was important to take to resolve the tension, avoid
a spiral of violence and enable Burundi to preserve
the benefits of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, which is the very foundation of the social
and political pact between the various components of
the Burundian people.
In addition to her previous efforts, the President
of the African Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana
15-35592

09/11/2015

The situation in Burundi

Dlamini-Zuma has repeatedly made similar calls on the
parties, particularly after the assassinations of General
Adolphe Nshimirimana and Colonel Jean Bikomagu.
These calls having not been heeded by all Burundian
stakeholders, our continental organization again met
in its Peace and Security Council on 17 October. On
that occasion, the Council decided, inter alia, to impose
targeted sanctions, including travel bans and asset
freezes against all Burundian actors whose actions
and words had contributed to the ongoing violence
and hindered the search for a solution to the crisis. It
also requested the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights to launch a thorough investigation into
violations of human rights and other abuses against
civilians in Burundi.
In addition, the Peace and Security Council
decided to increase the number of military experts and
human rights observers deployed on the ground to help
contain the violence and create conditions conducive
to a political dialogue among the actors concerned.
Similarly, the Commission was requested to begin
drafting a plan for the possible deployment of an
African-led mission to Burundi. Follow-up actions are
being taken.
The escalation of violence and targeted
assassinations against high-ranking Burundians,
combined with political radicalization and rumors of
military activity, attest to the volatility of the situation
and highlight the already obvious need to work for a
political solution to the current crisis. In that regard,
let me echo the conviction expressed by the African
Union Peace and Security Council that only a genuine
and inclusive dialogue based on respect for the Arusha
Agreement would allow the Burundian stakeholders
to find a consensual solution, maintain the peace and
consolidate democracy and the rule of law.
The African Union strongly supports the efforts
led by President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and
therefore welcomes the visit to Burundi undertaken
on 28 and 29 October by the Ugandan Minister of
Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, in order to discuss with
the Burundian authorities the modalities for resuming
dialogue.
In conclusion, I reiterate the call of the African
Union to the Government of Burundi and other
stakeholders concerned to weigh the gravity of situation
and rise to the challenge. The future of their nation and
the stability of the region depend on it.

S/PV.7553

For its part, as the Peace and Security Council has
pointed out, the African Union is determined to fully
assume its responsibilities under the Protocol relating
to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and other relevant African
instruments, in collaboration with the international
actors concerned.
The President: I thank Mr. António for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for External
Relations and International Cooperation of Burundi.
Mr. Nyamitwe (Burundi) (spoke in French): Let
me first thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting, which is indeed very important for our
country. I should also like to congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I also thank all other
members of the Security Council who continue to make
praiseworthy efforts that demonstrate their attentiveness
to my country, Burundi. I take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Adama Dieng and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al
Hussein for their efforts and good counsel with regard
to Burundi.
My statement will be structured around a few
points: the political situation, security and disarmament,
the question of refugees, relations with Burundi’s
partners, economic and social development and some
recommendations with regard to the international
community.
With regard to dialogue, I must say that dialogue
and consultation are part of the traditions of our
country. It is therefore necessary and fitting that, when
necessary, Burundians should sit down at the table and
discuss the issues that divide them, or reflect more
upon the issues that unite them. This good practice
should absolutely be implemented and I believe that the
region, the African Union, the United Nations and we
ourselves are saying the same thing when we say that
it is essential that there be a dialogue with regard to
questions that are of great importance for our country.
The terms and conditions may vary, but we agree on
the whole that there is a need for dialogue. Of course,
our delegation reaffirms that dialogue will continue, as
it characterizes good governance and ensures national
cohesion. This noble task falls primarily to Burundians
themselves, even if we cannot deny the contribution of
friends seeking to strengthen national cohesion.

15-355929/14

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

It is in this context also that the Head of State,
following lengthy consultations, established the
Inter-Burundian Dialogue Commission, which is
politically, ethnically and religiously inclusive and
promises to study the issues in depth, bringing together
far more people and stakeholders around a common
theme or themes. During its mandate, the Commission
will have to address issues related to politics; social
relations; the economy; the strengthening of peace
and security; even an assessment of the Arusha
Peace Agreement, which was signed 15 years ago; the
reading and understanding of our Constitution; the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement; the Charter of
National Unity that was adopted by referendum 24 years
ago; education programmes and patriotic training; and
so on. The Inter-Burundian Dialogue Commission will
have a six-month mandate, which can be extended if
needed. It will issue quarterly reports to be submitted to
the Head of State for his decision and implementation.
Copies of these reports will be submitted to both
chambers of our Parliament, the National Assembly and
the Senate.
At this stage, I should like to clarify the position
of our country vis-à-vis the regional efforts of the East
African Community concerning the dialogue. We are
in permanent contact with the Ugandan facilitation,
with President Museveni, through the Minister of
Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, who was in Burundi a
little over a week ago for talks with the authorities of
my country on the path to follow in the coming days
so that Burundians and Burundian political partners
can spend more time studying the issues that currently
divide them.
From this point of view, allow me to once again
lay to rest certain misunderstandings. Our Government
is not against the dialogue recommended by the East
African Community Summit, on 6 July in Dar es
Salaam. On the contrary, as I said earlier, we may have
differences of opinion on the terms, but overall we
agree on what is most important, which is that dialogue
must take place.
On the security front, our delegation wishes to
inform the Council that the entire country is generally
calm and that citizens are going about their activities
peacefully, except for in a few well-defined areas in
certain neighbourhoods of Bujumbura. In that regard,
I would question the reliability of the information
that has been provided at this meeting by Mr. Téte
António of the African Union. I do not know if it was

10/14

09/11/2015

the African Union Mission in Bujumbura that informed
him that insecurity was spreading to other regions
and other cities outside Bujumbura. I wish he would
inform us of what cities and give us the names of those
places that are lacking security in the country, outside
of certain neighbourhoods of Bujumbura, because that
is surprising information.
Contrary to the information conveyed by the
foreign-based radical opposition and by some
affiliated media, Burundi is not burning. The few
incidents of crime aimed at attracting the attention
of the international community are being controlled.
As the Council knows, security is the cornerstone of
everything, because in its absence no beneficial action
or development is possible. Burundians yearn for
peace and equality and are committed to maintaining
it day and night with determination. There are several
peacebuilding initiatives in various parts of the country,
but these have unfortunately been ignored by the media,
which are content to report only on the violence and
chaos that supposedly reign in the country.
With regard to disarmament, our delegation
reiterates the commitment of the Government of
Burundi to pursue its disarmament programme through
prevention and dialogue. The Council will recall
that, on 24 September, Decree 100/36 was signed,
exempting unlawful possession of firearms from
criminal prosecution, giving an extension of one month
to any person living in Burundi in illegal possession
of firearms, ammunition and/or related material, and
allowing them to immediately and voluntarily return
such material to the defence and security forces. This
act of clemency on the part of our Government to those
weapons-bearers allowed them to voluntarily surrender
their weapons and not be penalized.
Perhaps this is also an opportunity to clarify the
legitimacy of the decision to extend that time frame by
a few days. The decision was made in order to provide
an opportunity to those illegally in possession of
weapons to surrender them directly to the authorities,
because, in Burundi as elsewhere, unlawful firearm
possession is not permitted and even less so the use
of weapons against security forces or against peaceful
citizens. It therefore goes without saying that, in an
organized State, security forces must be able to fulfil
their mandate comprehensively.
The defense and security forces must therefore
continue search-and-seizure operations in order
to seize illegally held weapons. Over the course of
15-35592

09/11/2015

The situation in Burundi

S/PV.7553

those operations, numerous weapons and military
paraphernalia were seized, as well as medications
and narcotics, which are put into the service of those
criminals. Two months after the Government’s
commitment to restore peace to the country, the mission
entrusted to the defence and security forces was 92 per
cent successful. As of the end of October, 139 rifles,
151 grenades and other explosives, 7,151 cartridges and
151 loaders were seized. Since the beginning of the
year until the end of October, the permanent national
commission for the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons had already collected
more than 400 rifles, 440 grenades and explosives,
12,455 cartridges and 416 loaders.

to ensure that that those who fled the country owing
to the political situation at the time, particularly in
April, are able to return. That is the reason that the
Government is in contact with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and those
countries that welcomed our brothers and sisters, so that
we can engage the tripartite commission with the aim
of repatratriating the refugees. I would like to take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to neighbouring
countries that have hosted refugees. We know that that
is no easy task. In the past, our country also hosted
refugees for several years. We therefore understand that
it is a costly endeavour, especially when such a situation
occurs suddenly.

Allow me to clarify, for in the framework of those
operations, and following an ultimatum that has been
misinterpreted in certain circles, what has transpired
has not been fully understood in the Council. In a spirit
of transparency, since the fall bgan such operations
have been conducted in the presence of African Union
monitors. That was done under a mandate entrusted to
them during a meeting of the Peace and Security Council
that took place on 13 June in Johannesburg, which was
later reinforced by a decision taken on 17 October. The
monitors are therefore part of the operations, thereby
illustrating our Government’s intentions of good faith
to work with its partners.

We also call upon our partners to take allegations
seriously. I think Mr. Al Hussein correctly addressed
that issue earlier. I cannot say enough how much we
deplore the fact that some refugee camps have become
grounds for recruiting young people to fill the ranks of
rebel groups, and who in turn will continue to disrupt
peace and security in the country. We believe that the
way the refugee camps such as the one in Mahama,
Rwanda, are being managed is extremely ill-advised.
I believe that even the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region had the opportunity on
more than one occasion to highlight that we want to
uncategorically build our region in peace and security,
and that of course entails the proper management of the
refugee camps.

Today, our Government calls on the perpetrators
of those crimes to renounce an approach that will lead
nowhere. The path of violence is a dead end, a waste
of time and an obstacle to the future of our youth,
who are so necessary to rebuilding our country. The
five-day extension, which expired on 7 November,
was an opportunity to put an end to the situation. I
point this out to Mr. Al Hussein. I think that we all
agree that it is important that human rights abuses be
avoided at all costs and that they do not go unpunished.
It is crucial to know how to reconcile the duty of the
State in shouldering its responsibilities in ensuring
security at the national level, but it is also extremely
important — and I fully endorse what Mr. Al Hussein,
Mr. Dieng and others have just said — that there needs
to be a demonstration of authority in the management
of those issues, and specifically disarmament, so as
to avoid violations that would undermine peace and
security in my country.
With regard to the issue of refugees, it has been
clearly established that we must do everything possible

With regard to rebuilding trust with our partners,
my delegation would ask our traditional and
non-traditional partners to continue to focus on the
future of the country. I believe that this morning’s
meeting with the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission was once again an
opportunity to ask him to plead in my country’s favour,
so that we can all move towards the future together.
Our country still needs its friends. We will not be
able to rebuild our country without the contribution of
traditional partners, with whom we have had a bittersweet relationship but who nevertheless came back to
support us after we obtained our sovereignty, in 1962,
so that we could offer more opportunities to participate
with others in the world in the new era of globalization.
We therefore believe that threats by some of suspending
development assistance runs counter to the noble goal
of building a more equitable and just world. For we
think that the Burundian people have the same rights
as everyone else.

15-3559211/14

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

To certain members of the Security Council and
others of the European Union, we would like to clarify
that we did receive the request from that organization to
open consultations with Burundi on the basis of article
96 of the Cotonou agreement. That concerns human
rights matters, the state of democracy and governance.
We have received that correspondence and are in full
consultations so as to willingly provide an appropriate
response within the set time frame to our partners. In
any case, our intention remains one of maintaining
increasing beneficial cooperation among our people
and European and other partners.
Within the framework of rebuilding confidence,
my delegation humbly requests that countries in the
North, as well as in the South, that continue to harbour
individuals accused of reprehensible international and
national crimes, such as those who were implicated
in the coup of 13 May 2015 — as well as other
wrongdoers — that they cooperate with our Government
so that they can be prosecuted. I believe that that is not
just a matter of human rights. Other parties need to
cooperate too. That is very important.
In upholding the Charter of the United Nations we
also would ask that certain individuals, who are part
of destabilizing activities after the elections of 2015
and the coup d’état, would stop being supported and
disseminating destabilizing messages from their host
country, as those are not acts apt to favorize friendly
relations and cooperation among countries. For its part,
the Government of Burundi is committed to pursuing
peaceful diplomacy with its partners on the principle
of reciprocity. We have seen that unfriendly actions
by neighbouring countries and others is extremely
destructive. On that account, I would like to state that
it is noteworthy that we have demonstrated peaceful
gestures towards our neighbours and will continue our
policy of good-neighbourliness whatever situation we
happen to encounter.
Over the years, my country has always demonstrated
restraint. There have been no notable acts of aggression
against its neighbours, and we shall maintain that policy
of good-neighbourliness, despite the turbulence that we
are currently experiencing. We intend to establish a
new framework for growth and combating poverty. We
would therefore request the support of our traditional
and our non-traditional partners in carrying out the farreaching project of eliminating poverty in the context
of the post-2015 development agenda. The Burundi
configuration will play a key role therein, just as it has

12/14

09/11/2015

a key role of mobilizing resources in other post-conflict
countries. That role will become crucial. within the
framework of establishing a bridge between Burundi
and its partners in the restoration of trust between the
parties.
I should like to make a few of the most important
recommendations to the international community
concerning the current situation in Burundi.
First, the end of the electoral process provides an
opportunity to evaluate the evolution of the democratic
culture in the country. It is also a good time to note
the strengths and weaknesses that will allow all players
to draw lessons learned so as to better prepare for the
future.
Secondly, there is a vital need for investment in
the economy and in community-rebuilding through
generous financing for projects that create employment
for youth, women and other vulnerable individuals,
which will offer them an alternative to violence.
Thirdly, to the extent possible, it is important to
avoid resort to sanctions, which are ineffective in many
ways. They not only affect the most vulnerable, but they
also radicalize base positions on the political situation.
Fourthly, support for the inter-Burundian national
dialogue at all levels is a sound approach that will have
the positive effect of encouraging the Government and
the opposition to act together in the interests of the
country. The dialogue will allow citizens to share their
views on questions that divide the Burundian people,
and to find lasting solutions for lasting reconciliation,
Fifthly, it is vital to cooperate and engage in
dialogue with the Government of Burundi and other
stakeholders instead of hardening positions by issuing
contradictory press communiqués and adopting
selective sanctions vis-à-vis certain players in Burundi.
The head-on confrontation with our partners of the past
few days must stop. It is essential to rebuild trust in
good faith together through frank and sincere dialogue.
By way of conclusion, allow me simply to state
to all those who have taken the floor that while
we understand those of their concerns that may be
justified, the Government nonetheless remains ready
to work further with its partners at the regional and
continental levels. Our first priority is to allay any fear
of the genocide that has been widely touted in the press.
We must do our utmost to ensure an end to the flow of

15-35592

09/11/2015

The situation in Burundi

Burundian blood. Even one death in the country is a
national tragedy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, and your country, the United
Kingdom, on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency for this month and for organizing this
important meeting on the security situation in Burundi.
1 also thank you for inviting Uganda to brief the
Council on the efforts of the East African Community
to facilitate dialogue in Burundi.
Until recently, Burundi had been a success story,
based on the efforts undertaken by the region to address
insecurity in the country. The efforts of the region led
to the signing of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. The Heads of State of the countries of
the region have continued to provide their support for
peacebuilding efforts in Burundi. Fifteen years after
the signing of the Arusha Agreement, all the country’s
political leaders, including those in exile, must aim
to find common cause and commit to building on the
stability that was ushered in by the Agreement.
Uganda underscores the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. The United Nations and the
international community should support the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations to address the
challenges relating to peace and security, human rights
and development.
On 31 May, an emergency summit of the East
African Community was convened on the situation
in Burundi. Those attending the summit included His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic
of South Africa and guarantor of the Arusha Accord,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, and the Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. The Heads of
State were concerned about the violence in Bujumbura
and other parts of Burundi that had led to the deaths of
many people, as well as to the influx of refugees into
neighbouring countries and the destruction of property.
The summit called upon all parties to stop the violence
and exercise restraint.
At the third extraordinary summit of the Heads
of State of the East African Community, held on

S/PV.7553

6 July, His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
President of the Republic of Uganda, was asked to lead
and facilitate a high-level dialogue in a bid to find a
lasting solution to the political situation and to ensure
that peace returns to Burundi. Accordingly, on 14 and
15 July, President Museveni was in Burundi and met
with all the stakeholders in a bid to create momentum
for dialogue. The President has also been in contact
with the Secretary-General and leaders in the region.
Subsequently, President Museveni delegated The
Honourable Chrispus Kiyonga, Uganda’s Minister
of Defence, to continue facilitating the dialogue in
Burundi. On behalf of the President, the Minister
traveled to Bujumbura and chaired a series of
stakeholder meetings on 16, 17 and 18 July. In those
engagements, the Minister underscored the need to find
a durable political solution through dialogue among all
parties and called on them to desist from incitement
and violence. He left Bujumbura, and elections for the
President took place on 21 July.
On 26 July, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza
sent his special envoys, Mr. Pascal Nyabenda, Speaker
of the Burundi Parliament, and Mr. Agathon Rwasa,
First Deputy Speaker, along with two other members
of Parliament, to Kampala. It was further agreed that
the East African Community-mandated dialogue must
continue.
Uganda remains committed to facilitating the
dialogue, as mandated by the Heads of State of the
East African Community. In that regard, Mr. Kiyonga
visited Bujumbura on 28 and 29 October in order to
follow up on his assignment in Burundi. He held
meetings with the President of the Senate and his two
deputies; the President of the National Assembly with
his two deputies, including Mr. Rwasa, who comes
from the opposition; the Minister of Home Affairs; and
the Commission appointed by President Nkuruziza to
conduct the Inter-Burundi dialogue. In all the meetings
he held with the officials mentioned previously, the
Minister of Defence received similar, consistent
messages indicating that while they welcome the East
African Community intervention, their preference
is for the Community to play an advisory role to the
Commission.
Minister Kiyonga reiterated that the East African
Community facilitation efforts would proceed as
originally conceived, but would indeed work with the
Commission. In the light of the Minister’s position,
the officials promised to get back to the Community

15-3559213/14

S/PV.7553

The situation in Burundi

09/11/2015

after consultations with their principal, His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic
of Burundi. In view of the recent meetings held in
Bujumbura, we are optimistic that there will be progress.
The next summit of the East African Community Heads
of State is scheduled to take place on 30 November, and
the security situation in Burundi will certainly be on
the agenda.

consideration of peace and unity, as required by the
people of the country. At the same time, the African
Union Peace and Security Council has continuously
demonstrated its ability to follow the security situation
in Burundi closely, as reflected in its recently adopted
communiqué of 17 October. All these regional efforts
are consistent with Chapters VII and VIII of the United
Nations Charter.

It is important to note that the region has remained
actively seized of the matter and that recently, on
20 October, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region held a meeting of Ministers of
Defence in Luanda, which discussed, inter alia, the
security situation in Burundi. In its recommendations,
the meeting, first, appreciated the efforts of the East
African Community mediation process led by His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of the
Republic of Uganda, in search of peace and stability in
Burundi; and, secondly, welcomed the willingness of
the Government of the Republic of Burundi to engage
in an all-inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue on various
themes to be conducted in and outside Burundi in

We stress the importance of coordination among
international and regional efforts in supporting dialogue
in Burundi. All efforts must be focused on a credible
and inclusive dialogue aimed at re-establishing the trust
and reconciliation that will ensure confidence-building
among all parties and a return to the security and
stability that will spur development in the country.

14/14

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. We have heard how high the
stakes are, and I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

15-35592
