General AHembly-Twenly-ninth Ses1ion

84

Bearz,.g in mind the inadmissibility of a refusal to
apply the Geneva Conventions of 1949, 11
Reaffirming the urgent need to ensure full adherence to, and effective implementation of, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 on the protection of war victims
by all States, in particular those signatories to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949,
Considering that the desire to know the fate of loved
ones lost in armed conflicts is a basic human need
which should be satisfied to the greatest extent possible, and that provision of information on those who
are missing or who have died in armed conflicts should
not be delayed merely because other issues remain
pending,
l. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 to all armed conflicts, as stipulated
by those Conventions;
2. Calls upon parties to armed conflicts, regardless
of their character or location, during and after the end
of hostilities and in accordance with the Geneva Conventions of 1949, to take such action as may be within
their power to help locate and mark the graves of the
dead, to facilitate the disinterment and the return of
remains, if requested by their families, and to provide
information about those who are missing in action;
3. Appreciates the continuing efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross to assist in the
task of accounting for the missing and dead in armed
conflicts;
4. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to cooperate, in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, with protecting Powers or their substitutes
and with the International Committee of the Red Cross
in providing infonnation on the missing and dead in
armed conflicts, including persons belonging to other
countries not parties to the armed conflict;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the second session of
the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and
Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3221 (XXIX). Improvement of the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, having considered at its twenty-eighth
session the item entitled ''Creation of the post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights",
it decided, in its resohition 3136 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms",
Recognizing the need for adequate information and
documentation on which consideration of this item
should be based,
Noting that the International Covenants on Human
Rights 12 will enter into force in the near future,
11 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.

1 2 Resolution 2200 A ( XXI), annex.

Noting that the Secretary-General plans to issue
shortly up-to-date versions of the comprehensive studies
prepared for the International Conference on Human
Rights, held at Teheran in 1968, 13 on methods and
measures taken within the United Nations system in
the field of human rights,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit the
views of Member States, the specialized agencies and
regional intergovernmental organizations on alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. lnvites appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to submit to the Secretary-General any
relevant material on the subject, taking into account
that such material will not be politically motivated
contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
concise analytical report based on the views and material submitted under paragraphs 1 and 2 above and
taking into account the above-mentioned instruments
and studies and any other relevant material;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2278th plenarv meeting
6 November 1974
3222 (XXIX).

Human rights and fundamental
freedoms

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which stresses respect for the dignity and worth
of the human person,
Recalling that, in resolution 2860 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971, it declared its conviction of the
historic significance and the value of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
Recalling Economic and Social Council re~olutions
1864 (LVI) and 1869 (LVI) of 17 May 1974,
Highly indignant at the continuing repression and
inhuman treatment inflicted on peoples still under
colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling also its resolution 3059 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 on torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Reaffirms its attachment to the principles, values
and ideals of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Reaffirms also its determination to ensure to all
persons, without any distinction whatsoever, the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Reaffirms further the right of all peoples, in particular the peoples of southern Africa, to self-determination, freedom and independence, and the legitimacy
of their struggle to free themselves from colonial and
foreign domination in conformity with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
• i:i_ For the report of the Conference, see Unite-0 Nations pubhcat1on, Sale~ No.: E.68.XIV.2.
