A/77/462

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 December 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 67

Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Shalini Gungaram (Mauritius)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session, the item entitled “Right of peoples to self-determination”
and to allocate it to the Third Committee.
2.
The Third Committee heard introductory statements, held interactive dialogues
and a general discussion, jointly with item 66, entitled “Elimination of racism, r acial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”, and considered proposals and
took action on the item at its 39th, 40th, 41st, 46th and 54th meetings, on 31 October
and 1, 10 and 17 November 2022. An account of the Committee’s consideration is
contained in the relevant summary records. 1
3.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on the right of peoples to selfdetermination (A/77/265);
(b) Note by the Secretariat transmitting the report of the Working Group on
the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise
of the right of peoples to self-determination (A/77/268).
4.
At its 39th meeting, on 31 October, the Committee heard an introductory
statement by the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, who responded to
questions raised and comments made by the representatives of the United States of
America, Namibia, China and the Russian Federation.
5.
At the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chair of the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent, who responded
__________________
1

22-27453 (E)

A/C.3/77/SR.39, A/C.3/77/SR.40, A/C.3/77/SR.41, A/C.3/77/SR.46 and A/C.3/77/SR.54.

081222

*2227453*

A/77/462

to questions raised and comments made by the representatives of the European Union,
Brazil, the United States of America, Portugal, Côte d’Ivoire, the Russian Federation,
Cameroon, Algeria and the Syrian Arab Republic.
6.
Also at the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chair of the Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the Implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, who responded to questions raised and
comments made by the representatives of South Africa, Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, Chi le,
Algeria and the Russian Federation.
7.
Also at its 39th meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chairperson of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (via video-link),
who responded to questions raised and comments made by the representative of the
Russian Federation.
8.
At its 40th meeting, on 31 October, the Committee heard an introductory
statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
who responded to questions raised and comments made by the representatives of the
United States of America, the European Union, Jamaica, Cambodia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, France, the Russian Federat ion,
Armenia, Cameroon, Azerbaijan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and China.
9.
At the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, who responded to questions posed and comments
made by the representatives of Bulgaria, the United States of America, Cuba,
Indonesia, Hungary, Qatar, Uruguay, Albania, Romania, Canada, Israel, the European
Union, Austria, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Czechia,
Italy, Greece, the Russian Federation, Spain, Pakistan, Germany, Azerbaijan (also on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement), Guatemala, Cyprus, Australia, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and China.
10. Also at the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chairperson-Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of
Complementary Standards, who responded to questions raised and comments made
by the representatives of South Africa, the European Union and the Russian
Federation.
11. At its 41st meeting, on 1 November, the Committee heard an introductory
statement by the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries
as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination, who responded to questions raised and comments made by the
representatives of the European Union, Cuba and China.
12. Also at the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of
Senegal, Fiji, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Ghana, Algeria, Nicaragua, Singapore, the United
States of America, Cuba, Türkiye, Brazil, Ecuador, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Burundi, Morocco,
Libya, the United Republic of Tanzania, Armenia and Eritrea, as well as by the
observers for the Holy See and the International Organization for Migration.
13. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the representative of the United States of
America made a statement with regard to the draft resolutions before the Committee.

2/14

22-27453

A/77/462

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.30
14. At its 46th meeting, on 10 November, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination” (A/C.3/77/L.30),
submitted by Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), the Central African
Republic, China, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Equatorial Guinea, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Nicaragua,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam. Subsequently, Algeria, Antigua
and Barbuda, Botswana, the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Libya, Madagascar, Myanmar,
Namibia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
15. At the same meeting, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
16.

Also at the same meeting, the representative of Cuba made a statement.

17. Also at the 46th meeting, a statement on a point of order was made by the
representative of Cuba, to which the Chair (Dominican Republic) responded.
18. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.30 by a recorded vote of 122 to 50, with 5 abstentions (see para. 35, draft
resolution I). The voting was as follows: 2
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sol omon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
__________________
2

22-27453

The delegation of Liechtenstein subsequently indicated that it had intended to vote against and
the delegation of Ethiopia indicated that it had intended to vote in favour.
3/14

A/77/462

(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America
Abstaining:
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Palau and Switzerland
19. Before the vote, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the
representative of the United States of America.
20. After the vote, a statement in explanation of vote was made by the representative
of Argentina.
21. At the 47th meeting, the representative of Cuba made a point of order in
connection with the vote on draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.30. 3

B.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.48
22. At the 54th meeting, on 17 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Universal realization of the right of peoples to self determination” (A/C.3/77/L.48), submitted by Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, China, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Honduras, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republ ic, Tunisia,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and the State of Palestine. Subsequently,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia, Comoros,
the Congo, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Jamaica, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, South Africa,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Zambia and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
23. At the same meeting, Eswatini, Guinea, the Niger and Senegal joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
24.

Also at the same meeting, the representative of Pakistan made a statement.

25. Also at the 54th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.48
(see para. 35, draft resolution II).
26. Before the adoption of the draft resolution, the representatives of Argentina, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, India and the United States
of America made statements.
27. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Spain made a statement after
adoption.
28. Also at the 54th meeting, statements in exercise of the right of reply were made
by the representatives of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and Spain.

__________________
3

4/14

See A/C.3/77/SR.47.
22-27453

A/77/462

C.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.50
29. At the 54th meeting, on 17 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination”
(A/C.3/77/L.50), submitted by Ecuador and Egypt (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation).
Subsequently, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Central African
Republic, China, Colombia, the Congo, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe and the State of Palestine
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
30. At the same meeting, Botswana, Chile and the Syrian Arab Republic joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
31. Also at the same meeting, a statement was made by Egypt on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
32. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.50 by a recorded vote of 167 to 5, with 7 abstentions (see para. 35, draft
resolution III). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portu gal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia and Zimbabwe

22-27453

5/14

A/77/462

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru and the United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Guatemala, Kiribati, Palau, Rwanda, Solomon Islands and Togo
33. Before the vote, statements in explanation of vote before the vote were made by
the representatives of Israel and the United States of America; a statement was made
by the observer for the State of Palestine.
34. After the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the
representatives of Australia and Argentina; a statement was made by the
representative of South Africa.

6/14

22-27453

A/77/462

III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
35. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution
76/151 of 16 December 2021, and Human Rights Council resolutions on the subject,
including resolution 51/13 of 6 October 2022, 1 as well as all resolutions adopted by
the Commission on Human Rights in this regard,
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit or use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries, or
of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the relevant
resolutions and international instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Organization of African
Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of
mercenarism in Africa, 2 as well as by the African Union,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self-determination of
peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international relations
and non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development and that every State has the duty to respect
this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military
intervention and occupation that are threatening to suppress, or have already
suppressed, the right to self-determination of peoples and nations,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, 3
Acknowledging with appreciation the work and contributions of the open-ended
intergovernmental working group established by the Human Rights Council with the
mandate of considering the possibility of elaborating an international regulatory
framework, including the option of elaborating a legally binding instrument on the
regulation, monitoring and oversight of the activities of private military and security
companies,

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, S eventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/77/53/Add.1), chap. III, sect. A.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.
3
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
1

22-27453

7/14

A/77/462

Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries in various parts of the world,
in particular in areas of armed conflict, and about the threat they pose to the integrity
of and respect for the constitutional order of the affected countries,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policies and economies of affected countries resulting from
international criminal mercenary activities,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which mercenaries or mercenaryrelated activities are used or the form that they take to acquire some semblance of
legitimacy, they are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination of peoples
and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the latest report of the Working Group of
the Human Rights Council on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination; 4
2.
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing,
protection and training are causes for grave concern to all States and that they violate
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
3.
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
operations by third Powers encourage, inter alia, the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
4.
Urges, once again, all States to take the steps necessary and to exercise the
utmost vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take
legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under their
control are not used for, and that their nationals do not take part in, the recruitment,
assembly, financing, training, protection or transit of mercenaries for the planning of
activities designed to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize
or overthrow the Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in
part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States
conducting themselves in accordance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
5.
Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of
recruitment, training, hiring or financing of mercenaries by private companies
offering international military consultancy and security services, and to impose a
specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions to
destabilize constitutional regimes;
6.
Encourages States that import military assistance or consultancy and
security services provided by private companies to establish national regulatory
mechanisms for registering and licensing those companies in order to ensure that the
imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the enjoyment
of human rights nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
7.
Emphasizes its utmost concern about the impact of the activities of private
military and security companies on the enjoyment of human rights, in particular when
operating in armed conflicts, and notes that private military and security compani es
and their personnel are rarely held accountable for violations of human rights;
8.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider acceding to or
ratifying the International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries; 5
__________________
4
5

8/14

A/77/268.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.
22-27453

A/77/462

9.
Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that have received
a visit by the Working Group on the use of mercenaries since the establishment of its
mandate and the adoption by some States of national legislation that restrict s the
recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
10. Condemns recent mercenary activities in developing countries in various
parts of the world, in particular in areas of conflict, and the threat they pose to the
integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those countries and the exercise
of the right of their peoples to self-determination, and stresses the importance for the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries of looking into sources and root causes, as
well as the political motivations of mercenaries and for mercenary-related activities;
11. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in accordance
with national law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
12. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary
activities and to those responsible for the use, recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
13. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to cooperate with and assist the judicial prosecution of those
accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;
14. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries and other experts
to continue their participation, including by submitting contributions, in other
subsidiary bodies of the Human Rights Council considering issues related to the use
of mercenaries and mercenary-related activities in all their forms and manifestations,
including private military and security companies;
15. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue its work
with respect to the strengthening of the international legal framework for the
prevention and sanction of the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries, taking into account the proposal for a new legal definition of a
mercenary drafted by the Special Rapporteur on the use of mercenaries as a means of
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination in his report
submitted to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixtieth session 6 and the
evolving phenomenon of mercenaries and its related forms;
16. Also requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue to
study and identify sources and causes, emerging issues, manifestations and trends
regarding mercenaries or mercenary-related activities and private military and
security companies and their impact on human rights, particularly on the right of
peoples to self-determination;
17. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as a matter of priority, to publicize the adverse effects of the activities of
mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and, when requested and
where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are affected by those
activities;
18. Recommends that all Member States, including those confronted with the
phenomenon of private military and security companies, as contracting States, States
of operations, home States or States whose nationals are employed to work for a
private military and security company, contribute to the work of the open-ended
__________________
6

22-27453

See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.
9/14

A/77/462

intergovernmental working group, taking into account the initial work done by the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries;
19. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries in the fulfilment of its mandate;
20. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue to provide the Working Group on the use of mercenaries
with all the assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment of its mandate, both
professional and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between
the Working Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal with
countering mercenary-related activities, in order to meet the demands of its current
and future activities;
21. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to consult States
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations on the implementation of
the present resolution and to report, with specific recommendations, to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session its findings on the use of mercenaries to
undermine the enjoyment of all human rights and to impede the exercise of the right
of peoples to self-determination;
22. Decides to consider the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self determination at its seventy-eighth session under the item entitled “Right of peoples
to self-determination”.

10/14

22-27453

A/77/462

Draft resolution II
Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights, of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 1 as well as in the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples
under colonial, foreign or alien occupation and their emergence into sovereign
statehood and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military
intervention and occupation that are threatening to suppress, or have already
suppressed, the right to self-determination of peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the persistence of such
actions, millions of people have been or are being uprooted from their homes as
refugees and displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for concerted
international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peopl es
to self-determination and other human rights as a result of foreign military
intervention, aggression and occupation adopted by the Commission on Human
Rights at its sixty-first 2 and previous sessions,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the universal realization of the right of
peoples to self-determination, including resolution 76/152 of 16 December 2021,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, containing the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, and recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September
2005, containing the 2005 World Summit Outcome, which, inter alia, upheld the right
to self-determination of peoples under colonial domination and foreign occupation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the right of peoples to selfdetermination, 3
1.
Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right of all peoples,
including those under colonial, foreign and alien domination, to self-determination is
a fundamental condition for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights
and for the preservation and promotion of such rights;
2.
Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, since these have resulted in the suppression of the right
of peoples to self-determination and other human rights in certain parts of the world;
3.
Calls upon those States responsible to cease immediately their military
intervention in and occupation of foreign countries and territories and all acts of
repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, in particular the bru tal and
inhuman methods reportedly employed in the execution of those acts against the
peoples concerned;
__________________

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and
corrigenda (E/2005/23, E/2005/23/Corr.1 and E/2005/23/Corr.2), chap. II, sect. A.
3
A/77/265.
1
2

22-27453

11/14

A/77/462

4.
Deplores the plight of millions of refugees and displaced persons who have
been uprooted as a result of the aforementioned acts, and reaffirms their right to return
to their homes voluntarily in safety and with honour;
5.
Requests the Human Rights Council to continue to give special attention
to violations of human rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting from
foreign military intervention, aggression or occupation;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to report on this question to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.

12/14

22-27453

A/77/462

Draft resolution III
The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Aware that the development of friendly relations among nations, based on
respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, is among
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as defined in the Charter,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, entitled
“Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations”,
Bearing in mind the International Covenants on Human Rights, 1 the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples 3 and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted at the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 4
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the
United Nations, 5
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6
Recalling further the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the construction of a wall
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 7 and noting in particular the reply of the Court,
including on the right of peoples to self-determination, which is a right erga omnes, 8
Recalling the conclusion of the Court, in its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004,
that the construction of the wall by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, along with measures previously
taken, severely impedes the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,9
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967 and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between
the Palestinian and Israeli sides, based on the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative 10 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, 11
Stressing also the need for respect for and preservation of the territorial unity,
contiguity and integrity of all of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and recalling in this regard its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Recalling its resolution 76/150 of 16 December 2021,
Recalling also its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,

__________________

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Resolution 217 A (III).
3
Resolution 1514 (XV).
4
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
5
Resolution 50/6.
6
Resolution 55/2.
7
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
8
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 88.
9
Ibid., para. 122.
10
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
11
S/2003/529, annex.
1
2

22-27453

13/14

A/77/462

Affirming the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and
internationally recognized borders,
1.
Reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
including the right to their independent State of Palestine;
2.
Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to support and assist the Palestinian people in the
early realization of their right to self-determination.

14/14

22-27453
