A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/128
28 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 107
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/596)]
54/128. Action against corruption
The General Assembly,
Noting the corrosive effect that corruption has on democracy, development, the rule of law and
economic activity,
Recognizing that corruption is a primary tool of organized crime in its efforts, often conducted on an
international basis, to subvert Governments and legitimate commerce,
Drawing attention to the increasing number of regional conventions and other regional instruments
recently developed to fight corruption, including the Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public
Officials in International Business Transactions of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development adopted on 21 November 1997,1 the Inter-American Convention against Corruption adopted
by the Organization of American States on 29 March 1996,2 the Principles to Combat Corruption in African
Countries of the Global Coalition for Africa, the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption3 and the
Agreement Establishing the Group of States against Corruption adopted by the Council of Europe on
27 January and 1 May 1999, respectively, the conventions and related protocols on corruption of the

1

See Corruption and Integrity Improvement Initiatives in Developing Countries (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.98.III.B.18).
2
3

See E/1996/99.
Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 173.

00 24668

/...

A/RES/54/128
Page 2

European Union and recommendation 32 of the Senior Experts Group on Transnational Organized Crime
endorsed by the Political Group of Eight at Lyon, France, on 29 June 1996,4 as well as to best practices, such
as those compiled by the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering, the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions,
Commending the efforts in the United Nations to address corruption concerns in a global forum,
including the United Nations Declaration against Corruption and Bribery in International Commercial
Transactions5 and the International Code of Conduct for Public Officials,6 the ongoing development of a
comprehensive international convention against transnational organized crime and protocols thereto by the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 53/111 of 9 December 1998, and the manual prepared by the
Secretariat on practical measures against corruption,7
Noting the holding of the Expert Group Meeting on Corruption and its Financial Channels in Paris from
30 March to 1 April 1999, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/16 of 28 July 1998,
Noting also the holding of the first Global Forum on Fighting Corruption in Washington, D.C., from
24 to 26 February 1999, at the invitation of the Vice-President of the United States of America,8 at which
participants from ninety Governments called upon their Governments to cooperate in regional and global
bodies to adopt effective anti-corruption principles and practices and to create ways to assist one another
through mutual evaluation,
1. Takes note with appreciation of, and subscribes to the conclusions and recommendations of the
Expert Group Meeting on Corruption and its Financial Channels, held in Paris from 30 March to 1 April
1999, which are contained in the report of the Expert Group Meeting;9
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the Declaration made by the first Global Forum on Fighting
Corruption, held in Washington, D.C., from 24 to 26 February 1999,10 and notes that the second Global
Forum is to be held in the Netherlands in 2000 as a follow-up to the first Global Forum;
3. Invites Member States to examine, at the national level, as appropriate, taking into account the
above-mentioned documents, the adequacy of their domestic legal regimes in terms of guarding against
corruption and providing for forfeiture of the proceeds of corruption, drawing upon international assistance
available for that purpose, with a view, where necessary:

4

See Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/22, annex I.

5

Resolution 51/191, annex.
Resolution 51/59, annex.

6
7

International Review of Criminal Policy, Nos. 41 and 42 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.IV.4).
8
E/CN.15/1999/CRP.12.
9
E/CN.15/1999/10, paras. 1–14.
10

E/CN./15/1999/WP.1/Add.1.
/...

A/RES/54/128
Page 3

(a) To strengthening national laws and regulations in order to criminalize corruption in all its forms,
amending provisions against money-laundering so that they cover bribes and the proceeds of corruption, as
well as provisions concerning the prevention and detection of acts of corruption and money-laundering;
(b) To improving the transparency, vigilance and monitoring of financial transactions and limiting bank
and professional secrecy in cases involving criminal investigation;
(c) To promoting both inter-agency coordination and international administrative and judicial
cooperation in matters involving corruption;
(d) To enacting legislation and establishing programmes promoting the full involvement of civil society
in efforts to fight corruption;
(e) To providing, in accordance with relevant international instruments and domestic legislation, for
the possibility of providing extradition and mutual assistance in cases involving corruption or
money-laundering;
4. Stresses the need to develop a global strategy to strengthen international cooperation aimed at the
prevention and punishment of corruption, including the links of corruption with organized crime and
money-laundering, by:
(a) Encouraging Member States to become parties to and to implement the terms of relevant
international conventions and other instruments aimed at fighting corruption;
(b) Inviting Member States to participate in conferences and other forums for the advancement of
international efforts against corruption;
(c) Also inviting Member States to explore the possibilities of developing a global system for peer
review regarding the adequacy of practices aimed at combating corruption;
5. Directs the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime to incorporate into the draft Convention measures against corruption linked to organized crime,
including provisions regarding the sanctioning of acts of corruption involving public officials;
6. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee, using such time as its schedule permits and with extrabudgetary
resources provided for that purpose, to explore the desirability of an international instrument against
corruption, either ancillary to or independent of the Convention, to be developed after the finalization of the
Convention and the three additional instruments referred to in General Assembly resolution 53/111, and to
present its views to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice;
7. Invites Member States to keep the Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention of the Secretariat
informed of progress made in the implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Group Meeting on
Corruption and its Financial Channels;

/...

A/RES/54/128
Page 4

8.

Requests the Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention:

(a) To ensure that the ongoing revision of the manual prepared by the Secretariat on practical measures
against corruption7 incorporates the recommendations of the Expert Group Meeting on Corruption and its
Financial Channels9 and takes note of the conclusions of the first Global Forum on Fighting Corruption;8
(b) To continue to develop, in consultation with Member States, an effective global programme for
providing technical assistance to fight corruption;
(c) To explore ways to convince underregulated financial centres to adopt rules enabling them to trace
and take action against the proceeds of organized crime and corruption, to participate actively in international
cooperation aimed at preventing and controlling related forms of financial crime and, if necessary, to
consider measures to protect the international financial system from the underregulated financial centres and
mechanisms for the establishment of such minimum rules;
(d) To report to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice no later than at its tenth
session on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution and the steps taken by Member
States to combat corruption and its proceeds;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake, within existing or extrabudgetary resources, technical
cooperation activities to combat corruption, in consultation with Member States that may be able to provide
assistance.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December1999
