S/PV.9067

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9067th meeting

Monday, 20 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Gasri
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2022/468)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39000 (E)
*2239000*

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2022/468)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan; Ms. Ghada Mudawi,
Acting Director, Operations and Advocacy Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Lorna Merekaje, South
Sudanese human rights defender, civil rights activist
and peace advocate.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/468, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council today on the situation
in South Sudan. In my last briefing (see S/PV. 8987), I
shared that a window of opportunity remained for South
Sudan to meet the critical benchmarks required for it to
complete its transition. With eight months remaining,
that window is closing. That notwithstanding, I am
reporting to the Council on the following progress.
After the opposition’s withdrawal from the
transitional security mechanisms following a tense
security situation at the end of March, the parties
were able to overcome a critical impasse to reach
a breakthrough agreement on 3 April on a single
joint command structure for the necessary unified
forces. The formation of the reconstituted transitional
legislature, at the national and State levels, has now
2/20

20/06/2022

been completed, with all speakers sworn in and
heads of specialized committees appointed. Renewed
legislative activity and debate are noticeable. The fact
that at least some of the political differences are being
fought out in Parliament rather than outside it is a
welcome development. The recent mandate extension
of the National Constitutional Amendment Committee
will now allow for the review of the National Elections
Act. That is a prerequisite for launching the electoral
and other legislative frameworks, including the
reconstitution of the National Elections Commission.
I would like to commend the parties to the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan for advancing the provisions
of chapter 5 of the agreement. The ongoing nationwide
public consultations of the technical committees of
the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing
demonstrate a commitment to justice, accountability,
reconciliation and healing. Our hope is that that will
help to create a more resilient and stronger society.
Transitional justice is a prerequisite for sustainable
peace. And following a nine-month delay, I welcome
Parliament’s adoption in March of a national budget for
the year 2021-2022. However, with the fiscal year ending
by the end of this month, I encourage the Government
to submit the 2022-2023 budget to Parliament as soon
as possible for its expeditious approval.
In the months ahead, what is needed is national
leadership, resources and a visible commitment by South
Sudan’s leaders to fulfilling their responsibilities under
the peace agreement and to taking the necessary steps
for the country to exit the transitional period. As the
Secretary-General mentions in his report (S/2022/468),
with the agreement of 3 April to which I just referred,
South Sudan’s leaders have shown that they can make
real progress when there is a sense of urgency and
determination. We therefore expect that with the same
sense of urgency, the parties to the peace agreement
will now agree on a road map, as jointly called for by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and the United Nations. The
road map should serve to recommit the parties to the
Revitalized Agreement and must be accompanied by
clear benchmarks and timelines. In particular it should
address the completion of outstanding tasks such as the
graduation and deployment of the necessary unified
forces, the approval of pending key legislation for the
Constitution-making process and national elections,
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

as well as critical reforms of the security, judicial and
financial sectors.
With regard to the elections, it is important to note
that what is required is not only technical arrangements
and logistics but also an appropriate political
environment. The first of these refers to the necessary
transparency and organization for the elections to be
considered manifestly a true result of the votes cast,
while the second refers to the presence of a political
space for a robust and competitive political process
that is nonetheless a nation-building event. Unless the
parties demonstrate a collective common purpose,
there will be challenges in meeting those commitments.
The road map also offers an entry point for the
international community to align targeted support for
priority transitional tasks. It is our view that the sheer
magnitude of the tasks ahead requires the international
community’s full and unrestricted attention. In that
regard, I welcome the recent visit by the African Union
Committee of Five, representing the African continent’s
renewed commitment to the transition to sustainable
peace in South Sudan.
The scale of subnational conflict, which is now
spreading from north to south and from east to west,
is alarming. In Eastern and Central Equatoria, Unity,
Warrap and Jonglei states, as well as in the Abyei
Administrative Area, violence has been perpetrated
against civilians, fuelling a cycle of cattle raiding,
abductions, revenge killings and gender-based violence,
including conflict-related sexual violence.
I welcome the steps taken by the Government to
establish high-level investigation committees. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) will
provide logistical support in the cases of Leer, Unity and
Magwi, in Eastern Equatoria, for those investigations.
Meanwhile, the Mission has conducted its own
independent investigation into the conflict in Leer,
which have revealed horrific human rights violations
by armed youth from Koch and Mayendit counties.
More than 80 per cent of civilian casualties this
year have been attributed to intercommunal violence
and community-based militias. That violence divides
communities and hampers reconciliation. Peace
spoilers have also proven adept at instrumentalizing
those conflicts for their own interests.
More positively, the decline in civilian casualties
overall continues, as compared to the previous year.
The Mission is challenged more than ever to sustain its

S/PV.9067

prevention and response efforts. UNMISS continues to
deploy an increasingly mobile and robust posture, even
amid challenging terrain and weather conditions. For
example, the Mission is testing all-terrain amphibious
vehicles in Jonglei as part of my commitment to
transition UNMISS from a six-month mobile force
to a year-round Mission — one that is better able to
extend our integrated protection presence during the
rainy season.
Our concern, however, is to avoid becoming a
victim of our own success. While the deployment
of our temporary operating bases offers short-term
sanctuaries of peace, they are in ever-greater demand
to enter and to remain in theatre, thereby stretching and
immobilizing our resources. The UNMISS protection
posture is predicated on our ability to deploy quickly
where the needs are greatest. Quite frankly, we cannot
be everywhere, which serves as a reminder that the
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with the
Government itself.
The three-year strategic vision requested by the
Security Council continues to be the framework for
the integrated efforts of UNMISS. In addition to its
multifaceted work related to the protection of civilians,
the Mission has also been active in other priority areas.
One important building block in that regard is the
support it provides for strengthening the justice chain
and promoting accountability.
In that regard, UNMISS is supporting the standing
up of general courts-martial for Bentiu and Yei. In Yei,
the General Court Martial is prosecuting 21 serious
crimes by military personnel, five of which are related
to sexual and gender-based violence. It is the first
time that crimes of that nature have been referred to
UNMISS-supported courts-martial in South Sudan.
That support includes the provision of assistance to
victims and witnesses through pre-trial counselling,
translation and logistical support.
Another important aspect of support for the rule
of law more broadly is enhanced community policing
and the provision of individual training assistance and
advisory support by the United Nations police to the
South Sudan National Police Service. The Mission is
supporting special courts in several states, such as a
joint special mobile court for Warrap and Western Bahr
El Ghazal.
In four conflict hotspots — Unity, Central Equatoria,
the Jonglei and Greater Pibor Administrative Area and

22-390003/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Western Bahr El Ghazal — UNMISS participates in a
joint programming effort that seeks to operationalize
the humanitarian, development and peace and security
nexus in order to address the root causes of conflict by
implicating multiple actors across those sectors.
I acknowledge the support and vision of the
reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust fund
and the donors who support it. The fund enables
us to realize joint action with agencies, funds and
programmes, from which we are beginning to see
positive results.
The country is confronting a serious humanitarian
crisis. The United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs will provide a comprehensive
briefing on the situation, but I would like to highlight
the key issues and their far-reaching consequences.
As humanitarian needs have grown to an estimated
8.9 million people in need, resources are diminishing.
Currently, only 26 per cent of the $1.7 billion required
for the humanitarian response plan has been received.
Amid competing priorities, I urge the donor community
not to lose sight of South Sudan and to continue its
critical assistance, including to support more than
2 million women and 4.6 million children. Incessant
flooding for a fourth consecutive year in Unity state
and Jonglei, climate change-related displacement, food
insecurity and a lack of livelihood opportunities for
young people are now predicted. Those challenges will
exacerbate existing needs and contribute to localized
conflict over resources. Those affected are most often
vulnerable women and children.
Moreover, humanitarian workers are increasingly
targeted while delivering services to those in need.
In that regard, I call on the Government to guarantee
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
the general population and to bring those responsible
to justice.
In view of the dramatic escalation of humanitarian
needs, I must share my concern at the decision of
the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster
Management to require humanitarians to provide
additional documentation. Such unilateral decisions
impede the ability of humanitarian partners to carry out
operations that ultimately benefit the South Sudanese
people. Both I and the Humanitarian Coordinator have
urged the Government to review that decision as soon
as possible and to engage constructively in the ongoing
negotiation process with the humanitarian sector.
4/20

20/06/2022

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that, despite
the delays, I believe that the only viable course of
action remains the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement in letter and spirit, including with the
full and proper participation of women in all the
mechanisms contemplated by the peace agreement. I
urge the continued commitment of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its member States, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission and the members of the
international community. Their sustained engagement
and continued partnership is fundamental for ensuring
meaningful support for South Sudan.
On that topic, I would like to mention our
disappointment at the cancellation of the visit
scheduled for early July of His Holy Father the Pope,
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Moderator of the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. I also take
this opportunity to extend to the Council the request for
a deliberation on whether a Council visit to Juba would
be appropriate.
I thank Security Council members for their
steadfast support for the people of South Sudan and
extend my appreciation to all uniformed and civilian
personnel of UNMISS, who serve in the name of peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.
Ms. Mudawi: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council. I will
brief the Council on the humanitarian realities that the
South Sudanese people face, the challenges that we face
in responding and what is needed to improve people’s
lives and strengthen their protection.
Since we briefed the Council in December (see
S/PV.8931), most humanitarian indicators have
deteriorated. Subnational violence continues. In March,
violence displaced more than 40,000 people in the
Abyei Administrative Area and Twic county, Warrap
state — a worrisome development in that forgotten
area. The displacement of people continues elsewhere
due to subnational violence and conflict over resources
such as cattle in places such as Equatoria and Jonglei.
Women and girls are at serious risk of gender-based
violence when fighting breaks out, as we saw recently
in Unity state, where the conflict in Leer, Mayendit and
Koch counties resulted in numerous reports of women
and girls being raped.
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Against a backdrop of profound macroeconomic
challenges, the drivers of conflict and climate shocks
have resulted in a dire humanitarian situation. When
it gets as bad as in South Sudan, the spectre of severe
hunger and even famine results.
Food insecurity will persist this year. About
8.3 million people will likely experience severe food
insecurity during the lean season, May to July. Of those,
2.9 million people will likely face emergency levels
of hunger, known as Integrated Phase Classification
(IPC) level 4, while 87,000 people will probably face
catastrophic, famine-like levels of food insecurity/
famine, known as IPC 5.
The other big driver of humanitarian need is
climate-related shocks. South Sudan now faces a fourth
year of above-average rainfall, which has disrupted the
agricultural season and constrained food production.
With 200,000 people already displaced in Unity state
and with new flooding in areas water-logged from last
year’s flooding, at least half a million people will likely
be impacted by floods this year. In Bentiu, flood waters
from last year have receded slowly, limiting access to
safe water and resulting in a high risk of cholera. With
support from the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and others, humanitarians have worked tirelessly
to ensure that preparedness resources are in place
ahead of the rainy season. Thanks to the Humanitarian
Coordinator’s whole-of-system approach, the impact of
flooding this year could be mitigated in Unity state.
However, much needs to be done across the country,
and resources are scarce. Flood mitigation measures
over the years have been insufficient to prevent this
annual, predictable and preventable misery. Collective
action on climate mitigation and adaptation is needed
in the years to come.
More than 2 million people remain internally
displaced, and more than 2.3 million South Sudanese
are refugees. For people to return, South Sudan needs to
address the issues keeping people in a holding pattern
of displacement — insecurity, the presence of explosive
hazards, unresolved housing, land and property issues
and lack of basic services. There needs to be planning
for sites for internally displaced persons become
permanent settlement locations. In short, durable
solutions are needed.
Humanitarian partners are committed to stay and
deliver, but South Sudan remains a dangerous place
for humanitarians. So far this year, four humanitarian

S/PV.9067

workers have been killed in the line of duty. Last month,
an armed group reportedly attacked a clinic in Pibor
county and looted pre-positioned nutritional supplies.
Such incidents are unacceptable.
This year’s humanitarian response plan aims
to assist 6.8 million people. We have reached about
3.1 million people, but have been unable to help the
rest — not due to a lack of commitment, but a lack of
resources. The $1.7 billion humanitarian response plan
is only 26 per cent funded.
The World Food Programme has had to reprioritize
its food assistance programme. About 4.5 million people
will now be targeted, instead of the initial 6 million,
putting more people at heightened risk of starvation.
The Food and Agriculture organization has also had to
reduce plans for seed distribution, which reduces the
ability of communities to feed themselves.
When our Humanitarian Coordinator, Ms. Sara
Nyanti, visited Unity and Upper Nile states in April,
women told her of their experiences of gender-based
violence, health issues and the lack of education for
their children. Representatives of women groups said
that all they can do is “cry for peace, as without it, we
will never be able to feed our children without help.”
They go on to say:
“We are being raped, harassed, we have no
livelihoods, no opportunities and girls cannot go to
school. Humanitarians are doing a great job for the
vulnerable people and providing what they can, but
we, as women, still have so many needs. This is not
the life we chose.”
The resilience of the people of South Sudan is
commendable, but that is not enough to turn the tide.
The Council’s support is needed. I will end with
three messages.
First,
the
international
response
needs
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts
working together to address the root causes of the
crisis. Sustainability through national ownership of
basic services is needed, and efforts should promote
localized leadership and solutions when and where
possible. Throughout the process, we must ensure the
protection of civilians and accountability for human
rights abuses.
Secondly, the safety of aid workers and assets must
be ensured. We need the Government and all parties to

22-390005/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the conflict to take action in that regard. Impunity for
continuing attacks on humanitarian workers and assets
must stop.
Lastly, flexible, unearmarked and early funding
at scale is urgently required in order to address the
growing humanitarian needs I described here, including
to prevent a dangerous deterioration in the food security
situation in South Sudan.
The President: I thank Ms. Mudawi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Merekaje.
Ms. Merekaje: I am deeply honoured and humbled
by the invitation to brief the Security Council during
this meeting dedicated to discussing the situation in
my beloved country. Today I address the Council not
as the Secretary General of South Sudan Democratic
Engagement, Monitoring and Observation Programme,
but as an activist.
Please allow me to emphasize the importance
of this meeting, especially when we the people of
South Sudan are faced with many uncertainties and a
worsening economic situation, characterized by high
prices of basic food commodities, shrinking space for
civic engagement, escalating violence and human rights
violations. Nevertheless, the country is anticipating
conducting elections pursuant to the agreement.
There seems to be insufficient commitment by the
parties to fully implement the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan,
signed in 2018. It is important to acknowledge that
the validity of the agreement comes to an end in a
few months’ time, with the parties clearly failing to
implement critical elements of a deal they negotiated
and signed. The big question is — what is next for the
people of South Sudan?
We must increase pressure and urge the guarantors
of the peace agreement to support the people of South
Sudan in designing a concrete road map for the country
when the agreement is no longer valid.
Continued violence and heinous human rights
violations in the country continue to exacerbate trauma
and elicit insecurity. South Sudan may be one of the
most insecure places for anyone. Unfortunately, the
unpredictable wave of conflict in the country seems
to have a pattern. Even as memories of the violence
in Tambura/Yambio, Kitgwang and other parts of the
country remain vivid, a similar conflict has reared its
6/20

20/06/2022

head in Kajo Keji, Nimule and other parts of the country.
The country is deeply fragmented and bleeding.
Following the signing of the agreement, there was hope
for the people of South Sudan. And yet paradoxically,
the sporadic waves of intercommunal conflict and its
intensity continue to puzzle many. Women and girls
in particular continue to face the imminent threat
of conflict-related sexual violence and sexual and
gender-based violence even where there is no active
conflict, including in the capital of Juba. The incidence
of rape and murder of the victims is rising. While it
is important to acknowledge that there are ongoing
efforts towards the processes and establishment of the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing,
other important processes, such as that of drafting a
constitution, have significantly slowed, and the muchheralded public financial management reform process
also seems to be being frustrated. The country is
facing immense institutional gaps in terms of setup and
institutional culture.
There is no doubt that the people of South Sudan
want to be given an opportunity to choose their leaders
and participate in the design of a progressive agenda for
the country. However, that can be realized only if South
Sudan is helped with the necessary technical support,
first to enable it to strengthen the capacity of the
institutions and personnel required to conduct a credible
election; secondly, to create an environment conducive
to the operation of free media and civic engagement
without intimidation and reprisals; and thirdly, to
strengthen the necessary legal framework. Until we
achieve that, and based on my engagement with South
Sudanese from various walks of life and in a scenario
development exercise, for which the report entitled
Scenarios for South Sudan 2025 will be launched on
22 June, there is a clear realization that the country has
serious gaps in several aspects of national governance.
That has contributed immensely to the turmoil, and
a country in the state that South Sudan is currently
in cannot hold credible elections without sufficient
international support. I therefore strongly recommend
and appeal to the Security Council to consider involving
the United Nations in the organization and conduct of
the anticipated national elections for South Sudan.
Civil-society groups globally have continued
to amplify the voices of ordinary citizens and
marginalized people and communities. It is a service
that each of us has voluntarily chosen to undertake
for the sake of humankind. The role of civil society
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

globally has contributed in many ways to State- and
nation-building processes. It is disheartening when
the civic space is deliberately stifled. Civil-society
groups and organizations are not against the State,
but rather complement the roles that the State has
neglected. In order to enhance the contribution of
civil society, I therefore recommend two points. First,
we should establish periodic forums in which civil
society can engage with the leadership of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in order
to facilitate better in-country interaction and analysis.
Secondly, the Security Council should authorize
UNMISS to facilitate or host periodic engagement with
the Government and civil society or citizens’ groups
to build confidence and support forward thinking for
the country.
As I end my remarks, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Council for creating this opportunity
to brief it. I urge the Council and all United Nations
organs to invest in existing mechanisms for supporting
the work of civil society globally and encourage
periodic consultation with civil-society groups globally,
so as to amplify the voices of citizens who may not
get the opportunity to channel their concerns through
Government organs or through humanitarian agencies
on the ground.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Merekaje

for

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Haysom and Ms. Mudawi for their comprehensive
briefings today, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for raising the possibility of
a Council visit to Juba, which my delegation will
consider. But in the meantime, we look forward to
the visit to Juba by the end of the year by the Panel
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. I thank
Ms. Mudawi for her messages to the Council, to which
we will give serious consideration. And I want to thank
and appreciate in particular Ms. Merekaje for sharing

S/PV.9067

her insights and her very important recommendations
with the Security Council.
The United States finds itself once again deeply
disturbed to hear about another incident of brutal
violence affecting civilians in South Sudan, including
women and children. We are particularly appalled by
the horrific crimes earlier this year in Leer county
in Unity state, where, as we have heard, armed youth
from Koch and Mayendit Counties, reportedly under
orders from County Commissioner Koang Biel and
Mayendit County Commissioner Gatluak Nyang, killed
72 civilians, raped more than 60 women and girls and
assaulted humanitarian workers. We learned from a
25 April press statement of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) that some civilians were
burned alive, while others, including a child, were
beheaded. Two survivors of sexual violence recounted
being repeatedly raped and gang-raped.
Horrifically, such incidents of gender-based
violence are all too common and continue to increase
in South Sudan with impunity. According to recent
UNMISS reports, the incidence of conflict-related
sexual violence in the first quarter of this year increased
by 125 per cent compared to the same time frame last
year. My delegation wants to make it clear that those
involved in planning, directing or committing any acts
involving sexual and gender-based violence can be
subject to United Nations sanctions. The two permanent
Member States — China and Russia — that routinely
block sanctions nominations, place unwarranted holds
or blocks on the reappointment of sanctions experts
and generally seek to weaken the Council’s ability to
effectively wield the sanctions tool should be mindful
of the human costs of their actions. In keeping with
international law, we join others in calling on the South
Sudanese officials and Government to hold to account
all those responsible for committing violations and
abuses in Unity state, and we stress that it is the primary
responsibility of the Government of South Sudan to
ensure the protection of its civilians, including women
and children. We know that peacekeepers have a critical
role to play in that regard as well, and we commend
Mr. Haysom and UNMISS for the rapid deployment
of peacekeepers. Their swift engagement at the local,
state and national level to restore calm in Unity has
saved lives.
But as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral reminded us, no lasting and just peace will be
possible without political progress. In that regard, the

22-390007/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United States shares the Secretary-General’s concern
about the slow implementation and completion of
critical elements of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan before the
end of the transitional period in February 2023. And
we call on the Government of South Sudan to fully
implement the Revitalized Agreement, including
finalizing security arrangements, completing an
inclusive constitution drafting process, establishing
and resourcing transitional institutions, and as we
heard from our civil-society speaker, ensuring a free
and open civic space for elections.
As we also just heard, South Sudan is experiencing
the worst humanitarian crisis in its history, and 8.9 million
people are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
The United States provides about $1 billion every
year to support life-saving humanitarian assistance to
the South Sudanese people. We join others in urging the
international community to continue providing support
to the people of South Sudan, who depend on the delivery
of essential and life-saving humanitarian assistance.
Let me join others in categorically condemning attacks
on humanitarian workers that provide such life-saving
assistance. No humanitarian workers should face
threats of violence for simply trying to do their job.
We call on the South Sudanese officials to ensure
the safety and security of humanitarian workers and
organizations, and, as Mr. Haysom noted, reduce
bureaucratic impediments to delivering humanitarian
assistance instead of putting new ones in place.
Finally, although there has been some improvement
over the last year, the United States remains concerned
about the increase in violations of the status-of-forces
agreement over the reporting period. That includes
continued obstructions to UNMISS’s freedom of
movement, the imposition of undue taxes, fees
and restrictions on UNMISS and its contractors,
and the arrest of two UNMISS personnel, in clear
violation of the status-of-forces agreement arrest and
detention procedure.
We remind the Government of South Sudan that
it has primary responsibility for ensuring the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel and assets and that all violations of the
status-of-forces agreement are unacceptable.
More than ever, the people of the Sudan and the
team at UNMISS need our unified support on the
8/20

20/06/2022

Council to move towards peace, justice and free and
fair elections.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nicholas Haysom; the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Acting Director
of Operations, Ms. Ghada Mudawi; and the civilsociety representative, Ms. Lorna Merekaje, for their
informative briefings.
The positive political and security developments
in South Sudan were made evident in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/468) and have been reinforced
further by today’s briefing. The completion of the
formation of the reconstituted Transitional National
Legislative Assembly; the tabling of important
legislation, including the constitution-making process
bill; and the agreement on the implementation of the
transitional security arrangements that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General elaborated
on just now reflect the commitment of leaders to
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We also appreciate the role
played by the Sudan in supporting the parties in coming
to an agreement on the security arrangements.
There has also been a renewed emphasis on
reconciliation, with the launching of a consultative
process for the establishment of Commission for Truth,
Reconciliation and Healing. Those developments are
significant and need to be duly recognized.
Moving forward in the coming months, the South
Sudan authorities need to make further progress on the
graduation of the forces, the operationalization of the
necessary unified forces, and legislation concerning
elections and the finalization of electoral calendar.
We believe that with support from the countries in
the region and the international community, including
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), progress on the
holding of elections is possible in the coming months.
In that regard, we take note of the trilateral AU-IGADUnited Nations evaluation process held in March.
On the economic front, the situation has remained
relatively stable, with the gross domestic product
expected to grow positively in 2022. The humanitarian
situation, however, remains a matter of concern, with
an estimated 8.9 million people requiring humanitarian
assistance. The international community, including the
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United Nations, needs to step up its efforts in support
of the Government.
We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) towards the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need,
particularly in flood-affected areas.
The security situation remains tenuous in some
regions despite the overall decrease in the number
of violent incidents. We hope that the Community
of Sant’Egidio mediation efforts will help the
non-signatory groups and the Government to reach an
understanding soon. We also note the role of UNMISS
in protecting civilians at the Malakal site and mitigating
the intercommunal conflict.
We welcome the improved communication between
the Government and UNMISS. That development
is having a positive impact on the facilitation of the
Mission’s operations, as is evident from the decrease
in the number of status-of-forces agreement violations.
We also take note of the integrated and cross-Mission
approach, including the setting up of temporary
operational bases.
We appreciate the Mission’s efforts to support
rule-of-law and accountability institutions by
supporting special courts, mobile courts and the
development of a framework for victim and witness
protection programmes. The recent creation of the
Ministry of Peacebuilding in South Sudan will help
achieve a better understanding of peacebuilding needs.
India has been one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to UNMISS since its establishment a
decade ago. At present we have nearly 2,300 troops
serving in the country. Apart from its core mandate of
protecting civilians and providing medical services,
the Indian contingent is also contributing to sustainable
development and the welfare of the people of South
Sudan. Over the years, Indian peacekeepers have gone
beyond the call of duty by undertaking a variety of
engineering assignments, offering health services and
organizing educational-awareness camps.
The outstanding contributions of Indian
peacekeepers has been consistently acknowledged,
including by the United Nations. The most recent
such example was in April this year, when more than
1,100 Indian peacekeepers serving in Upper Nile state
were honoured with United Nations medals for their
outstanding and multifaceted work. That includes women

S/PV.9067

peacekeepers from India, who have been championing
the cause of disease prevention and integrating a gender
perspective into peacekeeping activities through
awareness campaigns and livelihood training.
We believe that at this transformative phase,
South Sudan requires the wholehearted support of the
international community, including from IGAD, the AU
and the United Nations. The international community,
including the Council, needs to make every effort to
address the concerns repeatedly raised by South Sudan
regarding the sanctions, including on the arms embargo
and targeted measures.
In conclusion, India is fully cognizant of the
challenges faced by South Sudan in its pursuit of
peace and stability. India supplied life-saving essential
medicines in 2020 and again in 2021 during the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Food grain assistance
was also provided to flood-affected people, and an
artificial-limbs fitment camp has been organized in
Juba that will benefit more than 500 amputees. We have
also recently concluded a special course for capacitybuilding of diplomats from South Sudan.
On our part, we will continue to support South
Sudan and its people in their journey towards securing
sustainable peace and a prosperous future.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): First, let me thank both
Nicholas Haysom and Ghada Mudawi for their very
frank assessments of the situation. I wish also to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his suggestion of a Council visit, and we would very
much welcome the Council’s consideration of that.
I wish also to commend and thank our civil-society
briefer, Ms. Lorna Merekaje, for her insights. It is good
to see her in the Council again, and we very much share
the concerns that she has expressed today.
I want to acknowledge the progress made in this
quarter, particularly the recent agreement on the
command-and-control structure of the necessary
unified forces. It is a significant step forward that we
wholly welcome.
Reaching agreement is one thing, and
implementation is another, so it is regrettable that the
timeline for the graduation of the necessary unified
forces has not been met. We await the urgent action
called for by the Secretary-General to fully implement
transitional security arrangements. It is imperative that
any momentum gained from the recent agreement on

22-390009/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unified forces continue in order to give the transitional
period the urgency that it deserves.
Security remains a key concern given the continued
violence across the country between Government and
opposition-aligned forces. That should prompt all of
us to question the parties’ genuine commitment to
the ceasefire.
Likewise, urgent protection for humanitarian
workers and assets is crucial; we heard that very clearly
from Ms. Mudawi this morning. As the country’s
citizens face a period of extreme food insecurity, the
ability of humanitarian workers to safely carry out their
duties is the minimum that we should be able to expect.
It is deplorable that during this reporting period
alone, as mentioned by Ms. Mudawi, four humanitarian
workers were killed. Recent attacks highlight the need
for enhanced efforts on that front. We commend the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
in that regard, but it cannot be expected to shoulder that
burden alone.
We remain deeply concerned about the continued
stifling of civic space reported by the SecretaryGeneral. If the Government of South Sudan is serious
about holding elections, then the freedom of speech,
assembly and expression must not only be protected
but also actively nourished and encouraged, as part of
the suite of basic benchmarks for ensuring a legitimate
election process that does not degenerate into violence.
Such action would empower civil society groups
that are seeking a more peaceful and inclusive South
Sudan, as we heard from Lorna Merekaje, and would
help instil much-needed hope in its young population. In
Ireland’s view, the future of the young State can better
be gauged by the status and participation of women in
public life and the welfare of children and young people
than by an increased flow of arms into the country.
We are appalled by the reported grave violations
of human rights, including against children, as well as
the harrowing rate of conflict-related sexual violence,
and we call on the Government of South Sudan to hold
offenders accountable, support survivors and take
measures to prevent future incidents. In that regard, I
would like to welcome the support for victims referred
to by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGenera1 in his briefing.
I commend the work of UNMISS in a challenging
space and recall that the Mission needs the support of the
10/20

20/06/2022

Government to fulfil its mandate. The recent increase
in reported status-of-forces agreement violations,
following the encouraging downward trend of such
violations, risks damaging hard-built trust. We hope to
see improvements in those rates in the next report.
Much can progress in the remaining eight months
of the transitional period, and the implementation of
the transitional security arrangements is central to
that. Security forces need leadership, guidance, unity
and intent. The lifting of the arms embargo will not
alleviate the lack of those principles. Furthermore,
South Sudanese women’s organizations and women
peacebuilders in particular are key to building lasting
peace in the country and responding to crises as they
emerge. They must be supported by the Government
and protected from threats and reprisals.
As always, we remain ready to assist, but leadership
and initiative must come from within. Capacityrebuilding alone will not suffice. Change requires the
will and tenacity to take the urgent action needed for the
sake of the country’s well-being, security and progress.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom;
the Acting Director of Operations and Advocacy
of the Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Mudawi;
and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their briefings this
morning. I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan.
My delegation notes the recent developments in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, including
the swearing-in of members of state assemblies, the
progress made thanks to the 3 April agreement with
regard to the unified force command structures and the
progress made with regard to the Commission for Truth,
Reconciliation and Healing. We also acknowledge the
positive cooperation dynamics among regional partners
in the peace process. It is important for developments to
continue in that direction with supportive efforts.
However, the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement remains significantly behind schedule. We
urge all parties to make progress on outstanding issues,
especially in the area of security, and to develop a road
map to complete the transition process. It is time to focus
on the South Sudanese people and abandon continuous
political confrontation. We emphasize the legislative
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

frameworks related to the constitution-making process
and elections. In that regard, Mexico reiterates the
call for compliance with the 35 per cent quota for
women’s participation in the institutions established by
the agreement.
In parallel to political issues, my delegation
is concerned about the continuing tensions at the
subnational level that have led to displacement and
the exacerbation of the humanitarian situation.
The significant increase in gender-based violence,
including conflict-related incidents of sexual violence,
is deplorable. The South Sudanese authorities have
a responsibility to protect civilians and ensure that
perpetrators are held accountable.
Moreover, the adverse effects of climate change
continue to pose a threat to the livelihoods of a
large majority of the already vulnerable population.
The consequences have been undeniable in terms
of food insecurity and the increased likelihood of
intercommunal tensions. It is therefore imperative
to integrate climate-related security risks into earlywarning, prevention, mitigation and preparation efforts.
In an extremely complex environment, humanitarian
operations continue to be obstructed in various parts of
the country, whether as a result of fighting, bureaucratic
requirements or checkpoint restrictions that impede
their movement. The rising trend in deliberate attacks
against humanitarian workers and the pilfering of
their supplies is concerning. We call on all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and the status of
humanitarian personnel and their property.
Similarly, we urge the authorities to guarantee the
protection of humanitarian personnel and allow them
to do their work. In that regard, we echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the Government to reverse the recent
decision of the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and
Disaster Management to require the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations to provide additional
documents, which unjustifiably obstructs the work of
the organizations. We call on all parties to guarantee
the security and freedom of movement of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
In conclusion, I once again call attention to the
challenge posed to both South Sudan and the region
by arms trafficking. Any revision to the arms embargo
must result from the situation on the ground and the
authorities’ ability to control unrestricted arms flows.
As long as arms are widely available, some actors will

S/PV.9067

prefer the path of violence to political dialogue and will
continue to pose a risk to humanitarian operations and
UNMISS itself.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his briefing.
We listened carefully to the briefing by Ms. Ghada
Mudawi, Acting Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and South
Sudanese civil society representative Lorna Merekaje.
We welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan, Mr. Akuei Bona Malwal,
at today’s meeting. We take note of the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/468) on the country and
the work of United Nations peacekeepers there.
The Russian Federation supports international
efforts to stabilize the situation in South Sudan and
strengthen peace and security in that country. The
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan continues to work, and the
ceasefire is largely being maintained. We believe
that the agreement signed in early April by President
Salva Kiir and First Vice-President Riek Machar on
establishing a unified command of the armed forces to
be a significant contribution to resolving those issues.
We believe it is particularly important to speed up the
process of forming a unified army.
The gradual implementation of all the provisions
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan is essential. We welcome
the particular attention that Juba has given to the
reconciliation process. We note that a transitional
Parliament has now been established and has begun
working on key bills, including the preparation of a
permanent constitution. We support the intention of
South Sudan’s leadership to hold the first elections in
the history of the State in 2023. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we hope that the Sudanese parties will soon
be able to agree on an election timeline and a clear road
map for completing the transitional period.
The security situation in the various regions
remains challenging. We are concerned about the
outbreaks of violence in Upper Nile and Unity states.
At the same time, we note the general decrease in the
number of intercommunal clashes and the readiness
of an increasing number of refugees and internally
displaced persons to return to their permanent homes.

22-3900011/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We strongly condemn any violations of the Revitalized
Agreement and acts of violence against civilians,
including humanitarian personnel working in South
Sudan. In our view, the main objective of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan should be to stabilize
the security situation and assist the South Sudanese
authorities in implementing the Revitalized Agreement.
The primary responsibility for addressing issues related
to the protection of human rights lies with Juba.
We firmly believe that the new realities demand
that the sanctions regime on South Sudan be updated,
including by easing the arms embargo in order to assist
in training the armed forces and National Security
Service personnel. We believe that the introduction of a
notification regime to simplify the delivery of non-lethal
military equipment to the country in support of the
implementation of the peace agreement, in accordance
with resolution 2633 (2022), adopted on 27 May, was
an important step in that regard. However, it will
not be enough to meet Juba’s legitimate aspirations,
which are fully supported by its African neighbours.
The international community should place greater
emphasis on assisting the authorities in implementing
the Revitalized Agreement and building their capacity
to resolve local conflicts.
In conclusion, and separately, I would like to
welcome South Sudan’s establishment of a National
Human Rights Council. We hope that its efforts will be
aimed at protecting the fundamental rights and freedoms
of the South Sudanese people, while strengthening
relevant values and improving legislation, as well as
communicating reliable information to the international
community about the human rights situation in South
Sudan. I believe it is important to emphasize that point
in the light of the statement by the representative of
the United States, who once again condescendingly
lectured South Sudan, which is just as much a sovereign
State as the United States. We see no justification for
demonstrating that sort of superiority.
The Security Council should help the youthful
State of South Sudan overcome its problems, including
those related to violence, and achieve real results.
However, we must bear in mind every aspect of the
country’s situation. The Russian Federation will
continue to work based on the premise that United
Nations mechanisms must act impartially and on a
basis of verified information.
12/20

20/06/2022

Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom, Ms. Mudawi and Ms. Merekaje for their helpful
briefings, and we very much welcome the participation
of the representative of South Sudan in today’s meeting.
The United Kingdom applauds the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom for their continued
efforts to build durable peace, protect civilians and
support election planning. Today I will focus on the
humanitarian and human rights situations, as well as
on the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
The humanitarian situation, as outlined by
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, is alarming, with 8.9 million
people now estimated to be in need of assistance and
almost two thirds of the population facing crisis levels
of food insecurity or worse. We urge the Government
of South Sudan to reduce the physical and bureaucratic
obstructions and meet its obligations under the peace
agreement to allow unhindered humanitarian access.
The human rights situation also continues to be of deep
concern, evidenced by harrowing reports of violence,
killings and widespread sexual violence, as our briefers
described today. That includes in Leer county, where
more than 25,000 civilians have been displaced. We
call on the Government of South Sudan to hold the
perpetrators accountable.
Since the Council’s last meeting, in March (see
S/PV.8987), the United Kingdom has joined others in
welcoming some recent progress made on the peace
deal, including the unified command structure. We
are also encouraged by the integration of the peace
agreement into the transitional Constitution and by the
fact that legislation has been presented to Parliament.
However, it is regrettable that overall progress remains
too slow and limited, and that critical benchmarks have
not been met. Mr. Haysom has rightly highlighted the
scale of the challenge of delivering the remaining tasks
in the peace agreement on the current timelines. The
South Sudanese people have already waited too long
for peace. It is clear that the parties have to demonstrate
leadership and engage in an honest discussion about
priorities and timelines.
With less than a year left of the transitional period,
we encourage the Government of South Sudan to set
out in detail the concrete steps it needs to take in order
to deliver on the Revitalized Agreement, particularly
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on constitution-making and elections, as well as how
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
wider international community can support it. We also
encourage the Government of South Sudan to make
full use of the available United Nations support. In
that regard, we look forward to the first meeting of
the Peacebuilding Commission on South Sudan in the
near future.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom reiterates its
calls on South Sudan’s leaders to demonstrate to the
world that they understand the severity of their people’s
plight, take responsibility and act in partnership with
donor communities and the United Nations to solve
the crisis.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers
for their insights and for providing the Council with
a much-needed reality check regarding the current
situation in South Sudan. I would particularly
like to thank Ms. Merekaje for her concrete and
constructive recommendations.
With only eight months left of the transitional period,
the people of South Sudan need to see a fundamental
shift in the parties’ approach to the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. They need national leadership, in deeds as well as
words. Delivering on three immediate priorities would
demonstrate political will and the parties’ commitment
to fully implementing the Revitalized Agreement.
First, the necessary unified forces must be
graduated and deployed, and sufficient resources
must be allocated to their operations. That is essential
to stabilizing the country and breaking the cycle of
subnational and intercommunal violence. As we have
seen in Jonglei, armed groups have been fighting one
another for years in a series of revenge attacks, including
again this spring. The presence of the necessary unified
forces could help reduce tension among those groups by
filling the current vacuum in national forces.
Secondly, the Government has long promised a
clear road map for the end of the transitional period,
aimed at an inclusive constitution-making process and
ensuring that free and fair elections are possible. The
process of creating that road map should be broadbased and inclusive, with an outcome that is realistic
but nonetheless ambitious, and it should start now.
South Sudan cannot afford to lose any more time.

S/PV.9067

Thirdly, the Government should provide the
necessary funds without delay to implement the
peace agreement, in particular with regard to security
arrangements, which are key to progress on the
constitutional process and elections. Blaming the slow
implementation of the peace agreement on a lack of
resources is not convincing. South Sudan’s oil revenues
are increasing. Eliminating avenues for corruption
and increasing transparency and accountability will
allow the Government to give higher priority to the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Following the slow pace of that implementation, the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan has gone from
bad to worse. While humanitarian actors are working
tirelessly to respond, dependence on humanitarian
actors to deliver almost all basic services is not
sustainable. Eleven years after independence, increased
engagement and investment from the Government’s
side are still much needed to address the root causes of
the protracted humanitarian crisis. Improved capacity
within the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and the United Nations country team to
coordinate triple-nexus efforts will also be necessary.
We condemn the killing of humanitarian workers
and the widespread looting and destruction of
humanitarian aid. Negative political signals from the
Government towards non-governmental organizations
trickle down to the local level and manifest in local
officials’ efforts to impede critical operations. We
commend UNMISS and the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
their principled stance on those issues, and we call on
the Government of South Sudan to fully respect its
obligations under international humanitarian law and
the Revitalized Agreement.
We are also deeply concerned by the reported
levels of conflict-related sexual violence. We urge
the Government to investigate allegations and hold
perpetrators accountable. We also underline the
importance of ensuring that survivors have access to
holistic care.
We acknowledge the Government’s efforts to
establish the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and
Healing, and we stress the ongoing need to implement
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan and the Compensation
and Reparation Authority. Protecting civilians, fighting
impunity and promoting human rights are essential
elements for building trust between the people and the

22-3900013/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

authorities, as well as building a sustainable peace,
and will also provide the necessary political space and
freedom for elections to be free, fair and credible.
In conclusion, Norway calls on the Government to
provide a clear road map for the end of the transitional
period and to demonstrate national ownership and
leadership, including by investing increased oil
revenues in peace implementation, service delivery and
long-term development.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I wish to start by
thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Ms. Ghada Mudawi
and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their briefings. I also
welcome the delegation of South Sudan to this meeting.
Brazil takes this opportunity to thank the women
and men of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for their valiant service. I would also like
to thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
and civilian experts who are part of UNMISS and the
United Nations country team for their unwavering
efforts. I will comment on three issues.
First, regarding security, we are concerned at the
increasing cattle-related violence in Eastern Equatoria,
Unity and Jonglei. On the one hand, we regret the
significant civilian casualties that those persistent
attacks and raids have caused. On the other hand, we
acknowledge and commend UNMISS’s efforts to spread
its personnel throughout South Sudan and enhance the
Mission’s mobility, thereby improving its cornerstone
goal of providing protection for civilians.
The second issue is the humanitarian situation. The
current levels of food insecurity and displacement in
South Sudan are our overriding concern. That is the
reason that we pay tribute to the essential work being
done by humanitarian agencies. Aside from reiterating
how crucial the humanitarian response plan for 2022
is, we underline the fact that improved humanitarian
access is indispensable to address the urgent needs of
millions of South Sudanese citizens.
The third issue is the peace process. We welcome
both the agreement on the command structure of
the necessary unified forces and the formation of
the reconstituted Transitional National Legislative
Assembly. We also commend in particular the
institutional steps taken to establish the Commission
for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing.
As the Secretary-General advocates in his latest
report (S/2022/468), South Sudan should use the proper
14/20

20/06/2022

implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan as its most
powerful tool to mitigate persistent intercommunal
violence. In that regard, we fully appreciate the
firm support provided by the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its members.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and Ms. Ghada Mudawi for their comprehensive
briefings. We also listened carefully to Ms. Lorna
Merekaje’s briefing. I welcome the participation of the
representative of South Sudan in today’s meeting.
With regard to the recent positive developments
in South Sudan, we believe that they contribute to
advancing the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. We appreciate all efforts to that end, including
the completion of the re-established Transitional
National Legislative Assembly, the introduction of a bill
on the constitutional drafting process and the launching
of a consultative process to establish the Commission
for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing.
We also recognize that the signing in April of
an agreement on transitional security arrangements,
which was facilitated by the Republic of the Sudan,
is an important step towards the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement. We urge South Sudan to
continue building on those gains in order to achieve the
desired security and prosperity.
We underline the importance of ensuring the
full, meaningful and equal participation of women
in all phases of peacebuilding. It is also important to
continue cooperation with regional and international
organizations, such as the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
United Nations. Such cooperation could be facilitated
through efforts such as the tripartite assessment process
in order to determine South Sudan’s needs in relation
to elections and the constitutional drafting process. We
also appreciate the mediation efforts of the Community
of Sant’Egidio to support South Sudan on its path to
achieving stability.
With regard to the disturbing security situation
in South Sudan, there is a need to redouble efforts to
address the current challenges, especially the significant
increase in sexual and gender-based violence, including
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by advancing the implementation of the joint action
plan for the armed forces on conflict-related sexual
violence in South Sudan.
There is also a need to address the root causes
of violence, including the consequences of climate
change, which have further increased competition for
natural resources, escalated intercommunal violence
and exacerbated the already fragile humanitarian and
security conditions. That issue should be a priority in
view of the approaching rainy season, which is often
accompanied by floods in South Sudan. We appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to provide the necessary support to
mitigate the impact of floods.
We also look forward to the Mission’s assessment
of the risks related to climate change pursuant to
resolution 2625 (2022), in coordination with the
United Nations country team in South Sudan, because
developing a clearer picture of the environmental risks
will contribute to addressing them more effectively.
As we heard today, South Sudan continues to
witness a deteriorating humanitarian crisis. More than
two thirds of the country’s population is in urgent need
of humanitarian assistance, and the situation has been
further exacerbated by the global food crisis. According
to the World Food Programme, food insecurity in South
Sudan has reached the highest levels since 2011.
There is a need for the international community
to enhance cooperation to meet the humanitarian
needs of the people of South Sudan. In that regard, I
note the World Bank’s announcement of a $70 million
grant for funding social and economic empowerment
programmes related to women and girls in South
Sudan, including survivors of gender-based violence.
Such efforts are essential for building stable and
prosperous communities.
We also appreciate the efforts of UNMISS to
support the delivery of aid relief to those in need and
ensure protection to humanitarian workers, since we
are concerned about the attacks launched against them.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
its commitment to supporting all efforts aimed at
achieving unity, peace and stability in South Sudan.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
read out this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council, namely, Gabon,
Kenya and Ghana (A3).

S/PV.9067

At the outset, we wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2022/468).
We also thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative to South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
for his very insightful comments on the situation in
South Sudan.
The A3 furthermore welcomes the additional
briefings delivered by the Acting Director of Operations
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Ghada Mudawi, and Ms. Lorna Merekaje,
from South Sudan. We also welcome our brother
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
this meeting.
The A3’s statement on this agenda item will focus
on three issues, namely, the political, security and
humanitarian situations in South Sudan. I will then
conclude by highlighting some important issues for the
consideration of the members of the Council.
First, in respect of the political situation in South
Sudan, the A3 commends the efforts and achievements of
the South Sudanese Government in the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, notably, the implementation
of phase one of the process of forming the necessary
unified forces, with approximately 50,000 trainees,
the agreement on the command-and-control structure
of the army, the opening of humanitarian corridors,
which has facilitated a gradual voluntary return of
about half a million refugees and internally displaced
persons, and the development of an action plan for
the commencement of public consultations on the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing,
among other things.
The A3 would like to further commend the recent
visit by the African Union (AU) High-Level Ad Hoc
Committee on South Sudan from 1 to 4 June 2022. The
visit paved the way for some open discussions with the
presidency, the legislative leadership, political parties,
the National Elections Commission, the National
Constitutional Review Commission, the African and
international diplomatic communities, the United
Nations, the European Union, the troika — the United
States, the United Kingdom and Norway — and civil
society. To the A3, the visit was significant, as it sets
the ground for South Sudan to consolidate peace and
democracy, flowing from the open discussions that
brought to the fore the successes and challenges facing
the Revitalized Agreement.

22-3900015/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We continue to urge all parties to remain committed
to the Revitalized Agreement and commend President
Salva Kiir Mayardit and First Vice-President Riek
Machar for the consistent reiteration of their positions
that the country will not return to conflict. We call on
all other parties that have not signed the agreement to
demonstrate their commitment to peace and reiterate
our call to the parties to urgently resume peace talks
under the facilitation of the Community of Sant’Egidio.
The A3 calls the Council’s attention to the challenges
confronting the implementation of the remaining
benchmarks of the peace agreement, especially during
the few remaining months of the transition. We call on
the Government and all political leaders to place the
overall interests of the people of South Sudan at the heart
of their discussions and decisions. We urge the parties
to hold an inclusive dialogue and forge consensus on
a road map for the remainder of the transition period,
including the conduct of elections. Since its economy
has been affected by prolonged flooding and the effects
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, South Sudan will
need international financial support in order to be able
to implement the agreement’s mechanism.
We call on the AU, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the United Nations and other
bilateral and multilateral partners, including the troika
countries, China and the IGAD Partners Forum, to not
relent and to continue to extend the necessary assistance,
while supporting the activities of the implementation
oversight mechanisms. We encourage the parties to
make progress on the aspects lagging behind.
On the security situation in South Sudan, the A3
notes with concern the surge in communal violence.
We call on all the parties to those conflicts to desist
from any action that will disturb the peace. We urge the
Government of South Sudan and leaders at all levels
to institute measures to address those intercommunal
conflicts, including through peace dialogues, in order
to address grievances between communities.
We commend the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) for its role in the protection of
civilians and in conducting key leadership engagements
in Jonglei, the Greater Pibor Administrative Area and
Juba, including facilitating the visit of a delegation of
influential Juba-based Dinka Bor leaders to Gadiang,
in Jonglei state, from 25 to 28 March. We believe
that such engagements help to build trust between
16/20

20/06/2022

communities at the grass-roots level, which is vital for
the peace process.
With regard to the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan, the A3 expresses grave concern about
the decision of the World Food Programme (WFP)
to partially suspend food aid to South Sudan due to
a funding shortage. The suspension of food aid will
lead to a third of the 6.2 million people in South Sudan
who were to receive assistance this year being denied
food aid. Climate change is also exacerbating the
humanitarian situation, with South Sudan facing severe
flooding, localized drought and conflict effects that
have left a large population food insecure.
The situation in South Sudan has been summed up
by the WFP’s Acting Country Director in South Sudan,
Adeyinka Badejo-Sanogo, who said:
“South Sudan is facing its hungriest year since
independence. We are already in a crisis, but we
are trying to avert the situation from becoming
more explosive”.
The international community should not allow this
young nation to face an explosive situation that could
break its core. Accordingly, the A3 calls on one and all
to support the people of South Sudan in overcoming
this humanitarian crisis through adequate funding of
its appeal.
Beyond the immediate provision of food aid, it is
important for the international community to increase
its development assistance to the country. The muchneeded reforms to help diversify the country’s economy,
promote agriculture and food security and develop
infrastructure will require significant international
resource support. We further urge South Sudan to take
advantage of this opportunity to start engaging with the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The A3 would like to conclude by highlighting
the following three points for the attention of Council
members and other Member States.
First, if we are to enable the Government to follow
through with the graduation of the necessary unified
forces, it is important that the international community
provide the needed financial and technical assistance in
order to equip the necessary unified forces to enhance
civilian protection.
Secondly, we urge the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the IGAD Special Envoy for South
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan, the head of the AU Mission in South Sudan
and the interim Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to continue
to offer their good offices in order to encourage the
parties to draft a mutually acceptable road map towards
the next elections.
Thirdly, because some such conflicts start at the
grassroots level, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the IGAD Special Envoy for South
Sudan, the head of the AU Mission in South Sudan
and the Interim Chairperson of the Reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission should
continue their efforts to engage the South Sudanese
authorities and all relevant stakeholders, including civil
society and women organizations, in order to address
the surge in intercommunal violence.
Finally, we would like to join the Secretary-General
in conveying our deep appreciation to the troop- and
police-contributing countries, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom and the uniformed
and civilian personnel of UNMISS for continuing to
work tirelessly towards peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and Ms. Ghada Mudawi, Acting Director
of Operations of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings. We welcome
the presence of the representative of South Sudan in this
meeting. I listened attentively to the statement made by
Ms. Lorna Merekaje. We are pleased to see continued
progress in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan.
On 3 April, the parties in South Sudan reached
an agreement on transitional security arrangements.
President Kiir Mayardit set up the command structure
of the necessary unified forces. South Sudan has
also completed the formation of the reconstituted
transitional national legislative assembly, launched
the process for establishing the Commission for Truth,
Reconciliation and Healing and formally presented the
constitution-making process bill. China welcomes those
important developments and appreciates the mediation
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
relevant countries of the region, the Sudan in particular.
The transitional period in South Sudan will come
to an end next year. It is hoped that all parties in South

S/PV.9067

Sudan will sustain the current positive momentum
and proceed in a steady and orderly manner to achieve
the objectives established for the transitional political
structure, security arrangements and economic reform.
With regard to the unique challenges facing the
country in implementing the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, the
international community should maintain the necessary
patience and provide constructive assistance, instead of
exerting excessive pressure, criticizing and imposing
sanctions.
I should point out that, while an important part
of the political transition, elections cannot resolve
every issue. The key lies in all parties in South Sudan
achieving reconciliation and reaching consensus on
various agendas to advance the political transition in
a concerted manner with a view to balancing national
stability and development.
The overall security situation in South Sudan
has been stable recently, yet interfactional and
intercommunal conflicts have occurred from time to
time, which calls for a tailored and integrated approach.
It is necessary to expedite the implementation of
transitional security arrangements and the formation of
necessary unified forces. The international community
should provide sufficient financial and material
support for those efforts. The Council should respond
to the appeal of the African Union by lifting the arms
embargo on South Sudan as soon as possible.
The United States continues to impose unilateral
sanctions on other countries, inflicting tremendous
harm on the people of those countries. Sanctions should
not be used as a tool for political ends. Double standards
should be abandoned. An increasing number of Council
members does not support the current sanctions regime
on South Sudan.
The intercommunal conflicts in South Sudan have
a long history and should be addressed by multiple
means, such as prevention, mediation, dialogue and
development. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/468) indicates that those conflicts are rooted
in competition over resources. The international
community should help South Sudan grow its economy,
improve people’s livelihoods and eliminate the root
causes of conflicts.
South Sudan’s economic reforms have achieved
some results. Its microeconomic situation remained

22-3900017/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

relatively stable. Nevertheless, the shortfall in
humanitarian resources remains large, and food
insecurity is acute, affecting an estimated 7.7 million
South Sudanese this year.
We call on the international community to
maintain and increase assistance to South Sudan and
scale up contributions to United Nations humanitarian
and development agencies. At the same time, the
international community should also focus on
helping South Sudan strengthen its own development
and capacity-building; fully respect its ownership
in economic development; unleash its potential in
agriculture, energy, infrastructure and other fields; and
help the people of South Sudan achieve self-reliance at
an early date.
China always stands with the people of South
Sudan. A number of major Chinese aid projects, such as
the Jur River bridge in Wau, the Juba Teaching Hospital
and radio and television broadcasting facilities, have
been under way or have been completed in succession.
China has also provided emergency food aid to South
Sudan, sent medical expert teams and provided supplies
and equipment to contain the pandemic. Together with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
we launched a pilot project in Eastern Equatoria state
to build the capacities of young persons and women
engaged in ecological agriculture, helping South
Sudan’s economic recovery and improving people’s
livelihoods.
UNMISS has done a great deal of work to
help implement the Revitalized Agreement and
protect civilians. China encourages UNMISS and
the Government of South Sudan to strengthen their
coordination and increase their communication and, of
course, supports aligning the mandate of UNMISS with
the national priorities and strategies of South Sudan, so
as to form synergy.
The safety and security of UNMISS peacekeepers
is essential for the Mission’s effective mandate
delivery. All the parties concerned should take practical
measures to contribute to the safety and security of the
peacekeepers and improve peacekeeping performance.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Ms. Ghada Mudawi and
Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their briefings. I also welcome
the presence of the representative of South Sudan at
today’s meeting.
18/20

20/06/2022

I would like to underscore three points. My
colleagues have already spoken about them, so I will
try to be brief.
First, we also welcome the agreement of 3 April
on the command structure of the necessary unified
forces. We note the positive role played by the Sudan
in achieving that agreement. We call on the Sudanese
authorities to allocate the necessary resources for its
implementation. The entire peace process depends on
security arrangements, in particular the holding of
elections, as well as the revision of the arms embargo.
Secondly, we call on all parties to agree on the
date of the elections and to begin their preparation
without delay. We welcome the establishment of an
electoral assistance team, as requested by the Security
Council. That team can only support the process, and
it is primarily up to the parties to agree on the date
and the next steps. In that regard, we regret the lack
of progress in adopting the constitutional and legal
framework for the elections and in establishing the
National Elections Commission. The adoption of a
legal framework for political parties is also essential. It
is up to the authorities to create the right conditions by
guaranteeing respect for fundamental freedoms.
Thirdly, the authorities must protect civilians
and humanitarian workers. Violence continues at an
alarming level and affects women and children in
particular. It is too often the result of local rivalries
between communities that are too often fuelled by
national political dynamics. In particular, we condemn
the violence committed in Leer county in April,
including atrocities that were attributed to the security
forces themselves. All the perpetrators must be brought
to justice, and the Security Council must adopt the
necessary sanctions.
We are concerned about the increase in restrictions
on the freedom of movement of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We call for greater cooperation
by the South Sudanese authorities.
Finally, in response to the emergency, the European
Union has increased its humanitarian assistance to South
Sudan from €42 million to €72 million in 2022. That
support will continue. At the same time, the authorities
must do more to protect humanitarian workers.
We also condemn attacks on humanitarian workers
and administrative harassment of United Nations and
22-39000

20/06/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9067

non-governmental organizations’ staff, at a time when
humanitarian needs are greater than ever.

adding preconditions for humanitarian actors to carry
out their work. That must end immediately.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.

Thirdly, we commend the work of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and urge the Government to
ensure the free movement of the Mission in order to
allow for the implementation of its mandate, and we
call on the Government fully to respect the status-offorces agreement.

I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom and Ms. Ghada Mudawi for
briefing the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan. My special appreciation goes to Ms. Lorna
Merekaje for her insightful remarks and her clear
recommendations today on how to move forward with
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and how
to help strengthen civil society.
We also welcome the presence of the representative
of South Sudan at this meeting.
I would like to focus my statement on four points.
First, we remain deeply concerned about the
grave human rights and security situation in South
Sudan. Particularly shocking is the significant
increase in gender-based violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence incidents, as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/468). Impunity
is the norm. What the country and its people need is
the opposite — strengthened and effective justice
and accountability. It needs real political will and the
resolve to move ahead. Therefore, we call on all leaders,
political actors and commanders to make fighting
sexual violence a priority.
Secondly, the people in South Sudan continue
to suffer from severe food insecurity and hunger,
violence, displacement and a lack of opportunities, as
we also heard from Ms. Mudawi. Climate change and its
affects have severe impacts on South Sudan. Creating
resilience will be key to improve the situation in the
future. At the same time, the humanitarian situation is
aggravated by violence and the global food crisis.
We express concern over the trend of increased
attacks on humanitarian workers and assets, including
the death of four humanitarian workers this year
and the looting of hundreds of tons of food and
life-saving supplies.
We call on the Government of South Sudan and all
other actors and leaders to ensure that humanitarian aid
can reach all people in need. We regret the fact that
the Government is creating bureaucratic hurdles and

Fourthly, while some progress has been made
on implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, the overall
implementation remains slow. The Secretary-General’s
benchmark report reflected the limited progress, and
the Panel of Experts summarized it in clear and very
sobering words.
We remain concerned about the delays
in implementing the agreement, the ongoing
intercommunal violence, the high levels of sexual
violence and the economic and humanitarian crises. We
call on all the parties to accelerate the implementation
of the agreement, particularly in relation to transitional
security arrangements and in the light of the end of the
transitional period, in February 2023.
In conclusion, it is difficult to see a way out of
the political gridlock. We therefore call on all actors
to step up their political will and agree on a date
for the elections, and keep in mind that the United
Nations stands ready to provide the necessary support
to the process should the Government request such
assistance. We express our strong support for regional
efforts as well as those of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to find a
way forward to bring peace back to South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to once again draw the attention of
speakers to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): I have a very
short statement.

22-3900019/20

S/PV.9067

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, I extend my congratulations to you, Madam,
and to your delegation on assuming the presidency
of the Council. I would also like to acknowledge and
welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom — Professor Haysom, as
he is known in South Sudan; Ms. Ghada Mudawi; and
our sister Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their presentations. I
wish also to thank the members of the Council for their
kind, welcoming words to my delegation.
We take note of the quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/468). Eight months from
now, the interim period and the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan will
come to an end.
We agree with the Secretary-General that no
party should take any unilateral decision that may
affect the future of stability in South Sudan at the end
of the interim period. The appeal for no unilateral
decision-taking ought to include the international
community as well. We hope that the next eight months
will be spent in close consultations by all parties to the
agreement, including the international community. In

20/20

20/06/2022

that regard, if the Council so decides, South Sudan will
welcome it to visit Juba and other places, as it has been
invited by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom.
Two weeks ago, a list of names of some senior
officials and individuals from South Sudan was
circulated on social media, purportedly compiled by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. The
news of that list indeed raised some concerns in South
Sudan. But we are thankful to have been assured by
some individuals from the Sanctions Committee itself
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan that that
list was fake. We are happy that it is actually fake and
not a serious consideration by the Council at this time.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-39000
