United Nations

A/RES/63/248

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 121

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2008
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/638)]

63/248. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December
1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 51/211 A to
E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A to E of 18 December
1998, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of
24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 56/287
of 27 June 2002, 57/283 A of 20 December 2002, 57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250 of
23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December 2004, 60/236 A of 23 December 2005,
60/236 B of 8 May 2006, 61/236 of 22 December 2006 and 62/225 of 22 December
2007,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested
the Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the
United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2008, 1 the
relevant report of the Secretary-General 2 and the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of the existing special arrangements governing the
recruitment of temporary assistance staff in the language services across the four main
duty stations, 3
0F

1F

2F

Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, 4
3F

Reaffirming the pertinent provisions relating to conference services in its
resolutions on multilingualism, in particular resolution 61/266 of 16 May 2007,

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/63/32).
A/63/119 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
3
A/63/94.
4
A/63/509.
2

08-48567

A/RES/63/248

I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.

Welcomes the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2008;1
0H

2.
Approves the draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the
United Nations for 2009, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences, 5 taking into
account the observations of the Committee and subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
4F

Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the
3.
calendar of conferences and meetings for 2009 that may become necessary as a result
of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its sixty-third session;
Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the
4.
arrangements referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A, 54/248, 55/222,
56/242, 57/283 B, 58/250, 59/265, 60/236 A, 61/236 and 62/225 concerning Orthodox
Good Friday and the official holidays of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, and requests all
intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when planning their meetings;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any modification to the
5.
calendar of conferences and meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the
mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
Notes that accurate, timely and consistent information provided to the Fifth
6.
Committee during its informal consultations facilitates the decision-making process in
the Committee;
II
A.

Utilization of conference-servicing resources

1.
Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must be
given to the meetings of Member States;
2.
Notes that the overall utilization factor at the four main duty stations
remained at 83 per cent in 2007, the same as in 2006, which is above the established
benchmark of 80 per cent;
Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their
3.
programmes of work in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conferenceservicing resources, and requests the Committee on Conferences to continue
consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their
conference-servicing resources;
Recognizes that late starts and unplanned early endings seriously affect the
4.
bodies’ utilization factor owing to the amount of time lost, and invites the secretariats
and bureaux of bodies to pay adequate attention to avoiding late starts and unplanned
early endings;
Notes that the percentage of meetings held by the bodies entitled to meet
5.
“as required” that were provided with interpretation services in New York in 2007 was

_______________
5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/63/32),
annex II.

2

A/RES/63/248

88 per cent, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the provision
of conference services to these bodies through the Committee on Conferences;
6.
Recognizes the importance of meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of
intergovernmental bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far as
possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and other
major groupings of Member States are met;
Acknowledges with appreciation the improvement in the percentage of
7.
meetings held by regional and other major groupings of Member States that were
provided with interpretation services at the four main duty stations, which increased to
84 per cent in 2007 from 76 per cent in 2006, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to employ innovative means to address the difficulties experienced by
Member States owing to the lack of conference services for some meetings of regional
and other major groupings of Member States and to report thereon to the General
Assembly through the Committee on Conferences;
Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the
8.
planning stage to take into account the meetings of regional and other major groupings
of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their programmes of work
and to notify conference services, well in advance, of any cancellations so that
unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to
meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States;
Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with several General Assembly
9.
resolutions, including resolution 61/236, section II.A, paragraph 9, in conformity with
the headquarters rule, all meetings of Nairobi-based United Nations bodies were held
in Nairobi in 2007, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session through the Committee on Conferences;
10. Notes with appreciation ongoing promotional efforts and initiatives
undertaken by the management of the conference centre of the Economic Commission
for Africa, which led to a continued upward trend in utilization of the premises in
2007;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore means to increase the
utilization of the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, bearing in
mind the headquarters minimum operating security standards, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
12. Calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States to adhere to the
guidelines and procedures contained in the administrative instruction for the
authorization of the use of United Nations premises for meetings, conferences, special
events and exhibits; 6
5F

13. Emphasizes that such meetings, conferences, special events and exhibits
must be consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations;
14. Regrets the voting incident in the seventh meeting of the Fourth Committee,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure prompt and effective communication
between the Secretariat and members of the General Committee;

_______________
6

ST/AI/416.

3

A/RES/63/248

15. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the measures taken to avoid the
recurrence of the above-mentioned situation in his next annual report on the pattern of
conferences;
B.

Impact of the capital master plan, strategy IV (phased approach),
on meetings held at Headquarters during its implementation

1.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that implementation of the capital
master plan, including the temporary relocation of conference-servicing staff to a
swing space, will not compromise the quality of conference services provided to
Member States in the six official languages and the equal treatment of the language
services, which should be provided with equally favourable working conditions and
resources, with a view to receiving the maximum quality of services;
Requests all meeting requesters and organizers to liaise closely with the
2.
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat on
all matters related to the scheduling of meetings to allow maximum predictability in
coordinating activities at Headquarters during the construction period;
Requests the Committee on Conferences to keep the matter under constant
3.
review, and requests the Secretary-General to report regularly to the Committee on
matters pertaining to the calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations
during the construction period;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate information
4.
technology support for conference services, within the existing resources of the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, in order to ensure
their seamless operation throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
Notes that during the implementation of the capital master plan, a part of
5.
the conference-servicing staff and information technology resources of the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management will be temporarily relocated to a
swing space, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate
support, within the existing resources of the Department, to ensure continued
maintenance of the information technology facilities of the Department,
implementation of the global information technology initiative and delivery of quality
conference services;
Requests the Secretary-General to consult Member States on initiatives that
6.
affect the utilization of conference services and conference facilities;
III
Integrated global management
1.
Notes with appreciation the progress achieved in the implementation of the
global information technology project, aimed at integrating, across duty stations,
information technology into meetings management and documentation-processing
systems, and the global approach to harmonizing standards and information technology
and sharing good practices and technological achievements among conference services
at the four main duty stations;
Also notes with appreciation the initiatives undertaken in the context of
2.
integrated global management aimed at streamlining procedures, achieving economies
of scale and improving the quality of conference services, and in this regard stresses
the importance of ensuring equal treatment of conference-servicing staff as well as the
principle of equal grade for equal work at the four main duty stations;
4

A/RES/63/248

3.
Emphasizes that the major goals of the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management are to provide high-quality documents in a timely
manner in all official languages in accordance with established regulations, as well as
high-quality conference services to Member States at all duty stations, and to achieve
those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next report on the pattern
4.
of conferences information about the financial savings achieved through
implementation of the integrated global management projects;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are
5.
given equal treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions
and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of services, with full respect
for the specificities of the six official languages and taking into account their
respective workloads;
Reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of
6.
technologies used in all duty stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all
official languages;
Requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all
7.
important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all six
official languages on a priority basis, so that these archives are also available to
Member States through that medium;
Reiterates that the satisfaction of Member States is a key performance
8.
indicator in conference management and conference services;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that measures taken
by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to seek the
evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to
them, as a key performance indicator of the Department, provide equal opportunities to
Member States to present their evaluations in the six official languages of the United
Nations and are in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, through the Committee
on Conferences, on progress made in this regard;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore best practices
and techniques in client satisfaction evaluations and to report on a regular basis to the
General Assembly on the results achieved;
11. Welcomes the efforts made by the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of the
conference services provided to them, and requests the Secretary-General to continue
to explore innovative ways to systematically capture and analyse feedback from
Member States and committee chairpersons and secretaries on the quality of
conference services and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the
Committee on Conferences;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly apprised of
progress made in integrated global management;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the administrative
policies, practices and procedures of conference services developed on the basis of
recommendations of the task forces are in full compliance with relevant General
Assembly resolutions;

5

A/RES/63/248

IV
Documentation and publication-related matters
1.
Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official
languages of the United Nations;
2.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters;
Stresses that matters related to conference management, including
3.
documentation, fall within the purview of the Fifth Committee;
4.
Reiterates with concern its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that
the rules concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents in all six official
languages are strictly respected as regards both the distribution of printed copies and
the posting of parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System and the
United Nations website, in keeping with section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution
55/222;
Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution
5.
59/265 that the issuance of documents in all six official languages on planning,
budgetary and administrative matters requiring urgent consideration by the General
Assembly shall be accorded priority;
Requests the Secretary-General to improve the documents planning process
6.
to ensure that the Fifth Committee receives, in the six official languages, all documents
necessary for its consideration of a particular item, including reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, within the established time
limits;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to direct all departments of
7.
the Secretariat to include the following elements in their reports:
(a)

Summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

8.
Reiterates its request that all documents submitted to legislative organs by
the Secretariat and intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action
have conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take steps to improve the
9.
quality and accuracy of meeting records in all six official languages through full
reliance in the preparation and translation of those records on sound recordings and
written texts of statements as they were delivered in the original languages;
10. Expresses its deep concern at the unprecedented, high level of late
submission of documentation by author departments, which, in turn, has a negative
impact on the functioning of intergovernmental bodies, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, through the
Committee on Conferences, on urgent measures taken to improve overall timely
submission, in particular by those submitting entities with submission compliance
below 90 per cent for three years in a row;
11. Notes with concern the unprecedented delays in the issuance of documents
in 2008, which heavily impacted on the work of the General Assembly, and requests
6

A/RES/63/248

the Secretary-General to elaborate more effective accountability measures to ensure
that both authors and their senior managers provide for the timely issuance of
documents in all six official languages and to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session through the Committee on Conferences;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance his efforts to address the
problem cited in paragraph 10 above, particularly as experienced with documentation
considered at the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee during the sixtysecond session of the General Assembly, including convening the task force formed to
study this matter, to provide an interim report on documentation concerning
peacekeeping financing, to report on the results of these consultations and actions
taken to solve this problem to the General Assembly, through the Committee on
Conferences at its organizational session in 2009, in order for the Fifth Committee to
consider the report at its second resumed session, and to provide a comprehensive
report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session through the Committee on
Conferences;
13. Recognizes the increase in the workload of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the growing volume of reports and other
documents before it, decides to authorize the Advisory Committee to meet for two
additional weeks in 2009, on an exceptional basis, invites the Advisory Committee to
continue considering how to better address its workload, and decides to discuss the
number of weeks in a session of the Advisory Committee in the context of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the associated expenditures in
the second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
15. Stresses the importance of the concordance principle in order to ensure
equally valid texts of resolutions in all six official languages;
16. Recalls, section C, paragraph 12, of its resolution 54/248 and section III,
paragraph 13, of its resolution 55/222, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to publish, prior to its sixty-fourth session, an updated version of the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations in the six official languages of the
Organization;
V
Translation and interpretation-related matters
1.

Recalls rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;

2.
Requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to ensure the highest
quality of interpretation and translation services in all six official languages;
3.
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General make sure that the
terminology used in the translation and interpretation services reflects the latest
linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure the
highest quality;
Takes note of the recommendations provided by the Office of Internal
4.
Oversight Services of the Secretariat in its report,3 and requests the Secretary-General
to ensure their full implementation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session through the Committee on Conferences;
1H

Reaffirms section IV, paragraph 3, of its resolution 59/265, section IV,
5.
paragraph 4, of its resolution 60/236 B, section V, paragraph 3, of its resolution 61/236
7

A/RES/63/248

and section V, paragraph 3, of its resolution 62/225, and reiterates its request that the
Secretary-General, when recruiting temporary assistance in the language services,
ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are provided with
equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving
maximum quality of their services, with full respect for the specificities of each of the
six official languages and taking into account their respective workloads;
Expresses continued concern at the high vacancy rate in the interpretation
6.
and translation services at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and requests the
Secretary-General to address this as a matter of priority through, inter alia, assistance
from Member States in advertising and facilitating the conduct of competitive
examinations to fill these language vacancies;
Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretariat to fill current
7.
and future vacancies at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the information
contained in paragraph 107 of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of
conferences, 7 and requests the Secretary-General to consider further measures aimed at
decreasing the vacancy rates in Nairobi and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session;
6F

Also notes with appreciation the initiative to seek a long-term solution to
8.
the high vacancy rates in language services in the United Nations Office at Nairobi by
engaging the services of a consultant to explore the possibilities of providing enhanced
training programmes to potential professional translators and interpreters on the
African continent, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on efforts in this regard;
Requests the Secretary-General to examine all aspects concerning
9.
recruitment and retention of language staff at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, to
make recommendations in this regard and to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session through the Committee on Conferences;
10. Recognizes the acute problems faced by the United Nations Office at
Geneva in providing conference services as required, as described by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 103 of his report on the pattern of conferences,7 and in this
connection requests the Secretary-General to address these problems and to make all
efforts to meet requirements in the context of the latest surge of meetings;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to seek a more effective strategy to fill
current and future language post vacancies at all duty stations in a timely manner, takes
note of paragraph 92 of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of
conferences,7 and also requests the Secretary-General to hold the competitive
examinations for the recruitment of language staff referred to in that paragraph, as well
as other examinations beyond 2009, well in advance so as to fill current and future
language post vacancies at all duty stations in a timely manner, and to inform the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session of efforts in this regard;
2H

12. Welcomes the measures taken by the Secretary-General to address more
effectively the demographic situation and the issue of succession planning, in
particular by resorting to temporary assistance in dealing with acute needs, as well as
enhancing internal and external training programmes, developing staff exchange
programmes among organizations and participating in outreach to institutions that train

_______________
7

8

A/63/119 and Corr.1.

A/RES/63/248

language staff for international organizations, and requests him to continue to take such
measures;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue exploring the possibility of
introducing a traineeship programme in order to attract and train young professionals
for a career in the language services of the United Nations;
14. Notes with concern the challenges presented by the demographic situation
in the language services, as described in paragraphs 91 to 95 of the report of the
Secretary-General;7
15. Notes that the intention of the General Assembly, in adopting section VI,
paragraph 1, of its resolution 57/305 of 15 April 2003, was to increase the availability
of retired language staff for employment with the language services, and requests the
Secretary-General to clarify and in turn implement the provisions of that paragraph
concerning the ceiling on United Nations earnings of United Nations language staff
retirees;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek evaluation by Member
States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, including through the
language-specific informational meetings held twice a year, and to ensure that such
measures provide equal opportunities to Member States to present their evaluations in
the six official languages of the United Nations and are in full compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the accuracy of
translation of documents into the six official languages, giving particular significance
to the quality of translation;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to
enhance translation quality in all six official languages, in particular for contractual
translation, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, at all duty stations, adequate
staff at the appropriate level, with a view to ensuring appropriate quality control for
external translation, with due consideration of the principle of equal grade for equal
work;
20. Takes note of the information on the impact of freelance recruitment on the
quality of interpretation at all duty stations contained in paragraphs 101 to 105 of the
report of the Secretary-General,7 and requests the Secretary-General to report on the
issue to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session through the Committee on
Conferences;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session on the experience, lessons learned and best practices of the main
duty stations in performing quality control of contractual translations, including on
requirements relating to the number and appropriate level of the staff needed to carry
out this function.
74th plenary meeting
24 December 2008

9
