TWENTY-SECOND

st

YEAR

MEETING: 25 October 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 37 1) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent’ Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8207);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel

addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8208)

...........

1

S/PV. 137 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of ;the Official Recordi of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-FIRST

Held in New York, on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Senjin TSURUOKA

(Japan),

25 October

MEETING
1967, at 3 p.m.

3. The draft resolution reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
SociaIist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

[The speaker continued in English.]
“The Security Council,
“Gravely concerned over recent military activities in the
Middle East carried out in spite of the Security Council
resolutions ordering a cease fire,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 371)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

“Huving heard and considered the statements made by
the parties concerned,

2. The situation in the Middle East:
[a) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council

“Taking into consideration the information on the said
activities provided by the Secretary-General in documents
S/7930/Add143,, Add.44, Add.45, Add.46, Add.47,
Add.48 and Add.49,

(S/8207);

(b) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8208).

“1.

Condemns the violations of the cease tire;

“2. Regrets the casualties and loss of property resulting from the violations;

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

“3. Reaffirms the necessity of the strict observance of
the cease-fire resolutions;

The situation in the Middle East:
fa) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8207);
16) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8208)

“4. Demands of the Member States concerned to cease
immediately all prohibited military activities in the area,
and to co-operate fully and promptly with the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.”
[The speaker resumed in French.]

4. I should like to know if there is any objection to
priority being given to the draft resolution which I have just
read out. Since there is no objection, I take it that the
Council has decided to give priority in the voting to this
draft resolution and I now put it to the vote.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken at the 1369th meeting,
and with the consent of the Council, I propose to invite the
representatives of Israel, the United Arab Republic, Jordan
and the Syrian Arab Republic to take places at the Council
table and to participate without vote in the discussion.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr.
M. A. El Kony
(United
Arab
Republic),
Mr. A. M. Rifa? (Jordan) and Mr. A. Daoadj) (Syria) took
piaces at the Council table.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1

5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now call
upon the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a statement.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The Security Council will now continue its discussion of the item on
the agenda. I apologize for such a long delay but, as a result
of the consultations which took place this morning and this
afternoon, following the adjournment of our last meeting, I
am happy to be able to announce that agreement has been
reached on the text of a draft resolution.

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken particular
note of the expressions in the course of the current debate
relating to the possible strengthening of the United Nations
1 See resolution 240 (1967).

I

the two sides it is being contemplated, on the sungestion
the Chief of Staff, General Bull, that body &mour to
protect the upper torso, in addition to the steel helmets
already in use, should be provided to the observers, The
cost for that item would not be great.

Observer Operation in the Suez Canal sector. I too have
been giving some thought to this matter for some time
because, in view of the number and serious nature of the
breaches of the cease-fire-which has been called for by the
Security Council-since the observers have been stationed in
the sector in pursuance of Ihe Security Council’s consensus
of 9110 July 1967 [S/8047/,”
it has become increasingly
apparent that the operation needs strengthening in certain
ways.

11. May I take this occasion also to call to the attention of
the members of the Council that in the absence of any
Security Council action, such .as its resolution 236 (1967)
adopted on 12 June relating t’o the Syrian sector and its
consensus of 9/10 July relating to the Suez Canal sector,
there is no United Nations observation operation beyond
token representation in the Israel-Jordan and IsraelLebanon sectors. Thus for those sectors there is at present
no machinery to assist in implementing the Security
Council’s cease-fire resolutions 233 (1967) and 234 (1967)
of 6 and 7 June, which apply to all sectors.

7. At present there are forty-three United Nations observers stationed in the canal sector. They man nine
observation posts and engage in limited patrolling in jeeps.
They have no means of observing by air or sea and their
mobility is limited. The canal itself is about eighty-eight
miles long and the observers must be deployed on both
sides, on its east and west banks.
8. I am in the process of consulting with General Bull, the
Chief of Staff of UNTSO, on means of enabling the
Observer Operation in the canal sector to become more
fully effective in maintaining the cease-fire. It is immediately apparent that steps aIong the following lines are
necessary if proper effect is to be given to the Council’s
consensus.

12. Naturally I shall seek and expect the full co-operation
of the parties in these measures to strengthen the cease-fire
operation and make it more effective.
13. Mr. LIU (China): When I inscribed my name on the
list of speakers this morning I intended only to make some
general observations, after listening to the many statements
made last night. Now, after the initiative taken by the
representative of Nigeria with his statement this morning
(1370th
meeting],
with which I was in agreement, and
after the happy result which has emerged during the recess,
I find it unnecessary, indeed redundant, to make those
general observations.

(1) To increase the number of observers to ninety in order
to increase substantially the patrolling function and the
number of observation posts. Such an increase, of
course, would require expanding, in consultation .with
the parties, the national distribution of’ the observers.
(2) To double the number of observation posts on each
bank of the canal, which means increasing the present
total from nine to eighteen.
(3) To acquire and make use of possibly as many as four
small patrol crafts for United Nations observerspatrolling in the waters of the canal, the Bitter Lakes and
adjacent waters.
(4) To acquire and use four small helicopters with operational and maintenance personnel for the purpose of
increasing the mobility of the observers and for aerial
observation, two to be stationed on each bank of the
canal.

14. I should like, however, if you will permit me, Mr.
President, to take this opportunity to offer to you the best
wishes of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency at this critical hour. I know of few men better
equipped, by both diplomatic experience and juridical
acumen, to deal with a situation such as that with which
the Council is confronted today. I know also how encp
getically you have been working in the past weeksin search
of a formula for the preservation of peace in the Middle
East. It is regrettable that the intensive and constructive
consultations which you have been carrying on have been
overtaken by events which cannot but aggravate an already
highly intense and explosive situation.

9. More specific requirements and details will result from
the consultations now under way with the Chief of Staff
and will be reported in due course..All such measures, of
course, would relate exclusively to the Security Council’s
cease-fire resolutions and its consensus, and therefore
would necessarily be of a provisional and temporary nature.
The strengthening of the Observer Operation in the Suez,
sector along the lines thus indicated would entail, of course,
a substantial increase in the cost of the operations beyond
the estimated cost set out in my report of 4 October
/S/8182/.
The estimated financial implications will be
submitted to the Council as soon as the necessary calculations are completed.
10. Because the observers in the Suez sector have on
several occasions been caught in exchanges of fire between

15. My delegation, in common with others, profoundly
.regrets the heavy losses of life and property which have
resulted from breaches of the cease-fire which, in our view,
can have no justification in any circumstances. My delegp
tion therefore welcomes and wholeheartedly endorsesthe
resolution which the Council has just adopted. It is the least
the Council should and must do as a first and essential step
in the present crisis, for unless the cease-fireis scrupulously
observed and respected a climate conducive to politics1
settlement cannot be created. It is the fervent hope of mY
delegation that the resolution unanimously adopted bY the
Council will help to restore tranquillity in the Middle East
and prevent a renewal of hostilities, thus paving the WsYfor
a durable settlement.

2 Incdrporated
in the record of the 1366th meeting of the
Council. SW also Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council,
1967 pp. 6-7.

16. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
Syria to make a statement.
2

17. Mr, DAOUDY (Syria): Thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing me to take the floor. You may remember that I
had asked to speak this morning before the motion of
suspensionwas presented, Nevertheless my delegation is of
tile opinion that our point of view regarding the Israel
aggressionagainst the United Arab Republic should be put
on record, despite the lateness of the hour.
18. While the United Nations was celebrating yesterday,
24 October, its twenty-second birthday with music and an
appeal for more harmony among the peoples of the world,
and while most governments and nations were in their
respective territories rejoicing on that occasion, and manifesting the hopes of mankind, the Israel occupying forces
were giving, on the same day and inside Arab territory,
their own version of a celebration of the birthday of the
United Nations, which had given birth to Israel, by the
destruction of Arab lands, the mass killing of Arab civilians,
the razing to the ground of industrial installations, and the
sowing of havoc, terror, death and annihilation, all in
execution of a well-conceived plan which falls within the
pattern of war crimes for which the Zionist Israelis are now
world-famous.
19, Indeed, the Defense Minister of Israel himself, General
Moshe Dayan, referring to the sinking of the destroyer EiZat
in the territorial waters of the United Arab Republic and
announcing his new plans for bloody revenge, stated: “We
shall know how to consider the actions, step by step.” And
on the night of 22 October an Israel military analyst ended
his commentary on the same event, over Radio Israel, by
recalling that: “Israel has never fdiled sooner or later to
settle her accounts.”
20,. Thus the stage was set by Israel warmongers for the
massacre of 24 October, the birthday of the United
Nations. Reports in the Press today give an idea of the
extent of the damage to civilian life and property caused by
that wanton aggression. If there is any doubt about the
responsbility for that premeditated aggression, representatives have all read and some have quoted, while
unfortunately others have ignored, what was reported by
the Secretary-General on 24 October:
“Observation post (OP) Mike at Port Tawfiq reported
that Israel Defence Forces initiated artillery fire at 1231
hours GMT, 24 October, at oil refinery south-west of Port
Suez.“[S/7930/Add.44.]

21. In the same report we are informed by the SecretaryGeneral that:
“At 1235 hours GMT, cease-fire proposal for 1330
hours GMT was made. UAR accepted at 1300 hours
GMT; Israel stated communications were distorted and
cannot confirm. At 1325 hours GMT senior Israel
representative stated he received distorted message from
Israel Defence Forces headquarters that Israel would
agree to cease-fire at 1530 hours GMT .” [Ibid.]
22. The inherent sadism of this stand, so typical of Zionist
behaviour, need hardly be emphasized, for on the morning
of 5 June the Israel system of communication proved itself
deadly accurate during the Israel attack on Arab countries.

Were the Israelis, in their sneak attack, unable yesterday
to communicate an order to their commanding officer to
accept a cease-fire.7 Two hours were indeed needed to
complete to the full their plan for destruction, annihilation
and mass killing. The only thing which has not been
reported in the Press is that the great Rabbi of the “new
Israel” did not blow the horn addressing prayers for this
new victory over the Arabs,
23. As is customary, and following the usual pattern, the
Israel representative launched an appeal for peace with the
Arab States. He said:
%rael again declares that it is ready right here and
now, tonight, under this very roof, to meet representatives of the United Arab Republic and of any other
Arab State and to discuss with them all measures designed
to ensure security for all and to lay the basis for a
peaceful future.” (1369th meeting, para. 35.j
24, I shall not use my own words to expose the hypocrisy
and utter cynicism of the Israel representative. Suffice it to
mention here that such appeals are always made at
gunpoint and under conditions of conquest and duress. But
the final, definitive and convincing answer to Mr. Rafael
comes from the lips of his own Prime Minister. On 20
October, Lc Mande, under the headline “Mr. Levi Eshkol
rejects the idea of negotiations with the United Arab
Republic through the Mixed Armistice Commission”, reported the following:
“ ‘Israel is not in favour of “reviving” the IsraelEgyptian Mixed Armistice Commission’. Mr. Eshkol was
here referring to a statement by Sir Dingle Foot, the
former United Kingdom Minister, in which he said that
President Nasser would be ready to undertake negotiations with the Israel representatives within the Commission. ‘We have no intention of resurrecting the dead,’
the Israel Prime Minister said.
“...
“There is no question of Israel accepting the bargain
proposed by the Arabs: to withdraw the Israel troops
from the occupied territories in exchange for an end to
hostilities. ‘The cessation of a state of belligerency, which
in itself constitutes a hostile and illegal act, does not
deserve any special reward,’ Mr. Eshkol said. He added,
‘My reply to all these proposals is therefore negative. We
emerged victorious from a war which was imposed upon
us. To propose the withdrawal of our troops in exchange
for the cessation of the state of war is to propose
rewarding those who have committed a hostile and illegal
act.’ “3
Those words speak for themselves: the rejection of the
United Nations machinery still in force, rejection of all
efforts at peace, and a new doctrine of belligerency; the
Israelis, having practised acts of belligerency for the last
twenty years, now formulate their wars into a doctrine.
25. When the destroyer EiZat was sunk within the
territorial waters of the United Arab Republic and some of
3 Quoted in French by the speaker.

its crew were killed or were not found, a great deal of
publicity was given to that incident so as to arouse the
humanitarian feelings of American public opinion. The
representative of the United Arab Republic told us yesterday that his country indicated to United Nations authorities its readiness to help to rescue the survivors. Victims are
to be regretted anywhere, from any cause. But one fact
struck our attention, and that was that when the American
ship Liberty was attacked, its sailors assassinated by the
Israel air force and by torpedo boats, the same media of
information,
together with some other quarters, hushhushed the news and played it down in a way diametrically
opposed to what they have done with regard to the sinking
of the Eilat. One wonders what the reason is for this
discrimination. Are the missing Israel sailors whose ship was
engaged in an aggressive mission, to be mourned in this
country while its own sons, killed in cold blood by Israel
military forces, are passed over in inexplicable silence?

29. As members of the Council will recall, the Soviet
delegation yesterday submitted its own draft resolution
[S/18212/, which we consider fully justified and appropriate
in view of the new acts of provocation by Israel, However,
we did not oppose the draft resolution submitted earlier hY
you, Mr. President [para. 3/, since we realized the need to
meet the wishes of some members who thought that the
Council should produce a unanimous decision.
30. Since the Security Council has unanimously adopted a
resolution on the question raiesed by the United Arab
RepubIic, there is no need to put to the vote the draft
resolution submitted by the delegation of the Unioa of
Soviet Socialist Republics. The nature and meaning of the
decision which the Security Council has just taken are quite
clear, and it requires no lengthy comment. Firstly, it
condemns the violation of the cease-fire. Of course, no one
is in any doubt as to what violations are meant or who
committed them: it wasIsrael, and Israel alone, and no one
else, which deliberately and arrogantly violated the de.
cisions of the Security Council regarding the cease-fireand
the cessation of hostilities.

26. The Israel representative in his statement yesterday
referred to the fact that the destroyer Eilat was hit twice
and became disabled when the third and forth hits came
through. He alluded to the fact that the destroyer was in no
position to continue its journey when it had been sunk. It is
clear that the Egyptian authorities, while engaging in
defensive activities against a naval &aft which had previously sunk some of their boats, were not in a position to
ascertain the outcome of the battle. What about the tens of
thousands of Egyptian soldiers in the aftermath of the June
war who struggled for days and days in the waterless desert
without being helped or rescued by the Israel helicopters
and aircraft which were circling over their heads and, in
some instances, strafmg them?

31. The Security Council in fact convened an urgent
meeting last night for the very purpose of considering the
new act of aggression committed by Israel in the Suez area,
which resulted in heavy casualties and serious damage in the
United Arab Republic. The Council has quite rightly
expressed its regret about this matter in the decisionithas
just taken, although we have alwavs thought from the very
beginning, and we do now, that the Council should
condemn these barbarous acts committed by Israel’s armed
forces and should demand compensation for the trernen.
dous losses sustained by the United Arab Republic,

27. The Israel representative in the same statement
quoted, among other things, Damascus Radio as calling on
the Arab people to resist Israel occupation of Arab land.
Does it surprise the Tel Aviv authorities that the Arabs are
determined to resist foreign occupation of their territory?
Is it an unusual phenomenon in the history of peoples the
world over that foreign occupation should be resisted and
condemned? How many peoples whose representatives are
sitting around this table were part of the valiant resistance
movements which arose during the Second World War to
combat the Nazi occupation‘? Do I have to mention here
the fact that the heroic peoples of the Soviet Union,
France, BUlgarid, Denmark, and, before them, Ethiopia,
gave the world a magnificent lesson on how to resist
occupation and liberate their homeland? The Arabs are no
different, and will never be different, and their resistance
will not cease until their occupied territory is cleared of the
invading troops whose presence and method are reminiscent
of the fascist occupation of Ethiopia and the Nazi German
occupation of European countries.

32. The fact that the Council’s decision applies only to the
Israel invaders is quite clear from the reports submitted by
the Secretary-General of our Organization.
33. ,At the 1369th meeting of the Council, the Israel
representative, followed by certain other members of the
Council, attempted to build some sort of story around the
sinking of the Israel destroyer Eilat. Such stories are only
possible under the cover of darkest night. Now that the
Council has before it the Secretary-General’s report
[S/793O/Add.49],
it is quite clear that once again Israel,
and Israel alone, bears full responsibility for the crime and
that it was Israel which violated the Security Council
decision by sending its destroyer into the territorial waters
of the United Arab Republic.
34. The Secretary-General’s report states that the vessel
Eilat “was 11 nautical miles in north-eastern direction from
Port Said” [ibid./, that is to say, within the territorial
waters of the United Arab Republic. In this conn&cn it
should be recalled that in resolution 236 (1967), adopted
on 12 June 1967, the Security Council affirmed that “its
demand for a cease-fire and discontinuance of all military
activities includes a prohibition of any forward military
movements subsequent to the cease-fire”.

28. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated frm Russinn): In its statement at the
emergency meeting of the Security Council on 24 October
/1369th meetiizg], the Soviet delegation had the opportunity to express its views on the new serious violation
by Israel’s forces of the Security Council decisions on the
cease-fire in the Suez area. We now consider it necessary
fully to reaffirm that position.

35. It is quite clear that this applies fully to the Israel
naval vessel sent forward into the territorial watersof the
4

.

United Arab Republic, an act of provocation. The legitimacy of the actions taken by the United Arab Republic
forces to defend that State’s sovereign interests and security
is just as clearly demonstrated.

only because they are violations of our resolutions, but also
because they delay our efforts to make a further step
towards peace in the area and prejudice them.
44. Once again, and rightly so, the. Council has refused to
take a one-sided view of the situation or to adopt one-sided
resolutions. Instead, WC have dealt in a balanced, evenhanded manner with incidents involving two of the parties
in the area. The resolution fully meets the spirit, language
and intent of our draft resolution of yesterday [S/8213]
which, as a result, need not be acted upon. We are gratified
that this agreement among all members of the Council has
been possible,

36. So the attempts of certain representatives to shield the
aggressor-and this is borne out in the documents-are now
completely unmasked, and all the statements of the Israel
representative are, as was to be expected, falsehoods from
start to finish.
37. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation considers it its
duty to point out yet again to the Security Council that
there can be no peace in the Middle East so long as Israel’s

aggressive forces continue to occupy the territory of the
Arab States.

45. We continue to believe that the events of the last few
days are tragic in themselves and have a much greater
significance. As I stated to the Council last night, these
events underscore what we have all known for a long time:
that what the Near East needs is not just a cease-fire,
essential though it is, but new steps towards a durable,
permanent and just peace.

38. As the situation in the Suez Canal area and on the
Israel-Syrian and the Israel-Jordanian fronts becomes more
tense, the Security Council has a duty seriously to consider
the need for prompt political settlement in the Middle East.
39. It is a. matter for deep regret that so far neither the
Security Council nor the General Assembly has taken the
decisions necessary to liquidate the consequences of Israel’s
aggression against the Arab States. At the same time it
should be noted that the majority of the members of the
Security Council have indicated in their statements that the
situation in the Middle East is extremely tense and that all
efforts should be devoted to restoring peace and a normal
state of affairs.

46. We join in the demand that the incidents which gave
rise to the last two Council meetings will not be repeated,
and again express the conviction that this Council must
begin promptly to help move towards a just settlement of
all of the outstanding questions between the parties. And
we believe that in some of the statements that were made
last night there is the framework by which such a
settlement can be concluded.
47. We take note of the constructive statements of the
Secretary-General today in announcing his willingness to
take appropriate steps to strengthen the Observer Operation
in the canal sector in order to make it more fully effective
in maintaining the cease-fire. We regard the steps he has
announced that he will take to be fully in accord with his
responsibilities to strengthen UNTSO and in full keeping
with his established authority under the Charter and
established practices of the United Nations, We, therefore,
fully support this initiative, so necessary if we are to move
to conditions of peace in the area.

40. It can therefore be deduced that there is an almost
unanimous feeling that consultations must be speeded up
with a view to working out a decision which will lead to a
political settlement in the Middle East and guarantee peace
and the lawful rights of peoples.
41, Of course, the Soviet delegation did not fail to take
note of the statement which the Secretary-General has just
made to the Council and we, who share his concern about
tile complex situation in that area, are ready to give all due
attention to the considerations which he put forward.

48. Reference has been made to the Press coverage in my
I reject completely the statement that our free
Press does not cover al1 incidents and events in the area
fully and objectively. We have only to look at the headlines
and the copy of yesterday and today, as well as past
coverage of all events, to disprove this statement. We will
place our Press, for its objectivity, against the Press of any
nation in the world. We Americans place great stock in our
free Press, for with us freedom of speech and of the Press is
the matrix of all of our liberties, Thomas Jefferson, one of
our greatest presidents, once said that if we had to choose
between a free Press and government, a free Press is to be
preferred. Fortunately, in the United States, we do not
have to make this choice. We have both a freely selected
government and a free Press, and take pride in both.

42. We also note the Secretary-General’s statement that
there are many details on which we do not as yet have
reports. Moreover, we think it should be emphasized that
the question of increasing the number of observers must be
examined by the Council in accordance with the terms of
reference granted it under the Charter, We refer to the
statement made by the Secretary-General concerning the
increase of the number of United Nations observers in the
Suez Canal area and other measures to verify compliance
with Security Council decisions regarding the cease-fire and
the cessation of hostilities.

country.

43. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): It is a
positive achievement of the Council that it has gone on
record today, as my delegation urged last night 11369th
meeting/, to reaffirm the cease-fire orders of the Council
and to demand mutual and scrupulous adherence by the
parties to the cease-fire and an end to all military activities
between them. The Council has also acted with vigour and
wisdom in condemning all violations of the crease-fire-not

49. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): During last night’s debate
members of the Council were virtually unanimous in
asserting that this was not the time to pursue recriminations
and acrimony. At the end of my statement yesterday
[1369th meeting/, I expressed the same sentiment, and I
5

-

was difficulties of communication with forward units. Tl
delay in effecting the cease-fire yesterday at the he,
proposed by the United Nations observer was due ta tl
fact that a communications centre of the Israel forcesha
been hit early at the beginning of yesterday’s incident
thus interrupting communications with command posts(
several units.

suggested a positive and constructive approach designed to
ensure security for all,
50. In that spirit, I will not deign to answer the slanderous
allegations poured out by the representative of Syria. They
are as stale as they are false, they are as vile as they are
perverse. A representative of a country whose leaders in the
Second World War were among the most ardent Nazi
collaborators, who had worked and prayed for the Nazi
victory, comes here to praise the valiant anti-Nazi resistance
fighters. This is the height of perversity and it is a low in
defilement of the resistance fighters as well as the Nazi
victims. I am obliged, however, to the Syrian representative
for having repeated my appeal for a pea.ceful meeting
between Israel and Arab representatives. I would have
preferred that instead of referring to my appeal the
representative of Syria had responded to it.

55. With regard to the sinking of the destroyer &lat, it hi
been alleged here thdt it was inside the territorial waters(
the United Arab Republic. We have already giver] tl,
vessel’s position and that can easily be checked, ~1
representative of India referred to forward military mav,
ments subsequent to the cease-fire but, as is well knew
and not denied by anybody, the vesselwas immobilized ss
crippled after it was first hit and was not capable of 8s
movement in any direction. There cannot be any s;
planation whatsoever for the cowardly second kssfl
strike, except that it wasprompted by deliberate aggressi\
intention. Contrary to the allegations of the representat!\
of the United Arab Republic, the Eilat was not spse&
towards Port Said and was not in the territorial watersc
the United Arab Republic when it wasfirst attacked, It wa
on its normal patrol on the high seas,following a routin
course well known to the United Arab Republic authorith

5 1. Neither will I argue here, at this hour, with Ambassador Fedorenko, whose monolithic and one-sided views of
events are by now a well-established tradition.
52. I have asked to speak at this stage simply to comment
on certain statements which do not conform with the facts.
Regarding yesterday’s incident, it was alleged that the
reports of General Bull established that Israel forces were
the first to open fire. I wish to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to paragraph 4 of General Bull’s
report which states that: “At about 1430 hours local time
(1230 hours GMT), small arms fire was opened by UAR
forces”-towards Israel positions-“toward
the area of the
Mitla road junction.”
[S/793O/Add.45.]
It is the usual
practice of the observers to communicate these reports even
when they have themselves been unable to observe that
there has been a breach of the cease-fire. In many instances
reports originating exclusively with the United Arab Republic authorities have been thus transmitted to the
Security Council. I refer, for instance, to the exchange of
firing
on 27 September
reported in document
S/7930/Add.40,
based on a United Arab Republic communication, on which General Bull commented that the
origin of the fire was not observed by the United Nations
military observers.

56. This morning the representative of Nigeria suggestc
[137&h meeting/ that further investigation could be usefr

to determine the vessel’s position when it wassunk, Iha\
not heard any similar suggestion from the representativeo
the United Arab Republic, but if such an investigationI
desired my Government is prepared to co-operate fully i
it. My Government is confident that such an investigatio
will corroborate that the ship was sunk on the high seas,
57. The United Arab Republic has furnished no reason&l
explanation for this outrageous attack on an Israel vessel,
1
has given no convincing reason why its armed forcesstrcl
the ship with their first missile and then deliberately
returned to the attack an hour and a half later whentile
ship was already helpless. The true explanation the United
Arab Republic has published in its Pressand radio, that this
attack was a part of the continued Egyption warfareagainsl
Israel.

53. Since the July meetings of the Security Council a
number of incidents have been reported which establish
that the United Arab Republic has opened tire mostly from
positions inside urban areas and has provoked heavy
artillery duels. Basing myself on Egyptian communiqu6s,
United Arab Republic artillery was heavily engaged in
yesterday’s action. And going by their unsubstantiated
accounts of damage inflicted on Israel, there is no doubt
that very heavy and substantial United Arab Republic
forces were involved in yesterday’s action.

58. I wish to reiterate here in this Council that it is the
firm policy of my Government to see this warfarestopped.
We have accepted the cease-fire resolutions. Their verybasis
is mutuality and reciprocity. If the cease-fireis observedon
this premise, it can be the point of departure on the read10
a durable peace.
59. Mr. DAOUDY (Syria): The representative cf the
United States referred to the Press in the United Statessad
expressed pride in its coverage and what he c&d “it*
independence”. It is natural that Mr. Goldberg shouldtab
pride in the coverage by his country’s Pressif he is sohappy
about it. But one point remains unanswered and thstisthe
fact that the New York Press, at least, hush-hushedIhe
Israel attack against the ship LibertJj during the JuneWV
an attack which resulted in the killing of over for’y
American sailors, We would very much like to kt~~wwfia’
was the result of the inquiry, if there Was aflY*Tyr
question remains valid because Mr. Goldberg in oneOflur
statements promised us the result of the inquiry,

54. It has been argued that Israel was at fault in not
agreeing to put the cease-fire into force at the hour
proposed. There is nothing unusual about it. There are a
number of General Bull’s reports in the records of the
Security Council which show that the United Arab Republic refused to accept the time proposed for the
cease-fire by the observers and, what is more serious,
continued firing after the agreed hour. The reasongiven for
the default, and accepted by the United Nations observer,
6

*

60. As for the representative of the Israel hordes, let me
remjnd him of what a famous Jewish author said about the
criminal behaviour of the Israel authorities towqrds the
Arab people. Mr. Moshe Menuhin, father of the famous
violinist Yehudi Men&in, wrote a very well-known letter in
which he commented on the killing of the Arabs by the
Israelis and said-1 am paraphrasing-that his Judaism was
not the Judaism of the napalm, bomb and ma& extermination.
61. As for the ridiculous accusation that the leaders of
Syria collaborated with the Nazis during the Second Worl$
War, I should like to refresh the memory of this gentleman.
Syria was not independent during the Second World War,
we were under French Mandate. So there was no point in
saying that we collaborated with Germany. I wish to
remind him that it was Winston Churchill himself who for
the first time in history compared the Zionists with the
Nazis. Winston Churchill, who was considered a very great
Zionist, when they announced to him the killing of Lord
Moyne coined that statement. He said “They are behaving
like Nazis” and we maintain that description.

and more life lost as a result of the long-standing conflict in
the Middle East points up most eloquently the urgent task
still confronting the Security Council.
66. The Council’s pre-eminent task now is to discharge its
responsibilities for the solution of the problem of the
conflict in the Middle East. In the words of the Foreign
Minister of Japan, Mr. Miki, on 22 September 1967 during
the general debate at the twenty-second session of the
General Assembly, our task is to seek “an equitable
solution of the problem on the basis of justice and
ieason” ,4 My delegation i- fully prepared to do everything
possible to co-operate with other members to that end.
67. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Taking into account
the remarks made by the representative of the Soviet Union
a little while ago, and the generalfeeling among members of
the Council, I suggest that the Council could now agree to
adjourn on the understanding that you, Mr. President, will
continue to hold informal consultations, All of us are aware
of the time and effort that you put into these consultations
until we met here last night. In our opinion, the consultations should not only proceed further, but should be
intensified in order that the Council should be able to
resume its consideration of the grave situation in West Asia
Bt the earliest possible date.

62. The PRESIDENT: As no other representatives have
indicated their wish to speak at this time I should now like
to make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of JAPAN.

68. Mr, IGNATIEFF (Canada): I should just lilce to say
two things. First, the Canadian delegation welcomes very
much the remarks of the Secretary-General. As I understand it, he is now in the process of getting a report from
General Odd Bull about the details of the requirements. I
shall, of course, report what he has to say about the general
outline of the requirements.

63. The Japanese Government has followed very closely
and with increasingly grave concern the repeated firing
incidents in the Suez Canal area during the past few
months. These incidents have taken place in contravention
of the cease-fireresolutions adopted by the Council. In the
interval since then, no progress has been made towards the
establishment of a permanent and just peace in the Middle
East.

69. Secondly, I would say with regard to the resolution
that various interpretations have been made of it. I think
that the resolution speaks for itself and, as far as the
Canadian delegation is concerned, I wish to associate myself
with the observations made by you, Sir, and also by the
representative of India, namely, that it can only be useful if
the parties observe the cease-fire and the Council bends all
its efforts to find a basis for a solution of a peaceful kind
based on sending a representative to the area, within
guidelines on which, we hope, we shall agree by negotiation,

64. Those sporadic incidents culminated in full”scale military operations on 21 and 24 October and, seemingly, have
not yet come to a complete halt. It is particularly
regrettable that this most recent exchange of major military
hostilities should have taken place while the non-permanent
members ,of the Council were engaged in intensive efforts,
in consultations among themselves and with others, to find
an acceptable formula for the comprehensive solution of
the various problems that are involved in the Middle East
conflict. The details of these deplorable incidents of the
past few days have been clearly explained in the SecretaryGeneral’s notes based on the information supplied by
General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of UNTSO. To General
Bull and his co-workers striving to maintain the cease-firein
the field we owe a debt of gratitude.

70. The PRESIDENT (trunslated
porn French):
With
regard to the point just raised by the Indian representative,
which, I believe, was supported by the Canadian representative, I should like to say that I intend to remain in
contact with all the members of the Council so that our
consultations on the question now before us may continue
with‘ the necessary urgency,

65. My delegation is happy with the resolution that was
adopted unanimously a little while ago. But once more this
is only a fiirst step. The clear duty of the Security Council
at this juncture is to measure up to its solemn responsibilities by finding that formula which, acceptable to the
parties concerned, will establish a durable and just peace in
the Middle East. While the Council is engaged in this task,
SCEI~U~OUS observance by the parties of the cease-fire is
essential. The sad fact that more blood is now being shed

71. The date of our next meeting will be announced
following these consultations,
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.
4 Official Records of rhe General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1563rd meeting, para. 54.

7

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications,may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
des
depositaires
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section

KAK

llOJIYLIMTb

be obtained
ar write

Nations
Unies
sont
entier.
Informez-vour
der venter,
New York

tl3AAHMR

CONSEGUIR

from bookstores
and distributors
,a: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

PUBLICACIONES

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

UNIES

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAl.lMti

&lqIlfi
~IOilillO Iij’IlIlTh
H I~llll~lilllrlX
~fLU’~3llll~X
hlO~~lT~!
CIlpUlli~
06 Il3~llllllllX
n ll~lllCll
lillIlilillOM
O~~KllIl73~l(llH
OihC@lllCllllI~IX
Ikll(llil,
~Cr;lWl

II
II0

Xhiem.
DE LAS

NACIONES

Los publicociones
de las Nociones
Unidas
estdn
en todas
porter
del mundo. Conrulte
a su librero
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

throughout
New York

en vente
dans
les libroiries
et lee agencer
aupres
de votre
libroirie
au adresser-vous
a:
au Get&e.

OPrAHM3AuMH

~h~illllllI
O~~~~lllll3ZlI~Illl
06%C~llllCllllI~lX
;LPCIIT(‘TIILS
110 DCCS ~ll~~Oll>LX JlIl[)ll.
H&~~:IIIIIC
11.111 IllIIlIIITC
II0 Zl~llCCj’:
Il~~O~~iliC
lI:~~aliru”I,
Iho-rlopi
nm
COMO

PUBLICATIONS

(or equivalent

en venta
o dirljare

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerior
a: Naciones

y casar distribuidoras
Wnidos,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

1432 l-November

1970-2,100
