asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6941

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6941st meeting
Monday, 25 March 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Di Luca
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Afande
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-fifth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2013/124)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26898 (E)

*1326898*

S/PV.6941

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-fifth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2013/124)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Karin Landgren, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Staffan
Tillander, Chair of the Liberian country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and representative of
Sweden, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/124, which contains the twenty-fifth progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: As members have seen in the
report of the Secretary-General before the Council
(S/2013/124), Liberia continues to make significant
progress as it approaches the 10-year anniversary of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Since that August
in Accra in 2003, Liberia has shown the world its
commitment to lasting peace, and the world has shown
its commitment to peace in Liberia. The resilience that
Liberians have demonstrated and their commitment
to moving the country forward are inspiring and bode
well for the hard work that still lies ahead.
Two months ago, Liberia hosted the High-level
Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda in a
meeting that illustrated how far the country has come.
In the words of Foreign Minister Augustine Ngafuan, it
has moved from pariah to partner, from problem child
to problem-solver. As he said, that is indisputably a
remarkable achievement.
The report before the Council describes the security
transition that began last October and in which the

2

Government will progressively take over responsibilities
from the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I
will say more about that, but let me begin by updating
the Council on the other critical processes that UNMIL
is mandated to support and which will need to advance
in tandem with the Mission’s drawdown or, preferably,
somewhat ahead of it.
The Constitution Review Committee, appointed
last September, has been preparing options for that
defining reform process. Only last week, President
Johnson-Sirleaf agreed to add a year to the Committee’s
original short timeline. As the Secretary-General noted
in his April 2012 special report (S/2012/230), many of
Liberia’s underlying tensions are perpetuated by the
provisions of the Constitution. That makes it especially
important to conduct an inclusive and participatory
reform process. UNMIL is an active partner in that
process, which, on the United Nations side, also
includes the Department of Political Affairs and the
United Nations Development Programme.
Even with the extension, the timeline is brisk. The
Constitution Review Committee is expected to present
its recommended revisions to the legislature by mid2014. By law, at least 12 months must pass between
the legislature’s action on the recommendations and
a popular referendum, which would now be held by
late 2015. Electoral reform is also moving ahead. The
National Elections Commission has held regional
consultations on a draft electoral law and is discussing
it with the legislature. The draft law features measures
to ensure the independence of the Commission, which
was a major call of the opposition during the 2011
elections.
The Land Commission has been conducting public
consultations on a historic draft land rights policy that
covers private, customary, Government and public
land tenure. The policy will be considered at a national
validation conference next month, with the involvement
of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
and UNMIL, and will form the basis of a new land
rights law. That creates an opportunity for Liberia to
move a step closer to addressing one of its principal
sources of instability and conflict.
Liberia’s first justice and security hub, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund as part of Liberia’s
peacebuilding plan, was launched on 12 February in
Gbarnga, Bong County. Justice and security hubs have
the potential to bring Liberians significantly better

13-26898

S/PV.6941

access to justice and security services, and the Gbarnga
hub will continue to need close attention even as the
focus turns towards the development of hubs two and
three, in Grand Gedeh and Maryland counties. Later
this year, a review will be conducted of the impact of
the first six months of hub one, but, so far, a major
lesson is that services should be rolled out in tandem
with the infrastructure. The plans for hubs two and
three are being adjusted to provide an earlier focus on
services.
There has been some progress in the area of
accountability. The Supreme Court upheld five
decisions of a judicial inquiry commission that had
issued significant penalties, including the suspension
of two judges, for corruption. In addition, the first case
prosecuted by the Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission
resulted in a conviction against a former InspectorGeneral of the Liberia National Police (LNP) and four
other defendants for embezzlement of funds intended
for the LNP.
However, issues of corruption and tensions between
branches of Government have remained at the forefront
of political life. In February, the legislature ordered
the Montserrado county superintendent detained in
connection with allegations related to the misuse of
development funds. The legislature then accused the
acting Mayor of Monrovia of thwarting the detention
and proceeded to a vote of no confidence against both
women, who subsequently resigned. That incident has
contributed to the undercurrent of mutual distrust
among Liberia’s primary political actors, a climate
that can colour the country’s ability to take forward
processes critical to democratic governance and longterm stability, including constitutional reform and the
fair and transparent management of natural resources.
Liberia’s border with Côte d’Ivoire remains a
significant focus for the Government and for UNMIL.
Operation Restore Hope, conducted jointly by the
Liberia National Police, the Bureau of Immigration
and Naturalization and the Armed Forces of Liberia,
has continued since June 2012. Despite a number of
challenges, the operation has proved a credible and
responsive presence along the border. Following crossborder attacks last August, the border was largely calm
for seven months, although clashes on the Ivorian side
in January and March led to several deaths. In the past
week, with reports of armed attacks in some Ivorian
villages close to the border, increased attention is being
given in Liberia to avoiding any cross-border activity

13-26898

that could be linked to such attacks. National security
agencies, the UNMIL force and the United Nations
police have carried out robust patrols, some jointly, in
strategic areas of Grand Gedeh, River Gee and Nimba
counties.
There has been no sign of any new refugee
influx, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has also reported growing
numbers of Ivorians returning home, with more than
5,200 so far in 2013. UNMIL and the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire continue our inter-mission
cooperation at all levels and are working actively with
both Governments to encourage the development of a
common border strategy that takes cooperation beyond
immediate security measures.
Ultimately, problems with political, economic and
social roots require solutions of broad scope. We expect
a follow-up quadripartite discussion, between the two
countries and the two missions, next month to move
this dialogue forward. I have just been informed that
this is confirmed for 5 April.
In January, President Johnson-Sirleaf noted in her
annual message that “the cleavages that led to decades
of war still run deep”. Efforts over the past decade
have helped the country recover from conflict and set
the stage for a transformed nation. But to realize that
potential, those deep cleavages will need commensurate
attention to institutionalize the foundations for Liberia’s
long-term stability.
As part of working towards those long-term
solutions, in December the President held a national
conference to launch the national Vision 2030 - a
long-term political and economic agenda, including
a fair political system, security, the rule of law and
national reconciliation. For the first five years of
the realization of the Vision, the Government has
presented a development plan - successor to the first
poverty reduction strategy - called the Agenda for
Transformation, as well as a National Reconciliation
Road Map, to sequence Liberia’s enormous range of
competing priorities.
The Agenda and the Road Map outline Liberia’s
path towards equitable growth and institutional
development, and reflect the close links between
reconciliation and development. The challenges are
considerable, and I would draw particular attention
to the need to achieve responsible and accountable
exploitation and management in the race for resource

3

S/PV.6941

extraction, where concessions, abuse and allegations
of corruption, already a source of significant tension,
have the potential to act as a catalyst for conflict. The
Government is conscious of those dangers and has
taken some steps to mitigate the risks, but much more
remains to be done.
At this point, let me read into the record a correction
to paragraph 9 of the report of the Secretary-General,
namely, that one deputy to the Auditor-General
resigned, not two.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.6830), planning for
the security transition has moved to implementation.
UNMIL has begun its next military drawdown under
resolution 2066 (2012), and now, for the first time
since 2005, UNMIL’s military is not permanently
deployed in every one of Liberia’s 15 counties. So far,
military personnel have vacated two counties and will
leave another two next month. Meanwhile, the Nepali
formed police unit (FPU), the first of three new FPUs,
deployed in full today. During the rainy-season hiatus,
the Government and UNMIL will continue detailed
planning and preparations for the next phase. The
drawdown and reconfiguration have been possible
through the hard work of the joint Government-UNMIL
transition working group, which primes all national
security actors to assume their added responsibilities
and to make effective use of the former UNMIL
facilities.
In October, UNMIL handed over the first of its
facilities to national authorities at Robertsport, in Grand
Cape Mount County, and a second facility, in Foya,
near the Guinean and Sierra Leonean borders in Lofa
County, was handed over in January. Between October
and April, UNMIL’s military will have withdrawn from
seven sites, of which the Government has taken over
four. This first phase of transition has been relatively
successful, but, from a security perspective, also
relatively undemanding. Even so, the Government
of Liberia has been stretched to deploy sufficient
resources, equipment and personnel to make good use
of the vacated sites and to cover the recurrent costs of
maintaining them. UNMIL and the Government will
soon hold a retreat to cost out transition needs through
mid-2015 and for the Government to plan how to make
those resources available.
As the Mission hands over locations and security
functions, the United Nations and partners continue
to invest in the development of Liberia’s justice

4

and security sectors. To gauge progress and inform
strategic planning, several studies are under way,
including a review, funded by the Peacebuilding Fund,
of management and accountability mechanisms within
the police, judiciary and prosecution, and a baseline
capacity assessment of the Liberia National Police.
Over the coming months, UNMIL and national partners
will also be part of a security sector reform mapping
exercise to identify gaps, and tomorrow a national
criminal justice conference, supported by UNMIL, is
opening, to review and make recommendations for the
improved functioning of all components of the criminal
justice system.
The Peacebuilding Commission’s (PBC) active
engagement, including last month’s joint visit by the
Liberia and Sierra Leone country configurations, has
generated sustained attention and discussion on these
critical justice and security issues. The PBC is a valued
partner in bringing Liberia’s peacebuilding issues to
the fore, and Ambassador Tillander’s continued efforts
in mobilizing the required resources have been vital.
Women and girls in Liberia continue to face a
high incidence of sexual and gender-based violence,
including rape, often of young children. As Liberia
grapples with those issues, I would like to congratulate
Liberia’s Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Marjon Kamara, for the landmark resolution
reached by the Commission on the Status of Women
under her chairmanship, in which members commit
to the prevention and elimination of violence against
women and girls.
Addressing the Legislative Assembly in January,
President Johnson-Sirleaf spoke robustly of the need
for economic justice and the spread of opportunity for
all, saying that Liberia would never develop unless
Liberians worked together as a team. When Liberians
tell me what reconciliation means to them, most of
them talk about employment and better services.
Lasting peace will require fairness and inclusion for
all Liberians in their country’s progress. It is more
important than ever, as UNMIL draws down, to move
swiftly to address the historic and current cleavages
that are so widely acknowledged. The United Nations
and all of Liberia’s partners continue to stand by in
support of the legitimate and democratic aspirations of
Liberians, who also tell us repeatedly that they have no
wish to return to war.

13-26898

S/PV.6941

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tillander.
Mr. Tillander: The visit of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to Liberia and Sierra Leone last
month, with participation from Australia, Bangladesh,
Canada, Egypt, Japan, Kuwait, Norway, Sweden and
the United Kingdom, demonstrated the commitment
to peacebuilding in Liberia and the region. I am very
grateful for the warm welcome and support from the
Government, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) and the entire United Nations system.
The visit allowed us to consult with the Government
on how to accelerate progress on security sector
reform, the rule of law and national reconciliation, in
accordance with resolution 2066 (2012). I appreciate
this opportunity to report to the Council on those
aspects. During the visit, the first regional justice and
security hub was inaugurated in Gbarnga. This is one of
the many steps needed to advance Liberia’s progress in
extending services, justice and security to communities
around the country. This is an essential component of
institution-building in Liberia and for consolidating
mutual trust and respect between the State and its
people. As President Johnson-Sirleaf stated at the
launch ceremony,
“The opening of this first hub, in the nation’s
heartland, is confirmation that we mean what we
say about decentralizing services to all parts of
this country. The presence of this hub, and of the
others to follow, will ensure access to justice and to
quality security service for all Liberians.”
Efforts should continue to ensure that the provision
of quality justice and security services is a reality.
We count on the Government of Liberia to make the
appropriate provisions, including planning and budget
allocations for recurring costs and delivery of services.
At the same time, we must now focus on the services
and activities that should be provided through the
second and third hubs, located in Zwedru and Harper.
We have agreed with the Government that a year from
now, the PBC will visit and assess the range of services
in place and offered to the people in the surrounding
communities.
This focus on implementing and providing
services quickly is very challenging. The Government
must establish a budget for recurring costs, training

13-26898

and deployment; the United Nations Development
Programme must start to implement the hubs’ service
components; gender advisers, judges, outreach and
public services should be quickly put in place; the
United Nations Office for Project Services must without
delay provide innovative infrastructure solutions, some
of them temporary; financing committed through
the Peacebuilding Fund should be made available
as indicated, with a focus on facilitating the speedy
delivery of services. Applying lessons learned from the
Gbarnga hub is essential; if we get this right, the hub
concept may serve as a model for other countries.
But the hub concept must be implemented within a
holistic, coordinated and balanced approach to justice
and security, including the entire rule-of-law chain.
The outcome of the review of the Justice and Security
Joint Programme will help strengthen its effectiveness
and its function in setting priorities. The result should
provide a basis for a comprehensive approach, with
agreed indicators and benchmarks in support of
Government actions that should also guide the United
Nations system and bilateral partners. Government
ownership is of fundamental importance. In line with
the statement of mutual commitments, and as a sign of
its commitment, Liberia has increased the allocation
for justice and security in this year’s budget. Its timely
disbursement will be the basis for implementing
programmes, ensuring partners’ full support and
keeping step with UNMIL’s transition.
Work on a police law is under way under the
leadership of the Minister of Justice. It has been given
the highest priority and includes the professionalization
of the police and the chain of command as well as proper
oversight and complaint mechanisms. The PBC will be
prepared to continue to assist in identifying creative
approaches to fill specialized UNMIL posts, using
the various tools available and relevant new funding
mechanisms.
National reconciliation is another core peacebuilding
priority. That is also an area where there is a need for
leadership and resolve. As the Commission discussed
with the Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Blamoh
Nelson, in a video teleconference last week, various
strands within the National Reconciliation Road
Map should now be implemented in an inclusive and
coordinated manner. The role and mandate of the various
institutions and actors involved in the implementation
still need to be clarified. Government funds allocated
should be made available in a timely manner, and

5

S/PV.6941

financing mechanisms based on the Road Map will
offer opportunities for international partners to support
coordinated implementation. Exchanging experiences
with other countries that have been in similar situations
could also promote the reconciliation process. The PBC
can offer a platform for facilitating such exchanges and
for promoting third-party commitments of necessary
resources.
The Minister of Gender and Development,
Ms. Julia Duncan-Cassell, participated in a PBC
configuration breakfast meeting during the session of
the Commission on the Status of Women, and reminded
us of the measures that are needed to prevent genderbased violence, such as working with men and women
and ensuring women’s participation in decision-making.
The Peacebuilding Fund and UN-Women have initiated
discussions to help identify areas needing support, and
such efforts should be encouraged. In order to support
various groups of youth, including women and girls, the
United Nations system, together with the international
financial institutions and bilateral partners, should
work with the Government and civil society to address
gaps in that area.
Regarding land and resources, representatives of
civil society expressed concern during the PBC’s last
visit about the lack of community participation, the
limited role of women and the fact that some concessions
do not necessarily lead to improved livelihoods for the
host communities. There should be further support and
encouragement for Government efforts to strengthen
laws, policies and institutions aimed at resolving

6

existing disputes and preventing the mismanagement of
land and natural resources, including measures to stop
the misuse of private-use permits, for example, and to
bring those responsible to justice.
Finally, I welcome the cooperation between the
Government and the PBC in addressing the mutual
commitments made, starting in November 2010, and
renewed and adopted last week, after the second review.
The Government has demonstrated its commitment
by increasing its efforts, including through budgetary
provisions, to support justice, security and national
reconciliation. The PBC is committed to working
with the Government to implement the statement of
mutual commitments and to align it with Government
priorities and peace- and State-building goals, thus
avoiding duplication, ensuring effective coordination
and channelling resources more efficiently in support
of the Government’s peacebuilding objectives. That
approach will help stakeholders focus on critical issues
and provide an environment conducive to the transition
and eventual drawdown of UNMIL. I look forward to
the intensification of our efforts and the full support of
the Security Council, and I stand ready to report back
to the Council on progress made.
The President (spoke in Russian):
Mr. Tillander for his briefing.

I thank

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. I now invite members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

13-26898
