222

General Assemhly - Thirl~·-eighlh Session

"ReaJjirming its previous rcsolutions and dcusions
on the question of Western Sahara, and in particular
AHG/Res.103 (XVIII) of27 Junc 1981.
"1. Tak<'s note of the report of the lmplcmentat1on
Committec of Heads of Sta te on Western Sahara:
"2. Urges the parties to the confltct, the Kingdom of
Morocco and the POLISARIO Front, to undertake
direct negotiations with a view to hringing about a
cease-fire to create the necessary conditions for a peaccful and fair referendum for self-determination of thc
people of Western Sahara, a referendum without any
administrative or military constraints, undcr thc auspices of the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations, and calls on the Implcmcntation Committee to ensure the obscrvancc of thc ceasc-firc:
"3. Directs the lmplementation Committee to meet
as soon as possible and, in collaboration with the partics
to the conflict, to continue to work out the modalities
and ali other details relevant to the implementation of
the cease-fire and the conduct of thc rcfercndum in
December 1983;
"4. Requcsts the lJnitcd Nations, in conjunction
with the Organization of African Unity, to providc a
peace-keeping force to be stationed in Western Sahara
to ensure peace and security during thc organization and
conduct of the referendum:
"5. Mandates the lmplcmentation Committec, with
the participation of thc United Nations, to takc ali necessary measures to ensurc the propcr implementation of
this resolution;
"6. Rcquests thc Implemcntation Committee to
report to the Assembly of Heads of State and Government at its twentieth session on the result of the referendum with a view to enabling the Assembly at that session to reach a final decision on ali aspects of the
question of Western Sahara;
"7. Decides to rema in seized with thc question of
Western Sahara:
"8. Requests the lmplementation ( 'ommittee in thr
discharge of its manda te to take account of the proceedings of the eighteenth and nineteenth ordinary sessions
on the question of Western Sahara and to this end
invites the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to make available the ful! records of thc
said proceedings to the Committee:
"9. Welcomes the constructive attitude of thc
Sahrawi leaders in making it possible for the nineteenth
ordinary session to meet by withdrawing from it voluntarily and temporarily."
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessar)
steps to ensure that the United Nations participates effectively in the organization and conduct of the referendum
and to report to the General Assembly and the Security
Council on this subject and on the measures requiring a
decision by the Council;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity with a view to the implementation of the pertinent
decisions of the Organization of African U nity and of the
present resolution;
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
4 Official Record., o.f the Uencra/ .t.1.11•111/J/r. f /1111r-eixhth Scs.,wn, Sup¡,fc

ment No. 23 (A/38/23), chaps. lil a11d XVI.
5 /bid.., Thirty-eighth Ses.1w11. Fourth ( '0111111111,·c 1 '>th meeting, para, .''•
32.

Sahara as a mattn of priority and to rcport thereon to the
( ieneral Asscmhh at its thirty-ninth scssion.
86/h plcnary meeting
7 Dccemhcr 1983

38/41.

Question of American Samoa

Fhc General ·11.w111hlr.
l!am1g considcrcd thc question of American Samoa,
J/aring c.\w11111cd thc relevant chapters of the report of

the Special Committec on the Situation with regard to the
Implcmentation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 4
Rccalling its rcsolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Indeprndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
rcsolutions and dccisions of the United Nations relating to
American Samoa.
Ta/.:.ing into a,·count the statement of the representative
of the administcring Power relating to devclopments m
.f\merican Samoa.'
Conscious of the nced to promote progress towards the
full implementalion ofthe Declaration in respect of American Samoa.
Noting 11·ith appreciation the continued participation of
the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee in regard to American Samoa, thereby enabling it to
conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of
the situation in the Territory,
Rciterating thc view that it remains the obligation ofthe
administering Power to carry out a thorough programme
of political education so as to ensure that thc people of
American Samoa are made fully aware of their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting that the Office of Economic Development and
Planning ofthc Government of American Samoa is implementing a five-year economic development plan, focusing
on economic d1vcrsification, land use, housing, banking
and tourism, for the benefit of the people of the Territory,
A warc of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of American Samoa and
stressing the neccssity of diversifying the economy of the
Territory as a matter of priority in order to reduce its
dependence on tluctuating economic activities,
A1indfúl that l Jnited Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the willingness ofthe administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa;"
2. Reafjirm.1 the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reitera/es the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy impler, lhid.. '/'h1rtr-c1gi11h Sc.111<Jll, Sup¡,lemellt No.

23 (A/38/23), chap. XVI.

VI l.

mentation ofthe Declaration contained in General Asscmbly resolution 1514 (XV). which fully applies to American
Samoa;
4. Calls upon the (iovcrnmcnt of thc U nited Sta tes of
America, as the administcring Power, to take ali nccessary
steps, taking into account the frcely expressed wishes of
the people of American Samoa, to expedite the process of
decolonization ofthe Territory in accordance with the rclevant provisions ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations and
the Declaration;
5. Reafjirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the people of American Samoa
are kept fully informed of their inalienable right to sclfdetcrmination and independcnce, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Reitera/es its rccmnmendation that, in accordance
with the expressed wishcs of the peoplc of American
Samoa, as reflected in thc report of thc second Political
Status Commission, the Chief Justiee and Associate Justices be appointed by the Governor and approved by the
Legislature, a proeedure which could be facilitated by the
fact that a growing number of American Samoans are
qualified lawyers;
7. Reaffirms thc responsibility of the administcring
Powcr, under the Charter, for thc- cconomic and social
devclopment of the Territory;
8. Ca/Is upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government and within thc- framework
of the five-year economic devc-lopment plan covering the
period 1979-1984, to continue to help to strengthen and
diversify the economy of American Samoa in thc interests
of the people of the Territory;
9. Urges the administering Power to continuc to facilitate close relations and co-operation between the peoplc of
the Territory and their neighbours and between the territorial Government and the regional institutions to enhance
further thc cconomic welfare of the pcoplc of American
Samoa;
1O. Urges the administering Powcr, in co-operation
with the freely elected representatives of American Samoa,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures to ensure their right to own and dispose
of those resources and to establish and maintain control of
their future development;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate
time should be kept undcr review;
12. Requcsts thc Special Committee to continue the
consideration of this question at its next scssion, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate time and in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
X6th pfenary meeting
7 Dcccmlwr /983

38/42.

Question of Guam

The General AS\'emhlr.
llaving cnnsidered the question of Guam.
Having examined the relcvant chapters of the report of

the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countnc~ and Peoples, 7
7 lhid., chaps. IIL IV and '\ VII

ZB

Resolutions adoptcd on the reports of the Fourth C'ommítk<·

Rccalling its resolu11011 1) 14 (X V) ,)r 14 1kcember
1960, containing the Dcclarat1on on thc (ira11ti11g of 111dcpendence to Colonial Countrics and Pcoplcs. ami ali other
resolutions and deeisions of thc 1 lnitcd Nations rclat1ng to
(iuam.
llarmg hcard thc statement of the I cprescntat I H' <'I the
administering Power,'
Notlllg 11·ith apprcna/1011 thc rnntinucd active partKipation of the administering Power in the work of tlw Spccial
Comm11tee in regard to (iuam. therchy enabling it to conducta more informed and meaningful cxammation of thL'
situation in thc Tcrritory with a view to accclerating the
process of dccoloni;,ation towards the f'ull and spccdy
1mplementation of thc Dcdaration,
,Vot111g that a referendum on politirnl status was organ1zcd in the Territory, thc l1nal phasc of which was hcld on
4 Septembcr 1982,
Recafling ali relcvant rcsolutions of thc l lnited Nat1,ms
relating to mílitary bases and 111stallat1ons in eolo111al ami
Non-Self-( ioverning T erritorics,
Not111g the grcat potential for di, er~1fyi11g and dn dop
111g thc cconomy of Guam olli::rcd h} romnwr.-ial lishmg.
agriculture and thc dcvclopmcnt ol tlw transportation
industry,
Bcar111s: 111 mind that an ohstaclc to the econom1c devt>lopment ofthe Territon has heen thc uncertainty concernmg land held by the federal authorit1es.
-l1mrc of the spccial nrcumstanccs or thc geograph1eal
location and cconomie conditions of(iuam and the Tll'LTS·
sity of diversifying the ccnnomy of thc Tcrri11iry as a malter ofpriority and noting thc great potcntial for d1vl'fsilication offered by commcrcial fishing, agriculture and the
devclopment of the transportation industry,
M111dfúl that United Nat1ons vi!>iting missions providc
an effective means or asccrtaining the situatinn in the
small Territories and exprcs~ing its ~atisfaction at the w11lingness ofthe administering Power to rcceivc visiting missions in the Terntories under its administration,
l. Arprovcs the chapter or thc report or the Special
Committee on the Situation with rcgard to tlw lmplementation of the Dcclaration ,m the ( ,ranting of I ndcpcndcnre
to Colonial Countries and Pcoplcs rclating to ( ,uam: s
1
Rcaftinm the inalienable right of thc peopk of
Ciuam to self-dctermination and indepcrHknce in ,·,mformity with the Dedaration on thc <,ranting of lndq,cndence to Colonial Countrics and Pcopks, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV):
.t Rcaf!inns it.1· co11rict1011 that surh foctors as terntorial si;,e, geographiral location, size of population and lim ited natural resourccs should in no way delay tlw 1mplemcntation of the Declarat1011 contained in Grncral
Assembly rcsolution IS 14 (XV). which fully applies to
Guam:
4. lakl's note of thc fact that 111 thc rl'fcrendum on
political status, hcld on 4 Scptember 1982, 75 pcr cent of
thc voters voted in favour of Commonwealth status in
association with the lJnited States of America and. in that
connection. mindful of the principies contained in the
Charter of the ll nited Nations and in tht' Declaration. ca lis
upon the administering Power, in co-operation with the
territorial Governmenl, to cxpcdite the proccss of
decoloni;ration in accordance with tht' expre\sed wishl's of
the people of thc Territnry:
5. Reaf/irms its strong e, 1/l'll'//011 t hat thc admmistering Power must ensure th.it 1111litary bases and installations
do not hinder the population ,,f tlw Tl'fri1,11 \ from ,·x,·1ris1

x //,11/ ,·hap \ \ 11
