278 (III). The problem of slavery

278 (III). Prohleme de l'esclavage

The General Assembly

L'Assemblee generale

Requests the Economic and Social Council to
study the problem of slavery at its next session.

Prie le Conseil economiquc et social d'etudier,

a sa prochaine session, le probleme de l'esclavage.

Two hundred and eleventh plenary meeting,
13 May 1949.

De11.r cent :mzieme seance pleniere,
le 13 mai 1949.

279 (Ill). Droits syndicaux

279 (III). Trade union rights

L' Assemblee genfrale,

The General Assembly,
Recalling that at its second regular session it
endorsed the principles p!'oclaimed by the International Labour Conference at its thirtieth session in respect of trade union rights and approved
the request made by the Economic and Social
Council at its fifth session that the International
Labour Organisation should continue its efforts
in order that one or several international conventions on the subject might be adopted, 1 and

Rappe/ant qu'au cours de sa deuxieme session
ordinaire, elle a fait siens les principes enonces
par la Conference internationale du Travail a sa
trentieme session en ce qui concerne les droits
syndicaux et qu'elle a approuve !'invitation faite
par le CL nseil economique et social au cours de
sa cinquieme session a l'Organisation intemationale du Travail de continuer ses efforts en vue
de l'adoption d'une ou plusieurs conventions
internationales sur ce sujet 1 , et

Noting that the International Labour Conference at San Francisco in the course of its thirtyfirst session adopted, on 9 July 1948, a Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection
of the Right to Organize, and that this Convention has now been communicated to Governments
for ratification,

Prenant acte du fait que la Conference internationale du Travail a adopte a San-Francisco,
le 9 juillet 1948, au cours de sa trente et unieme
session, une Convention sur la liberte syndicale et
la protection des droits syndicaux, et que cette
Convention a maintenant ete communiquee aux
Gouvernements pour ratification,

Expresses the earnest hope that Governments
will take prompt action for the early ratification
of the Convention of Freedom of Association
and Protection of the Right to Organize adopted
by the International Labour Conference at San
Francisco.

Ex-prime le sincere espoir que les Gouvernements prendront des mesures immediates en vue
de la ratification a bref delai de la Convention
sur la liberte syndicale et Ja protection des droits
syndicaux adoptee par la Conference internationale du Travail a San-Francisco.
De11.r cent onzieme seance pleniere,
le 13 mai 1949.

Two lrnndred and eleventh plenary meeting,
13 May 1949.

280 (III). World social and cultural
situation

280 (III). Situation sociale et culturelle dans le monde
L' Asscmblce generale,

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Economic and Social
Council has been entrusted by the Charter with
the re~ponsibility of helping to solve international problems in the economic, social, humanitarian and cultural fields,

C onsiderant que la Cha rte a charge le Conseil
economique et social d'aider a resoudre les problemes internationaux qui se posent clans les domaines economique, social, humanitaire et de la
culture intellectuelle,

Considering that solutions to these problems
can best be achieved through exhaustive studies
in the corresponding fields,

Considcrant que ces problemes ne peuvent etre
mieux resolus qu'au moyen d'etudes detaillees
dans Jes domaines correspondants,

Considering that tlw Council has already initiated, in the economic field, a series of general
studies on the world economic situation which
has been of the greatest p1·actical use tn it m
carrying out its work,

Considerant que le Conseil a deja inaugure clans
le domaine economique une serie d'etudes d'ensembk sur la situation economique clans le monde
qui lui a ete de la plus grande utilite clans la conduite de son travail,

lm•ites the Economic and Social Council to
consider, oil' the ha,is of a report by its Social
Commission and after consultation with the specialized agencies and the non-governmental organizations concerned, the pus~ihility of drafting a
gent:ral report on the world social and cultural
situation.

1l'v1te le Conseil economique et social a examiner, sur rapport de sa Commission des questions
sociales, et apres consultation des institutions
specialisees et des organisations non gouvernementales interessees, la possibilite de l'etablissement d'tm rapport d'cnsemble sur la situation
sociale et culturelle clans le monde.

T,L'O l11t11dred and cle,xnth plenary meeting,

De11x cent onzieme seance plcniere,
le 13 111ai 1949.

13 Ma:y 1949.
'See T<csol11tio11s adottcd b.v the General Assembly
at its second session, pages 39-40.

'Voir le,; r<.:Snlutinns adnf>t,'cs f'ar /"Assc111blce gl:nerale pendant sa deuxieme session, pages 39-40.

31
