A /71/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

87th plenary meeting

Thursday, 15 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of eighteen members of the Economic
and Social Council
The President: The General Assembly will
now proceed to by-elections to elect members of the
Economic and Social Council, in accordance with rule
140 of the rules of procedure.
I would first like to draw the attention of members
to documents A/71/923 and A/71/924, which contain
the texts of letters, dated 19 May and 8 June 2017
respectively, from the Permanent Representatives of
Austria and Romania to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the General Assembly.
In his letter, the Permanent Representative of
Romania, in his capacity as Chair of the Group of Eastern
European States for the month of June, announces that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will relinquish its seat on the
Economic and Social Council for its remaining term in
favour of Romania, as of 31 December 2017.
In his letter, the Permanent Representative of
Austria, in his capacity as Chair of the Group of
Western European and other States for the month of
May, announces that Australia will relinquish its seat
on the Economic and Social Council for its remaining
term in favour of Canada, as of 31 December 2017, and
that Sweden will relinquish its seat on the Economic

and Social Council for its remaining term in favour of
Denmark, as of 31 December 2017.
As a result, three vacancies will occur and new
members must therefore be elected to fill the unexpired
terms of office of Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Sweden, commencing on 1 January 2018 and
expiring on 31 December 2018, in the case of Australia,
and 31 December 2019, in the case of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Sweden.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI), of 20 December 1971, and taking into account
the number of States that will remain members of the
Council after 1 January 2017, the members should be
elected as follows: one from among the Group of Eastern
European States and two from among the Group of
Western European and other States. The ballot papers
reflect that pattern.
I should like to inform the Assembly that those
candidates — their number not exceeding the number
of seats to be filled — that receive a two-thirds majority
and the greatest number of votes by members present
and voting will be declared elected. Consistent with past
practice, in the case of a tie vote making it necessary
to determine the candidate to be elected or that will
proceed to the next round of restricted balloting, there
will be a special restricted ballot limited to those
candidates that have obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17150 (E)

*1717150*

A/71/PV.87

15/06/2017

The President: In accordance with rule 92 of the
Assembly’s rules of procedure, the election shall be
held by secret ballot, and there shall be no nominations.

The meeting was suspended at 10.20 a.m. and
resumed at 11 a.m.

In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed accordingly.

Group A — Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
186
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
186
Abstentions:
4
Number of members voting:
182
Required two-thirds majority:
122
Number of votes obtained:
Romania
172
Belarus
9
Bulgaria
1

I should like to inform members that, as of 1 January
2018, the following States from among the Group of
Eastern European States and the Group of Western
European and other States will be represented on the
Economic and Social Council: Andorra, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, the Czech Republic, Italy, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America. The names of those
10 States should therefore not appear on the ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s name plate.
We shall now begin the voting process. I request
representatives to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
I should like to remind members that they are voting
in the by-election for one seat for the Eastern European
States and two seats for the Western European and other
States. The election of 18 members of the Economic and
Social Council will take place immediately following
the by-election.
Ballot papers marked “A” and “B” will now be
distributed. I request representatives to use only those
ballot papers and to write on them the names of the
States for which they wish to vote. A ballot will be
declared invalid if it contains more names of Member
States from the relevant region than the number of seats
assigned to it. A ballot will also be declared invalid if
none of the names of the Member States on that ballot
belongs to the relevant region. If a ballot paper of a
region contains both the names of Member States that
belong to and that are outside that region, the ballot
remains valid but only the names of the Member States
that belong to the relevant region will be counted. The
names of Member States that do not belong to that
region will not be counted.
2/11

The President: The result of the voting is as follows:

Group B — Western European and other States
(2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
186
Number of invalid ballots:
2
Number of valid ballots:
184
Abstentions:
9
Number of members voting:
175
Required two-thirds majority:
117
Number of votes obtained:
Denmark
167
Canada
166
France
4
Germany
3
Spain
3
Turkey
3
Ireland
1
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Canada, Denmark and Romania were elected
members of the Economic and Social Council
for a term of office beginning on 1 January 2018
and ending on 31 December 2018, in the case of
Canada, and 31 December 2019, in the cases of
Denmark and Romania.
The President: I congratulate Canada, Denmark
and Romania on having been elected members of the
Economic and Social Council.
The General Assembly will next turn to the election
of 18 members of the Economic and Social Council to
replace those members whose term of office expires on
31 December 2017.
The 18 outgoing members are: Argentina, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Estonia, France, Germany, Ghana,
Honduras, India, Ireland, Japan, Mauritania, Pakistan,
17-17150

15/06/2017

Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda and
Zimbabwe. Pursuant to rule 146 of the rules of
procedure, those countries are eligible for immediate
re-election.
Members will recall that Australia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Sweden relinquished their seats in the
Economic and Social Council effective 1 January 2018,
and that Canada, Denmark and Romania have just been
elected to fill those vacancies.
Consequently, as of 1 January 2018, the following
States will be represented on the Economic and Social
Council: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Lebanon, Nigeria, Norway, Peru,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Somalia, South Africa,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Viet Nam. The names of those 36
States should therefore not appear on the ballots.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI), of 20 December 1971, and taking into account
the number of States that will remain members of the
Council after 1 January 2018, the 18 members should
be elected as follows: five from among the Group of
African States, three from among the Group of AsiaPacific States, one from among the Group of Eastern
European States, four from among the Group of Latin
American and the Caribbean States and five from
among the Group of Western European and other
States. The ballot papers reflect that pattern.
I should like to inform the Assembly that those
candidates, their number not exceeding the number of
seats to be filled, who receive a two-thirds majority and
the greatest number of votes by members present and
voting will be declared elected.
Also, consistent with past practice, in case that
due to a tie vote it becomes necessary to determine the
candidate to be elected or to proceed to the next round
of restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?

A/71/PV.87

It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with rule 92 of the
rules of procedure, the election shall be held by secret
ballot, and there shall be no nominations.
Regarding candidatures for the respective regional
groups, the Secretariat has been informed that for the
five vacant seats from among the Group of African
States, the Group has endorsed five candidates: Ghana,
Malawi, Morocco, the Sudan and Togo. For the three
vacant seats from among the Group of Asia-Pacific
States, the Group has endorsed three candidates: India,
Japan and the Philippines. For the one vacant seat
from among the Group of Eastern European States, the
Group has endorsed one candidate: Belarus.
For the four vacant seats from among the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Group
has endorsed four candidates: Ecuador, El Salvador,
Mexico and Uruguay. For the five vacant seats from
among the Group of Western European and other
States, the Group has endorsed five candidates: France,
Germany, Ireland, Spain and Turkey.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to the election by secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s name plate.
We shall now begin the voting process.
Ballot papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”, “D” and “E”
will now be distributed. I request representatives to use
only those ballot papers and to write on them the names
of the States for which they wish to vote. A ballot will
be declared invalid if it contains more names of Member
States from the relevant region than the number of seats
assigned to it. A ballot will also be declared invalid if
none of the names of the Member States on that ballot
belong to the relevant region.
If a ballot paper of a region contains both the names
of the Member States that belong to and that are outside
of that region, the ballot remains valid, but only the
names of the Member States that belong to the relevant
region will be counted. The names of Member States
that do not belong to that region will not be counted.

17-171503/11

A/71/PV.87

15/06/2017

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Regis
(Haiti), Ms. Vangansuren (Mongolia), Ms. Schot
(New Zealand), Mr. Jamal-Hariri (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Ramazanov (Ukraine) and Mr. Phiri (Zambia)
acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and
resumed at 11.25 a.m.
The President: The results of the voting are
as follows:
Group A — African States (5 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Malawi
Togo
Ghana
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
Zambia

188
0
188
0
188
126
184
184
183
177
175
1
1

Group B — Asian and Pacific States (3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
0
Number of members voting:
188
Required two-thirds majority:
126
Number of votes obtained:
Japan
185
India
183
Philippines
182
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 1
Pakistan
1
Group C — Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
3
Number of members voting:
185
4/11

Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Belarus
Estonia
Montenegro
Ukraine

124
182
1
1
1

Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
1
Number of members voting:
187
Required two-thirds majority:
125
Number of votes obtained:
Ecuador
182
Mexico
182
El Salvador
181
Uruguay
180
Cuba
2
Group E — Western European and other States
(5 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
3
Number of members voting:
185
Required two-thirds majority:
124
Number of votes obtained:
Germany
182
Spain
181
Ireland
180
Turkey
179
France
177
Israel
1
Liechtenstein
1
Switzerland
1
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority
and the largest number of votes of the members
of the General Assembly, the following 18 States
were elected members of the Economic and
Social Council for a three-year term beginning on
1 January 2018: Belarus, Ecuador, El Salvador,
France, Germany, Ghana, India, Ireland, Japan,
Malawi, Mexico, Morocco, the Philippines, Spain,
the Sudan, Togo, Turkey and Uruguay.
17-17150

15/06/2017

The President: I congratulate those States that
have been elected members of the Economic and Social
Council and I thank the tellers for their assistance.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 112.
Agenda item 118
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Draft resolution (A/71/L.66)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/918)
The President: Before proceeding to consider draft
resolution A/71/L.66, I would like to remind members
that the debate on agenda item 118 will take place at a
later date, to be announced.
The General Assembly meets today to renew its
“unwavering commitment to strengthening
international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”
and to reaffirm
“that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed”.
It is in the spirit of that commitment that the
draft resolution establishing the Office of CounterTerrorism is presented today. The draft resolution will
enhance the capability of the United Nations to assist
Member States in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy across its four
pillars by ensuring greater coordination and coherence
across the Organization’s system and by improving
visibility, advocacy and resource mobilization for
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts. I would like
to thank all delegations for working cooperatively and
constructively throughout the consultation process
and for supporting my Office in securing today’s draft
resolution, the first major institutional reform presented
by Secretary-General Guterres, and I commend it to
the Assembly.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.66, entitled “Strengthening the
capability of the United Nations system to assist
Member States in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”.

A/71/PV.87

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/71/L.66?
Draft resolution A/71/L.66 was adopted (resolution
71/291).
The President: Before giving the floor to those
wishing to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, I would like to remind
delegations that statements are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of Australia and New Zealand as well
as my own country, Canada. We welcome the General
Assembly’s adoption today of resolution 71/291 and
its creation of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and a
position for a new Under-Secretary-General. This
update of the United Nations architecture comes after
our three countries have worked for a number of years
advocating that the Organization’s counter-terrorism
structures be made fit for purpose. We see these changes
as contributing to the Secretary-General’s overall
objective of improving the focus of the prevention
efforts of the United Nations.
Today’s resolution comes at a time when we all
face the evolving threat that terrorism represents, and
we need to work together even harder than before to
prevent and respond to it and to violent extremism. We
look forward to seeing the Office established and the
Under-Secretary-General selected as soon as possible.
It is critical to ensure that the new Office will oversee
a balanced implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, including the prevention of violent
extremism. As we have said before, we expect the
position to be filled by a senior, highly qualified and
credible individual in the field. It is imperative to ensure
that the individual selected has experience across the
key sectors of development, human rights and security.
Simply put, we need the best person for the job.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand look forward
to working with the new Office and Under-SecretaryGeneral in the coming months.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Mexico, Indonesia,
the Republic of Korea, Turkey and Australia (MIKTA).
MIKTA is a cross-regional partnership of five
countries of diverse cultures and regions that share
core values and similarities and are like-minded on
many of the global challenges we face today. Of those

17-171505/11

A/71/PV.87

challenges, terrorism and violent extremism, in all
their forms and manifestations, present a global threat
to which no country is immune. As a result, MIKTA
has established counter-terrorism as one of its core
areas of collaboration in contributing to greater global
peace and stability. Bearing that in mind, at their eighth
meeting, held in Sydney in November 2016, the MIKTA
Foreign Ministers adopted their latest communiqué,
reaffirming their collective resolve to counter and
prevent terrorism and violent extremism. The Foreign
Ministers furthermore stated that they stood united
against that scourge, which knows no borders, respects
no beliefs and has no respect for human rights. Indeed,
terrorism and violent extremism cannot and should not
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. The MIKTA countries, which play a
pivotal role in United Nations global counter-terrorism
efforts, therefore welcome today’s adoption of resolution
71/291, on reform of the United Nations global counterterrorism architecture and the establishment of a United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, to be led by an
Under-Secretary-General.
We would like to express our full support for the
Secretary-General’s initiative and his commitment to
adapting the United Nations system to the ever-evolving
threat of terrorism. They herald his first a major
institutional reform of the United Nations since he took
office. In that regard, the MIKTA countries would like
to stress the importance of delivering counter-terrorism
capacity-building assistance to Member States, at their
request, in a timely, adequate and effective manner, and
to emphasize that the new Office of Counter-Terrorism
would not be empowered to monitor, supervise or
interfere with efforts by Member States to implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the rest of the international legal framework with
regard to counter-terrorism.
The MIKTA countries would like to express their
sincere hope that the present reform will contribute
to the balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy across
its four pillars; enhance strategic coordination and
the coherence of United Nations counter-terrorism
activities, both within the United Nations system
and with relevant external actors, in order to create
synergies and avoid duplication; ensure respect for
international law, including international human
rights law; continue to guide United Nations counterterrorism efforts; and ensure that the voice of the United
6/11

15/06/2017

Nations on issues regarding counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism will be better heard in
the international community. With that understanding,
and with the ultimate goal of defeating the scourge
of terrorism, MIKTA countries look forward to swift
implementation of the reform and today’s resolution,
and to constructive engagement with the new United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation joined the consensus this
morning. From the outset, we have supported the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with regard
to strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
counter-terrorism system. That springs from our belief
that this topic should be a priority, since terrorism is
the number-one threat to peace and security all over the
word. The recommendations of the Secretary-General
in that regard, especially for the creation of an Office
of Counter-Terrorism, to be headed by a new UnderSecretary-General, are a quantum leap forward in
addressing that universal threat. They coincide exactly
with the requests that Syria has been making for
decades, especially concerning the terrorism that we
have been enduring and that is funded, managed and
condoned by the Governments of some Member States.
However, at the same time my Government is of
the view that the Office of Counter-Terrorism can be
independent and truly efficient only if it is totally free
of the politicization and financial polarization that are
used by the Governments of certain Member States to
serve their own interests and agendas and that would
ultimately be an obstacle to the goals of the Office.
That is why my delegation has reservations about
paragraph 3 of resolution 71/291, adopted this morning.
We reiterate our determination to reconsider that
paragraph during any periodic or regular revision of the
resolution, whether in the Fifth or Sixth Committee. It
is a very serious and unjustified precedent that confers
on the Government of a certain State some prerogatives
and privileges in the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre at a time when, as everyone knows, that country
is itself contributing to terrorism.
The provisions of paragraph 3 are an offence to the
collective work of the United Nations because they run
counter to the purposes and principles of its Charter,
and that is why we are shocked at the Centre’s double
standards. There is no way that it should receive more
than $100 million in funds from the Saudi system and
regime when that same regime persistently violates
17-17150

15/06/2017

Security Council resolutions by providing armed
terrorist groups in Syria with billions of dollars, as
well as by spending hundreds of millions of dollars in
centres all over the world that claim to be taking up the
call for religion when they are actually advocating for
Wahhabi extremism and working to sow the seeds of
sectarianism in our countries. Those infamous Saudi
centres have been recruiting thousands of young people
and sending them as foreign terrorist combatants to
fight in the ranks of Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and the
other relevant terrorist groups.
In various United Nations forums, in various reports
that we have submitted, and in the information that we
have provided to various United Nations agencies, we
have reiterated the facts about the support of certain
Member States, such as Saudi Arabia, for terrorism in
Syria. They are not mere political accusations but facts
known to everyone, and they have even been confirmed
by certain reports issued by various committees
and institutions.
What we are witnessing today in the Gulf area
and in all the disagreements going on between Gulf
regimes is a demonstration of the practices of those
regimes, which have an insatiable desire to destroy
our States and manipulate the futures and destinies of
people. They use terrorism as a tool to advance their
own agendas and interests with complete disregard for
global security and stability.
We have also said that terrorism knows no religion
and has no identity. However, the most dangerous
enemy for Arabs and Muslims today is the race between
Saudi Arabia and Qatar to use political Islam in a way
that offends both Arabs and Islam. What they are really
engaged in is a race of hypocrisy. In that regard, I
would like to quote the writer Fareed Zakaria in The
Washington Post:
“It’s true that Qatar has supported some extremist
Islamist movements. So has Saudi Arabia. Both
are Wahhabi countries, both have within them
extremist preachers, and both are widely believed
to have armed Islamist groups in Syria and
elsewhere. In both cases, the royal families play
a game of allying themselves with fundamentalist
religious forces and funding some militants, even
while fighting other violent groups.”
Donating $100 million for the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre or spending more than
$500 billion on arms and weapons will never absolve

A/71/PV.87

the Saudi regime of its support of terrorism and its
adoption of violent extremism, which has spilled the
blood of thousands upon thousands of innocent people
in my country, Syria, and which continues to claim
hundreds of lives all over the world.
Finally, my Government is hopeful and confident
that the new Under-Secretary-General appointed to
head the Office of Counter-Terrorism will be careful,
neutral, efficient and comprehensive and that the UnderSecretary-General will be from a country that respects
the shared principles and the rules of procedure of the
Organization, in particular with regard to sovereign
equality and rights among Member States. We are
also confident that the new Under-Secretary-General
will reject double standards and avoid political and
financial tension and polarization, while observing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I am taking the floor to
congratulate you, Sir, and your Office on bringing this
process to a swift and expeditious conclusion, resulting
in today’s adoption of resolution 71/291. I also take this
opportunity to compliment the Secretary-General on
his earnest efforts on the issue.
This is the first of the Secretary-General’s reform
initiatives, which has come to fruition through the
General Assembly. The Assembly’s unanimity on
the issue demonstrates the importance that Member
States give to collective and coordinated action on
terrorism, which remains the most complex threat
that the international community faces. India believes
that the creation of the Office of Counter-Terrorism
is a long-awaited first step in our efforts to enhance
the coordination of United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts. It will align the Organization with the changed
global reality and the international community’s needs,
as the Secretary-General himself articulated yesterday
in Kabul — a city ravaged by terrorists. He mentioned
the reform and said that support for terrorism carried a
very high price.
Terrorist networks are not limited by the borders,
norms, legal frameworks or bureaucratic inertia that
constrain us as Member States and the United Nations
at all levels. While terrorist networks use modern
platforms such as social media and cyberspace,
and exist in parallel worlds alongside us in hidden
transnational networks, we cannot work in silos created
either by boundaries or by bureaucracy. There was

17-171507/11

A/71/PV.87

never a stronger case for more multilateral action,
coordination and cooperation on any matter among all
stakeholders than with regard to terrorism today. An
all-of-United Nations approach and a certain convening
power on counter-terrorism issues will be crucial if
the new Office of Counter-Terrorism is to fulfil its
functions effectively.
The Office should not only engage Member States
at a high political level, it should also cooperate with
other international organizations dealing with issues
relating to terrorism in order to fulfil its mandate
effectively. It is also important to build the United
Nations narrative on counter-terrorism for the ordinary
people who are threatened by this scourge. It is now
time to reap the benefits of the early harvest of reform.
For its part, in that regard, India will continue to work
with other Member States to guide and steer the steps
of the United Nations as part of the international
community’s collective response to one of the gravest
challenges facing humankind today.
Mr. Kravik (Norway): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his efforts to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations system to assist Member
States in implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I would also like to thank
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
for working so tirelessly and expeditiously to ensure
today’s adoption of resolution 71/291, establishing the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
More than ever, we need an effective, cohesive and
adaptable United Nations that is equipped to counter
and tackle the challenges posed by terrorism and
violent extremism. The creation of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism represents a major step
forward in that regard. Headed by an Under-SecretaryGeneral reporting directly to the Secretary-General,
the Office will give the United Nations more coherence
and provide for better strategic leadership and external
and internal communication. It will promote the United
Nations system’s ability to implement all four pillars
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a cohesive
and coordinated way. Our ability to mobilize resources
and support from Member States through capacitybuilding efforts and the sharing of best practices will
be manifestly enhanced.
Since 2006, when the United Nations adopted its
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, there has been too
much emphasis on combating terrorism by military
8/11

15/06/2017

and security means. We must also address the root
causes and upstream factors of violent extremism, as
highlighted by the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. The responsibilities of the Under-SecretaryGeneral and the Office will be to ensure an appropriate
balance and emphasis across all four pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We therefore appreciate the fact that the mandate of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism includes a reference to
preventing the violent extremism agenda.
As part of its efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremism, the Office must work to advance peace and
security, sustainable development, human rights and
the rule of law, and to institutionalize the prevention
of violent extremism across the United Nations system.
We also believe that it must partner and interact with
civil society and other non-governmental stakeholders
in order to be effective. One key qualification for the
position of Under-Secretary-General should be that
the successful candidate will have experience in both
development and security and a demonstrated ability to
work inclusively, cooperating effectively with a range
of stakeholders, including civi-society actors.
Mr. Nasimfar (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
joined the consensus on resolution 71/291, which we
have just adopted. Indeed, we support the principle
of the initiative of the Secretary-General in bringing
reform to the counter-terrorism structure and creating
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, headed by an UnderSecretary-General. The new structure has the potential
to enhance the coordination of counter-terrorismrelated activities across the United Nations system and
to expand United Nations capacity for addressing the
root causes of terrorism and violent extremism better
and more effectively. However, in our view, further
structural improvement is still needed to ensure the
efficiency, impartiality, transparency and predictability
of the activities of the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
In our view, resolution 71/291 fails to address the
following issues. First, it is imperative that sufficient
financial resources for the Office of Counter-Terrorism
be allocated from the United Nations regular budget.
We note with concern that in the new structure most
of the positions will be funded through voluntary
funds, which could seriously imperil the impartiality
and efficiency of the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Secondly, transparency and inclusiveness are among
the core United Nations principles that should be
upheld and mainstreamed in all areas of United Nations
17-17150

15/06/2017

counter-terrorism activities — including the United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism (UNCCT) and
its Advisory Board.
In our view, the UNCCT should be reformed in
order to clearly reflect those main principles. Given
the Centre’s important role in providing capacitybuilding projects to Member States, transparency
and inclusiveness in its Advisory Board should be
guaranteed. We are of the view that the Centre should
be bound by United Nations rules and regulations. The
Centre might have seen some exceptions in that regard
at its inception, but after years of operation under the
United Nations system, it must be brought up to the
level of other regular United Nations entities.
We are of the view that the members of the Advisory
Board should be elected in a transparent process
following consultations with regional groups and after
meeting specific conditions set by the Assembly. That
would meet the basic requirement for equal opportunity
for the entire United Nations membership in connection
with active participation and effective engagement in its
activities, and would pave the way for more voluntary
and other forms of support from a larger percentage of
the general membership.
For the sake of transparency, it is important that
the terms of reference of the Office be negotiated by
Member States and adopted by the General Assembly.
We would therefore expect the members of the Advisory
Board to be elected in April 2018 in accordance with
the transparently negotiated terms of reference.
Mr. Roet (Israel): My delegation would first like
to offer its condolences to the families of the victims
of the shocking terror attacks that have recently taken
place around the globe in the United Kingdom, Egypt,
Somalia and many other places, and that have once
again shaken our world to its core. The countless lives
lost every day to terror makes that threat the top priority
of almost every country represented in this Hall. As
terrorism grows, our common responsibility to defeat it
together grows ever more urgent.
Israel welcomes today’s adoption by consensus
of resolution 71/291, which establishes the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, to be led by an Under-SecretaryGeneral. We thank Secretary-General Guterres for
taking a strong stand against the constant threat of
terror around the world. His efforts and insistence
in establishing the new Office are a step in the right
direction. We would also like to express our appreciation

A/71/PV.87

for the constructive and transparent way in which the
process was conducted. We also extend our gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and your Office for your tireless
work in promoting this resolution. We have discussed
the fragmented nature of the Organization’s counterterrorism strategy here in the Hall. Although 38 United
Nations entities are working to combat terrorism, we
lack an overarching voice to guide their efforts. This
resolution has the potential to be that voice, and we look
forward to working closely with it.
The new counter-terrorism architecture will not
only improve efficiency and coherence, it can also
help turn the United Nations into a relevant actor in
overcoming the challenges that terrorism poses in the
twenty-first century. But that goal can be achieved only
if we do not surrender to the attempt to politicize the
issue. Terror is terror, and we must respond with the
same urgency and vigilance wherever it strikes, whether
it be through the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Hizbullah, Boko Haram, Hamas or any other terror
group. Our response must grow alongside the constantly
evolving terror tactics of those organizations. Terror is
terror, wherever it is.
Israel has dealt with the threat of terror since
its inception in 1948. Out of that daily necessity, we
have become expert in counter-terrorism and have
developed technologies and tools for counter-terrorism
unmatched by almost any other country. We understand
and recognize that the only way to combat that threat
is by staying ahead of the game and anticipating the
terrorists’ next step. We in the international community
must do the same and act together to combat the terror
threat of tomorrow. Serious international threats require
serious international responses. Only if we stand united
can we defeat global terrorism and stop those who seek
to undermine our way of life.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia commends the Secretary-General
for giving priority to strengthening the United
Nations counter-terrorism capability in order to assist
Member States in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a balanced and
comprehensive manner. We thank him and you, Sir,
for the consultative approach that you have taken
throughout the process of establishing the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and we support resolution 71/291,
which we have just adopted.

17-171509/11

A/71/PV.87

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recognizes the need
to enhance coherence and coordination across counterterrorism activities carried out by the United Nations
and, in that regard, views the establishment of the
Office as a necessary step towards achieving that goal.
As everyone knows, Saudi Arabia is heavily invested
in the success of the overall United Nations counterterrorism architecture. We are therefore pleased to see
that the new Office will take on the current functions
and responsibilities of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre and its Advisory Board. We are also
pleased that all funding and contribution agreements
between donors and the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre will remain dedicated to the execution
of its intended projects and will not be diverted to other
administrative requirements.
We look forward to a smooth transfer of counterterrorism activities from the Department of Political
Affairs to the newly established Office of CounterTerrorism. As Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation’s group on counter-terrorism, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia represents the group of countries most
affected by the scourge of international terrorism, and
we look forward to constructively and actively engaging
with the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
It is also essential to reiterate that terrorism should
not be associated with any religion, race or ethnicity.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stands ready to share
its insights and expertise to facilitate the effective
functioning of the Office, and we will do our part to
help ensure its early and sustained success.
(spoke in Arabic)
We have always insisted on distancing the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre from any kind of
political pressure. It is with regret that we heard the
statement made earlier by the representative of Syria
who — as the Arab expression goes — infected us
with a problem and left us with it. The Syrian regime
is guilty of a number of human rights violations. It
uses chemical weapons, missiles and barrel bombs.
The Syrian regime resorts to torture and at times even
collective torture. Such a regime has no place in a
discussion on terrorism because its hands are stained
with the blood of its own people.
The regime has been condemned by numerous
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, as well
as by other United Nations bodies. Such attacks are
unacceptable, and Syria is not in any position to make
10/11

15/06/2017

them. Furthermore, the representative of Syria has no
right to address issues concerning the Gulf. We call on
Syria to end the terrorist attacks carried out by groups
supported by the regime, including Hizbullah.
Concerning the statement by the representative
of Iran, I wholeheartedly welcome his constructive
remarks, in particular with regard to the need to
support United Nations counter-terrorism activities in
the framework of budgetary decisions, so as to ensure
a greater level of transparency and respect for the
norms of the United Nations. I would like to assure
everyone that all those norms were respected within the
framework of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre, which represents all countries. The Advisory
Board is an independent body that has oversight over
the Centre’s activities and submits quarterly and
annual reports to all members of the United Nations.
The Advisory Board also welcomes all proposals and
recommendations that would enhance transparency,
as well as all proposals coming from countries that
support the Centre’s work. We thank the representative
of Iran for his comments and assure him that the Centre
will take them under consideration.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position. We shall now hear statements
following the adoption of resolution 71/291.
I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): We thank you,
Mr. President, for facilitating today’s adoption of
resolution 71/291.
The European Union (EU) and its member States
have contributed to the process constructively and
substantively, and we are pleased that today we have
taken this important institutional step. The establishment
of the new Office of Counter-Terrorism should be seen
as a necessary first step aimed at improving the role
of the United Nations and its impact on countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
We welcome the fact that the new Under-SecretaryGeneral and the Office of Counter-Terrorism are set
to address the prevention of violent extremism as a
core part of their responsibility for implementing the
whole Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a balanced
manner, as stipulated in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/71/858). That also resonates with the overall
prevention agenda of the Secretary-General, which the
EU and its member States fully endorse. We strongly
17-17150

15/06/2017

support the Secretary-General’s proposal to establish
the new Office, headed by an Under-Secretary-General
who will provide strategic leadership, participate in
high-level decision-making at the United Nations and
ensure that cross-cutting drivers of terrorism and
violent extremism are taken into account in the work
of the Organization. We are confident that the new
Under-Secretary-General will be eminently qualified,
with experience in counter-terrorism as well as United
Nations policies, including those on human rights,
gender equality and development.
Needless to say, it is important to have more
effective and efficient coordination within the overall
United Nations system and between the United Nations
and other international organizations and forums.
Within the mandates of the existing entities, it will
be necessary to establish more linkages and foster a
spirit of systematic cooperation, as well as to evaluate
and monitor the impact of United Nations efforts in
the future.
The EU and its member States want a strong and
efficient United Nations, capable of driving the global
agenda on counter-terrorism and preventing violent
extremism while taking a balanced approach across
the four pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. To achieve that, we are committed
to closely cooperating with the newly established Office
of Counter-Terrorism and with the Under-SecretaryGeneral, as soon as he or she is appointed.

A/71/PV.87

The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in exercise of the right of reply, may I remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second intervention, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): In Syria we do not like proverbs, but it would
appear that Saudi Arabia does. We are not manipulating
the situation but rather attempting to state it clearly as
it stands. Saudi Arabia must allow the Syrian people
to enjoy their right to exercise their own rights. Saudi
Arabia should not interfere in the domestic affairs
of Syria and should stop financing terrorist groups,
because they are promoting Wahhabi attacks. We note
that that ideology is gaining ground. My country is a
sovereign State. We have a Constitution and domestic
legislation. We are not looking for revenge or to promote
Wahhabi ideology. Our army and allies will continue
to fight terrorism and the extremist Wahhabi ideology
behind it, an ideology supported by Saudi Arabia and
its allies.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 118.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

17-1715011/11
