S/PRST/2009/31

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 December 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6229th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 December 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist
attack in Mogadishu on 3 December at a graduation ceremony for Somali
medical students at Benadir University, which resulted in the death of innocent
civilians and the Somali Ministers of Health, Higher Education and Education.
This was a criminal attack on people dedicated to building a peaceful, stable
and prosperous future for the people of Somalia.
“The Security Council expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the families of those killed and to those injured in the attack, as well as to
the Transitional Federal Government and the people of Somalia.
“The Security Council urges that a thorough investigation be conducted
and that the perpetrators of this attack be brought swiftly to justice.
“The Security Council underlines its determination to continue to support
the people of Somalia in their quest for peace and reconciliation, and the
Transitional Federal Government as the legitimate authority in Somalia, and
reiterates its full support for the Djibouti Peace Process, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political solution in Somalia.
“The Security Council reaffirms its demand that all opposition groups
immediately end attacks, put down their arms, renounce violence and join
reconciliation efforts. The Council further calls on all parties to abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law, in particular to respect the
security of civilians, humanitarian workers and AMISOM personnel.
“The Security Council welcomes the work of AMISOM in supporting the
casualties of the attack and their relatives. It reiterates its strong support for
AMISOM and expresses its continued appreciation for the commitment of
troops by the governments of Uganda and Burundi.
“The Security Council reaffirms that Somalia's long-term security rests
with the effective development by the TFG of the National Security Force and
the Somali Police Force, in the framework of the Djibouti Agreement and in
line with a national security strategy. The Council urges the international
community to support the Somali security institutions, in coordination with
AMISOM, including through training and equipment.”

09-63293 (E) 031209

*0963293*
