United Nations

S/PV.6322

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6322nd meeting
Wednesday, 26 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hariri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Burt
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Intercultural dialogue for peace and security
Letter dated 19 May 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/248)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-37690 (E)

*1037690*

S/PV.6322

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Intercultural dialogue for peace and security
Letter dated 19 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/248)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now being its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/248, which contains a
letter dated 19 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper for the item under
consideration.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
On behalf of the Council, I also extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Alistair Burt, Member
of Parliament, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom.
I shall now make statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of Lebanon to begin today’s discussion.
There is an intimate relationship between
committing oneself to the Charter of the United
Nations and opting for dialogue as a way to achieve
world peace and security. Undoubtedly, there is a need
to consider that relationship in all its aspects, and this
has led United Nations bodies and agencies to initiate
programmes and formulate guidelines. Since the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 53/22, which
proclaimed 2001 as the Year of Dialogue Among
Civilizations, a great number of events have taken
place. Successive — and not redundant — efforts have
been undertaken to increase the opportunities for
dialogue, benefit from their assets and strengthen their
impact. Lebanon has taken part in these efforts. Its
contribution has been inspired by its specific historical

2

experience and its societal and political model, which
is often described as unique.
The position of Lebanon on the aims, value and
methodology of dialogue, as well as on the conditions
that make it credible and effective, have been clearly
stated on many occasions, notably during the General
Assembly’s 2007 High-level Dialogue on Interreligious
and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for
Peace and in the address of the His Excellency the
President of the Lebanese Republic in 2008 in support
of the dialogue initiative of King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia. Through such
occasions and endeavours, Lebanon bears witness to
the strong ties that bind our country to the United
Nations, which has consistently demonstrated its
attention and commitment to Lebanon’s freedom,
sovereignty and stability. Also, they show our respect
for international resolutions and reflect Lebanon’s
endeavours to promote the significance and promise of
positive encounters between religions and cultures.
Members are well aware of the difficulties that
have tested our country and people, but that have not
shaken our will to live together in one homeland,
enriched by its diversity and openness and proud of its
partnership between Christians and Muslims in
designing a common national future and destiny.
The need for dialogue between people of
different faiths and cultures is all the greater today in
view of the problems faced in relations between
peoples and communities, and the dangers of
confrontation that may be brought about by policies
based on threats, intimidation and fear. Dialogue stems
from recognition of identities and specificities and
respect for religious and cultural diversity; at the same
time, these values must not be expressed in hostility
towards others, which can lead to the drawing of
bloody religious and cultural borders.
For that reason, we believe that dialogue must
encompass an awareness of traditional, renewed and
new phenomena of sectarian and ethnic violence,
terrorism and intimidation. And the best way to address
and pre-empt these phenomena is to deal with their
root causes through preventive diplomacy. This
requires a coalition against fanaticism and extremism,
and it demands that conflicts be settled peacefully and
justly. Moreover, as a complement, patient efforts to
engage in dialogue should be made in the areas of
policy, culture and media in order to heighten

10-37690

S/PV.6322

immunity to violence, extremism and terrorism.
Dialogue may not extinguish the fire, but if carried out
seriously and resolutely, it will largely diminish the
probability of its igniting.
Efforts to launch dialogue in a long-term
perspective may open doors that would otherwise be
closed by those who look at communities that have
distinct cultural and religious identities as monolithic
entities with essential and perennial features. Not every
dissimilarity reflects a defect, and a community’s
essence is not embodied in its individual members,
holding them accountable for deplorable acts
perpetrated by those who share their religion, faith or
culture.
This means that dialogue cannot be effective
unless it strives to prevent the spillover of violence, be
it real or symbolic, from one place to another under the
impact of this perception. For that is often the case
where remote conflicts intrude on neighbourly
relations and local social and political tensions and
disputes assume global dimensions, be they cultural or
religious. Many countries, including my own, have
witnessed such intrusions. That is why we need to
caution against seeing our local problems as mere
reflections of regional and international confrontations
that turn our country into a battleground rather than a
homeland for its people that deals with its own internal
problems and protects its own unity and diversity.
A dialogue of life focused on culture, society and
politics — or coexistence, as we like to call it at
home — is the path to preserving unity and being
enriched by plurality. These goals are at the heart of
our insistence on parity between Muslims and
Christians, stipulated in the Taif Accords. This parity
strengthens Lebanon’s ability to contribute to global
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and its selfunderstanding as a locus of encounter and exchange,
rather than an arena of conflict.
We learn from the dialogue of life, which goes
hand in hand with the dialogue of ideas, that the search
for agreement does not necessarily lead to agreement.
However, its importance — indeed, its urgency —
resides in acknowledging disagreement and differences
for what they are, without artificially understating or
exaggerating their significance and implications.
Dialogue does not ignore contradiction or deny
democratic competition; it is, rather, a mode of
managing plurality so that differences do not generate

10-37690

hostility or cause divisions. Dialogue is not a process
of negotiations conditioned by power relations, but a
contribution to changing these relations, even in
relative terms, in order to ensure equal footing among
dialogue partners. That is why the practice of dialogue
at the global level converges with diplomatic action
driven by international law and rejects the logic of
might, imposition and double standards.
Be that as it may, such an affirmation does not
dissipate the ambiguities that colour its reality. The
advocacy of dialogue among nations and the promotion
of a culture of peace raise doubts among many people
about their credibility and utility, as well as fears that
they may function as a pretext or cover for an ulterior
political motive alien to its raison d’être. Dialogue is
not true to its meaning if unavowed objectives hide
behind its stated aims. It does not bear fruit unless its
partners agree to build equitable relations. Maintaining
hegemony, oppression and injustice without raising
fundamental ethical questions renders dialogue itself
questionable.
This is true in our country, which has been
subject to 25 years of Israeli occupation and recurrent
Israeli wars. Thousands of Lebanese citizens have been
killed, our economy and stability have been severely
affected by Israeli threats and massacres, and the
occupation of parts of our land continues. It is
legitimate to ask how dialogue can build confidence
and new relationships in the context of the ongoing
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands and
the persistent denial of the national and human rights
of the Palestinian people, and more particularly their
rights to return and to an independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital. In other words, the spirit of
justice and respect for international law and legitimacy
must prevail if an authentic dialogue is to occur. This is
all the more true since Jerusalem, the city of peace and
meeting place of the believers of the monotheistic
religions, cannot fulfil its historical vocation unless its
people are freed from injustice, changes in its
demography and character cease, and an end is put to
its occupation.
I am sure that we are all aware that establishing a
just and genuine peace in Palestine, as called for in the
Arab Peace Initiative, would have a substantial impact
on relations between cultures and religions. Moreover,
a just peace is necessary if dialogue is to succeed as an
approach to crisis-solving and achieving genuine

3

S/PV.6322

rapprochement between the Western world and the
Arab and Muslim worlds.
Finally, in opening the debate on the topic of this
meeting, I would like to reaffirm the commitment of
my country, Lebanon, to the universal ethical values of
the United Nations Charter that guide its diplomacy
and programmes, particularly in mediation and conflict
resolution. These values are the basis of intercultural
dialogue, and intercultural dialogue in turn promotes
them.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I again thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his participation in this meeting and
invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Mr. Prime Minister, it is
a great pleasure to welcome you to the United Nations.
As this is your first visit to the United Nations in your
capacity as Prime Minister of Lebanon, I wish you
great success and hope for peace and stability under
your leadership. I also welcome Parliamentary UnderSecretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. Alistair Burt, to
the Security Council.
I thank you, Sir, for using Lebanon’s presidency
of the Security Council to have this discussion on
intercultural dialogue. This is an important topic for
Lebanon and for all Member States. It is especially
relevant now on the eve of the third Forum of the
Alliance of Civilizations, which will begin Friday in
Rio de Janeiro and to which I will travel directly from
this meeting. I once again salute the leadership of the
original sponsors of the Alliance, Turkey and Spain,
and thank the Government of Brazil for hosting the
meeting.
Support for the Alliance keeps growing. We just
welcomed the one-hundredth member, the United
States. I hope that the Alliance’s membership and work
will expand further still. It is the right initiative at the
right time. Our world is changing rapidly, and it is
changing in unpredictable ways. We are growing more
connected through migration, trade and technology, yet
in some ways we are also moving further apart. Not
only are countries coming into more frequent contact
with each other, but many are themselves becoming
more multicultural and diverse.

4

To many, this enrichment is a matter of
celebration; yet to others, it can be confusing and
intimidating. Local challenges can easily spill over
national and regional borders. In the same way, local
solutions can be shared and inspire change elsewhere.
This underscores the need to build space for
cooperation and to strengthen mutual understanding
and respect. This should not be done as a feel-good
exercise, but because it is essential for achieving peace
and security in the broadest sense.
Dialogue can defuse tensions and keep situations
from escalating. It can promote reconciliation in the
aftermath of conflict. It can introduce moderate voices
into polarized debates. At a time when prejudice and
hatred are all too common, extremists seek new
recruits through incitement and identity-based appeals,
and politicians use divisiveness as a strategy to win
elections, dialogue can be an antidote. Dialogue is a
force for conflict prevention, management and
resolution. It can contribute to peacebuilding. It can
move us towards peaceful coexistence — the
fundamental human project.
But this work requires action on many levels.
There is a need to protect cultural diversity. That is a
basic human right, enshrined in many legally binding
instruments. Just five days ago, to mark the World Day
for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development,
seven human rights rapporteurs released a joint
statement calling on States to uphold their
responsibility under international law to create an
environment conducive to the enjoyment of cultural
rights, including the rights of ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities and indigenous peoples.
Education must also be a priority. It has been said
that knowledge is power. We need to strengthen
education systems so that young people can benefit
from cultural diversity and not be victimized by those
who exploit differences. Increased exposure to
information and communications technology makes
this more critical. We must also cast a wide net of
engagement. Solutions will require the active
partnership of local Governments, civil society, the
media, young leaders and many others. This is our
common responsibility.
The General Assembly proclaimed 2010 to be the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures.
Many summits and commendable efforts have likewise
sought to bridge the world’s dividing lines. We all

10-37690

S/PV.6322

recall the General Assembly’s high-level meeting on
the culture of peace two years ago, held at the initiative
of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia. We
all agree on the importance of intercultural dialogue
and shared values for peace and security.
The challenge now, for the Security Council in
particular, is to follow up on today’s discussion by
incorporating intercultural dialogue more fully into its
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Many members of the Council have ample experience
in the problems that can ensue from cross-cultural
tensions and perceptions of injustice, but they are also
well versed in the benefits of dialogue and the great
strength to be found in diversity. I urge the members of
the Council to draw more on these experiences and
share the lessons they have learned. Intercultural
dialogue is an important tool in the diplomat’s toolkit. I
urge Council members to make greater use of it.
I thank Prime Minister Hariri once again for
focusing our minds on strengthening this important
work.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): I am delighted to be
the first Minister of the new British Government to
address the Security Council. It is a particular honour
that you are in the chair, Sir, as I do so, particularly on
a day when my Foreign Secretary has made a key
announcement in the House of Commons in relation to
non-proliferation, which is designed to assist all our
efforts to promote understanding through greater
transparency among nations. I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on Lebanon’s membership of the
Council and pay tribute to your delegation’s handling
of Lebanon’s presidency this month.
I would also like to join in welcoming the
Secretary-General to the Council and to thank him for
his kind and welcoming introductory remarks. The new
British Government looks forward very much to
working closely with him.
We welcome the importance you attach,
Mr. President, to intercultural dialogue as an
instrument to prevent, manage and resolve conflict and
to build peace after conflict. We see all too often that

10-37690

prejudice and misunderstanding can cause
perpetuate conflict within and between societies.

and

In Afghanistan, it is clear that sustainable peace
requires a truly representative, transparent Afghan
political process that will give all Afghans a real stake
in that process. Next month’s peace jirga is an
important opportunity to begin a process of dialogue
aimed at achieving an enduring national consensus for
a political settlement. We must all support this process
as a fundamental part of ensuring that Afghanistan
emerges after 30 years of conflict as a peaceful and
functioning State.
In the Middle East, the unresolved IsraeliPalestinian issue has been a source of anger and
resentment for over 60 years. It is one of the biggest
obstacles to intercultural dialogue and understanding,
particularly among Muslims, Jews and Christians. We
will work for peace in the Middle East with a secure
and universally recognized Israel living alongside a
sovereign and viable Palestinian State.
The current process of proximity talks offers
hope for a solution. We welcome and support the
United States efforts. We call on the parties to continue
working to narrow the gaps between them and to take
the bold political decisions necessary to achieving a
lasting peace. The region must play its role, too, by
supporting dialogue and negotiation and taking steps to
build a greater sense of trust.
We applaud the range of international efforts
under way to promote intercultural dialogue. We
support the work of the Alliance of Civilizations in
promoting such dialogue as a means of preventing
conflict. I wish the Alliance well as it begins its annual
Forum in Brazil tomorrow. The Alliance is at its best
when engaged in projects that draw on the energy of
the media and civil society to promote dialogue and
understanding.
I would like to highlight three points. First, while
intercultural dialogue should acknowledge our
differences, it must also be built on universal human
values. The United Nations has led the way in
promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms
through the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and subsequent human rights treaties. These rights and
freedoms are universal, indivisible and interdependent.
Respect for those rights enriches and underpins our
common humanity.

5

S/PV.6322

Secondly, dialogue must mean exactly that. Your
moving opening address, Mr. President, made clear
your views on this. It requires a willingness to be
influenced as well as to influence. It must be based on
the recognition that diplomacy, politics and life are not
a zero-sum game. Reconciliation requires both an
acceptance of different views and approaches and the
recognition of shared values and common interests,
and — as you yourself said — not avoiding the
difficult things or ignoring contradictions. The United
Nations, with its unique legitimacy and global reach, is
well placed to support such dialogue.
Thirdly, we need an approach to intercultural
dialogue that builds understanding of cross-cultures
and helps us deal with diversity and difference in a
tolerant and respectful way. This cannot be done only
by politicians or by the diplomacy of the United
Nations. It must begin with open societies whose
citizens are able to engage positively with other
cultures, both in their own country and around the
world. The Secretary-General observed this in his
opening remarks as well, when he said that improved
technology and communications will ensure that those
we represent are better informed than ever before and
ever more keen to join with others in the dialogue we
are discussing today. This openness in communication,
and the involvement of those we represent, will both
inspire and challenge us in our roles on their behalf.
Thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s debate. We must now ensure that its lessons are
reflected in the Council’s ongoing vital work in
preventing and resolving conflict. May intercultural
dialogue help all of us to live up to the highest ideals,
as set out in the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I thank Lebanon for having taken the
initiative to bring us together under its presidency of
the Security Council to discuss the contribution of
intercultural dialogue to peace and security. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement. As French President Nicolas Sarkozy
stressed on his most recent visit to Beirut, Lebanon is
for us, the French, a glorious crossroads of
civilizations and religions, a symbol of openness and
diversity. Lebanon, a country that unites life and
Government in dialogue and the continuing quest for
concord for the benefit of all and of different
communities, embodies what peace can owe to

6

tolerance, respect for others and the acceptance of
differences.
Since 11 September 2001, dialogue among
cultures and civilizations has been on the international
agenda, for better or for worse. No one can deny the
benefits of dialogue between individuals and groups in
a globalized world where cultural identity has assumed
increasing importance. Intercultural dialogue can be a
tool for preventing conflicts, resolving crises and
building peace, but it cannot be an end in itself.
Cultures are not homogeneous, autonomous or frozen
entities that we can bring together around a table.
Every individual can legitimately claim several cultural
identities, or choose not to have one at all. Intercultural
dialogue, then, should not lead to the political
instrumentalization of cultures, which belong to no
one, are neither fixed nor exclusive, and are bridges
rather than fortresses or weapons.
Tolerance and mutual respect are at the heart of
the mandate of the United Nations, and we can
therefore only welcome the fact that initiatives on
intercultural dialogue are developing under its
auspices. Since its creation, UNESCO has worked for
rapprochement and understanding among peoples, to
promote peace and cultural diversity. The Universal
Declaration on Cultural Diversity and the Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of
Cultural Expressions are essential instruments.
UNESCO is therefore by its nature the right place for
such matters.
For our part, States members of the Security
Council have the responsibility to act to prevent or put
an end to conflicts. This requires us to take into
account the many factors that can raise tensions
between communities, one of which is culture. But the
cultural factor is rarely the direct or single cause of
conflict; in reality, more often than not it is exploited
by radicals of all stripes.
It is in this context that France supports dialogue
among cultures, because cultural diversity is at the
heart of the French national identity: Atlantic and
Mediterranean France; maritime and continental
France; Mediterranean and African France. France is
made up of a multitude of traditions, customs and
beliefs. Our secularism seeks, within the French
national community, to organize the peaceful
coexistence of all beliefs and non-beliefs, which must
remain in the private sphere in order to make public

10-37690

S/PV.6322

life a place where all can gather around the values of
the Republic. We are neither Catholics nor atheists;
neither Jews nor Muslims; we are French citizens, sons
and daughters of the nation.

today’s meeting on the important and topical theme of
intercultural dialogue. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his statement, which enriched
our discussion.

Furthermore, diversity, a fact of life today in our
towns and cities, is at the heart of the European
project. We must recognize that diversity. Old countries
with Christian traditions must now allow their Muslim
citizens to practice and live their religions, just as
Muslim countries must do for Christians and Jews. The
successful establishment of the Union for the
Mediterranean, which France co-chairs with Egypt,
illustrates this determination to build a concrete,
common future in a world of broad human, religious
and cultural diversity. Our activity in the area of
Francophonie, committed to promoting human rights,
democracy and peacebuilding, also demonstrates our
resolve to pursue our common political objectives
through dialogue in respect for cultural diversity.
Finally, France is a member of the Group of Friends of
the Alliance of Civilizations, whose projects we
welcome as instruments of preventive diplomacy. In
that regard, we look forward to the forthcoming
ministerial Forum of the Alliance on 28 and 29 May.

A sweeping analysis of the path of world history
leads us to the conviction that approaches to current
international problems, including peace and security,
must be linked to the cultural diversity of global
civilizations. In this regard, the Russian Federation
welcomes the creation of relevant and various
platforms for dialogue within and on the margins of the
United Nations. Two important initiatives, we believe,
are the Alliance of Civilizations, sponsored by Spain
and Turkey, and the trilateral forum on Interfaith
Dialogue and Cooperation for Peace and Development
sponsored by the Philippines. We believe that the
potential of these and similar initiatives is their
complementary nature, which should rule out any
element of competition.

Respect for the values and universal principles of
human rights is the indispensable foundation on which
intercultural dialogue should be built and reinforced.
That dialogue cannot exist outside civil society; it must
encourage the participation of women; it must include
representatives of every religion and every spiritual,
philosophical and humanistic tradition in all their
diversity and multiplicity; it must not permit any
discrimination, be it on the basis of religion, public
opinion, sexual orientation, gender or nationality. In
order to have dialogue, one must be able to listen to
contrary and critical opinions. The exercise of freedom
of expression is a sine qua non for intercultural
dialogue.
This freedom of expression is indivisible; it is
either there or it is not. To limit it in any way, shape or
form would be to deny its very existence. It is in the
context of its unshakeable and resolute attachment to
liberty that France will continue to be devoted to the
dialogue between cultures and civilizations.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Security Council, and we thank the
Lebanese delegation for its initiative to convene

10-37690

As was emphasized by the Secretary-General,
today’s meeting is also very timely in the light of
tomorrow’s opening in Rio de Janeiro of the third
Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations and the
declaration of 2010 as the International Year for the
Rapprochement of Cultures.
The Russian Federation is a country that brings
together many ethnicities, cultures, religions and social
groups, and we therefore strongly believe that
encouraging tolerance among cultures and their mutual
enrichment is of tremendous significance in today’s
world, which faces the exacerbation of inter-ethnic,
political, economic and social clashes in which existing
differences are used to justify terrorism and extremism.
Factors promoting the growth of extremism are,
of course, uninformed or distorted views of religion,
history and the cultures of other peoples, as well as the
skilful manipulation of these concepts. That, in turn,
leads to mistrust, alienation, often hostility and
sometimes even confrontation. For our part, we hold to
be false and erroneous the notion of a conflict of
civilizations and cultures, which is based on false
cultural and civilizational views and stereotypes. The
Russian Federation therefore categorically rejects any
attempt to associate any specific religion or culture
with such global threats as terrorism or transnational
organized crime.
Achieving sustainable peace and security
undoubtedly
requires
mutual
familiarity
and

7

S/PV.6322

understanding, tolerance and respect for the diversity
of national cultures, traditions and religious customs.
That, in turn, is the basis for effective joint efforts of
the members of the international community to
confront today’s global challenges, including in the
area of security, to which the Council pays a great deal
of attention.
One of the time-tested ways for the international
community to react diplomatically to conflict situations
is mediation. The work of mediators requires not least
deep knowledge of historical, cultural and other
specificities of conflicts. Of course, the work of
mediators must be duly transparent and, if under a
Council mandate, accountable to the Council.
The United Nations does not possess a monopoly
on mediation, so the use of regional agencies,
arrangements and agreements is an important
mechanism called for in Article 33 of the United
Nations Charter. Chapter VIII of the Charter focuses
Member States on the priority resolution of so-called
local disputes with the help of such agencies,
arrangements and agreements before referring them to
the Council.
The United Nations must leverage the experience
and expertise of regional organizations in its work and
approach questions of mediation on the basis of the
principle of reasonable division of labour with these
regional and subregional bodies. Due to objective
factors, it is the regional players that are the most
receptive to the cultural and historical dimensions of
conflict, and that of course promotes the success of a
mediation mission.
In addition to the acknowledged partners in this
area — in particular the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and organizations on other
continents — we believe that there are good prospects
for United Nations cooperation with organizations that
are actively gaining experience, such as the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
The universal nature of the United Nations
dictates the need for each Member State to consider the
religious traditions and diversity of world cultures and
religions. The cultural wealth of humankind in and of
itself possesses significant peacekeeping potential that
is capable of preventing the so-called clash of
civilizations and of making a significant contribution to

8

conflict resolution. We believe that the United Nations
is, in fact, the unique platform for building bridges and
overcoming prejudices and misunderstandings that
inherently threaten to peace and security. How
effectively we use this capacity will, to a significant
degree, determine our success in implementing the
major purposes of the Organization — ensuring global
security, development and respect for human rights.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome
Prime Minister Hariri as he presides over today’s
Council meeting and to thank him for his very
insightful statement. Japan congratulates Lebanon on
having organized this discussion on an important topic.
Intercultural dialogue is an essential tool for
conflict
prevention,
conflict
resolution
and
peacebuilding. As the Secretary-General asserted in his
opening statement, the United Nations Charter calls for
international cooperation in solving global problems
and promoting fundamental freedoms without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. It
underscores the relevance of intercultural dialogue to
the work of the United Nations.
First of all, the importance of intercultural
dialogue for conflict prevention cannot be
overemphasized. Lack of respect and tolerance for each
other’s ways of life, religions and cultures has been a
common cause of conflict. Mistrust and prejudice
between peoples and their differences have all too
often led to tension and even war. Diversity within
societies and between countries in fact deepens the
richness of humankind so long as the culture of peace
and intercultural dialogue are promoted.
The Security Council should place greater
emphasis on the peaceful settlement of disputes before
violence erupts. The Security Council should
encourage more dialogue between parties by making
the best use of all tools available in an effective and
timely manner before a situation further deteriorates.
The United Nations Charter envisages the role of
the Secretary-General to include giving early warning
to the Security Council. The Secretary-General may
play an active role in the promotion of intercultural
dialogue. The recent Security Council retreat
concluded that the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral should jointly maximize the use of available
means to promote dialogue and prevent conflicts. In
particular, the Council should consider how the United
Nations can increase the number of mediators and

10-37690

S/PV.6322

political representatives of high calibre. Once conflict
abates, intercultural dialogue has to be placed at the
heart of efforts to resolve conflicts and reach peace
agreements. Freedom to exercise religious belief and
respect for cultural heritage must be embedded in the
framework of every peace agreement in order to end
conflicts and prevent their recurrence. Above all,
people of different religions and cultures must learn to
coexist
peacefully.
Confidence-building
and
reconciliation measures should follow.
Intercultural dialogue is also an important
element of a successful post-conflict peacebuilding
strategy. The Security Council should recall the
thematic debate on peacebuilding last month under the
Japanese presidency. In its statement (S/PRST/2010/7)
the Council recognized the importance of inclusive
dialogue, reconciliation and integration. Education
plays an important role here because it can nurture
mutual understanding, and a culture of peace can take
root where differences can be settled through dialogue
and the rule of law without resorting to violence.
Japan is a strong advocate of human security,
with its conviction that every individual — irrespective
of religion, race, sex or place of residence — is entitled
to enjoy a peaceful, healthy life with dignity, free from
fear and free from want. Intercultural dialogue
presupposes the importance of promoting the human
security of people concerned. Japan has been bold in
increasing opportunities for intercultural dialogue,
including organizing dialogue among civilizations
between Japan and the Islamic world, exchange
programmes for youth, women and young diplomats
from various cultural backgrounds, and an Islamic,
Israeli and Palestinian youth exchange programme to
advance the Middle East peace process. We also
appreciate the strong initiative of King Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia on dialogue among religions and
civilizations.
Intercultural dialogue is the most effective
instrument for maintaining peace and security. Japan is
committed to enhancing human security through active
intercultural dialogue.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, we are
honoured by your presence today in the Security
Council. I thank Lebanon for holding this very
important debate today. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his participation.

10-37690

This is a timely moment to hold a debate on
intercultural dialogue for peace and security, coming as
it does on the eve of the Third Global Forum of the
Alliance of Civilizations, which is going to begin
tomorrow in Rio de Janeiro, as has already been
mentioned. The Forum will seek to rethink the way
tensions among different cultures are dealt with and to
launch projects for the promotion of trust and
understanding among nations. It will address questions
that include the challenges of stimulating integration in
multicultural societies and of strengthening the role of
women and of religious leaders in the advancement of
peace.
It is very fitting that today’s debate is promoted
by a country such as Lebanon, which knows and
appreciates the benefits of the peaceful coexistence of
cultures, faiths and traditions and recognizes the value
of dialogue and understanding.
The theme of our debate is also very close to the
heart of Brazilians. We are a country born of a mix of
cultures and ethnicities. We were enriched by the
significant contribution that many immigrant groups
have made to our country and culture, among which is
an important Lebanese community. For us, therefore,
intercultural dialogue is not a political preference; it is
part of our own identity. We are determined, in the
Council and elsewhere, to do our part in promoting and
facilitating such dialogue.
As noted in the background note that your
delegation, Mr. President, has prepared for this debate
(S/2010/248, annex), intercultural dialogue is in no
way alien to the concerns of the Security Council.
International peace and security cannot be sustained in
the absence of adequate communication, mutual
understanding and a minimum of trust.
As a universal organization, the United Nations is
uniquely placed to facilitate dialogue among nations
and cultures. Such dialogue is important to diffuse
tensions and to avoid a conflict. It should take place
during a conflict, in the form of peacemaking. It must
happen
afterwards,
though
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and mechanisms of reconciliation and
transitional justice.
Discussions on preventive diplomacy in the
United Nations tend to consider issues such as early
warning systems, mediation and good offices. They are
all necessary and potentially effective. However, in
cases where conflict arises or may arise due to

9

S/PV.6322

profound differences — actual or perceived — in
values, traditions and faiths, there is a deeper
perspective of preventive diplomacy that can be
explored, one that, instead of managing conflict, seeks
to eliminate or mitigate the possibility of conflict by
changing the way people and groups see and react to
differences.

relationship between the United States and Lebanon, as
well as the many common goals we share, including
reaching a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace. The
United States continues to strongly support Lebanon’s
independence and sovereignty and the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006).

Such a deeper approach seeks to promote a
structured exchange at several levels among persons,
groups, governments and cultural and religious
organizations. The goal is to correct misconceptions,
prove prejudices wrong and mitigate stereotyping and
simplistic generalizations.

We are pleased to note that there have been two
rounds of proximity talks between Israelis and
Palestinians already. We believe that through goodfaith negotiations the parties can agree to an outcome
that ends the conflict and reconciles the Palestinian
goal of an independent and viable State based on the
1967 lines, with agreed swaps, and Israel’s goal of a
Jewish State with secure and recognized borders that
reflect subsequent developments and meet Israel’s
security requirements.

One element of such an approach must be what
some have called education for tolerance — a
conscious and sustained effort to form the minds of
individuals and to influence the ethos of groups and
institutions so that they accept and even welcome the
difference. If we succeed in building institutions and
educating people in that manner, some of the intangible
but very powerful root causes of conflict in many parts
of the world will have been eliminated or abated.
The United Nations itself can also contribute to
the intercultural dialogue through peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The work with local communities,
capacity-building, support to local media, especially
radio, and projects that promote dialogue and
understanding are all means that can be used to that
purpose. They contribute to a culture of peace. They
help cement and exemplify the notion that a strong
society requires not only the absence of violence, but a
foundation of mutual trust and cooperation among
diverse traditions and beliefs.
My delegation remains ready to support all
efforts at the United Nations aimed at dispelling
cultural misconceptions that nurture resentment and
contribute to conflict. This Organization, built on the
notion of collaboration for the benefit of all, including
with regard to peace and security, has an indispensable
role to play.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and thank the
Secretary-General for the important remarks he made
today.
Mr. President, let me begin by thanking you for
your recent visit to Washington, D.C. Your visit
highlighted the enduring strength of the bilateral

10

The United States recognizes that Jerusalem is a
deeply, profoundly important issue for Israelis and
Palestinians, for Jews, Muslims and Christians. We
believe that through good-faith negotiations, the parties
can agree on an outcome that realizes the aspirations of
both parties for Jerusalem and that safeguards its status
for people around the world.
We call again on our international partners, both
inside and outside this Council, to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation between the parties. We
renew our call for Arab States to advance the promise
of the Arab Peace Initiative and take steps that show
Israelis, Palestinians and their own citizens that peace
is possible and will bring tangible benefits.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
the Council today to discuss the importance of
promoting dialogue across cultures. As the world is
woven closer together by technology and trade, new
ways of thinking are replacing old lines of division.
The United States supports frank and open dialogue in
the spirit of mutual interest and mutual respect, rooted
in the belief that cultures and faiths of the world need
not be in conflict. Indeed, despite the great diversity of
the human family, cultures the world over share
common principles of justice, progress, tolerance and
belief in the dignity of all human beings.
Exchanges such as this one help leaders share
perspectives and views directly. But we should not
neglect the importance of direct person-to-person
dialogue and cooperation. Cross-cultural exchange is a
task for citizens, not just officials. International

10-37690

S/PV.6322

exchange and training programmes have long been
important components of United States foreign policy
and outreach, but their role is now being expanded.
These programmes serve as concrete vehicles for
cooperation that can have a lasting impact. The United
States currently funds exchanges for more than
2.4 million people a year. And, while each programme
is unique, they all advance our goal of promoting
understanding among peoples. Millions of Americans,
through schools and universities, religious institutions,
youth groups and other organizations, help build close
ties with peoples all around the world through their
own informal exchanges.
Diversity and intercultural dialogue are very
much a part of America’s history and identity. What
President Obama calls “our patchwork heritage” is an
abiding source of national strength. The United States
has, in many ways, been a long experiment in bridging
cultural divides. The United States is a diverse and
pluralistic society, one that people of all religious and
cultural backgrounds call home. It is very much the
American way to celebrate the different ways in which
we have been created.
The United States recently decided to join the
Group of Friends of the Alliance of Civilizations. Over
the past five years, the Alliance has grown into an
important global network of partners that fosters
dialogue and encourages grass-roots projects in the
areas of youth, education, media and the successful
integration of migrants. We support the Alliance’s
mission, and we believe that by joining we can further
the innovative, inclusive approach of that promising
cultural initiative.
With his historic address in Cairo last year,
President Obama called for a new beginning between
the United States and Muslims around the world. As he
said,
“in order to move forward, we must say openly
the things we hold in our hearts and that too often
are said only behind closed doors. There must be
a sustained effort to listen to each other, to learn
from each other, to respect one another and to
seek common ground”.
Not all differences can be easily bridged. Not all
disputes will vanish simply from dialogue. But the
United States firmly believes that the interests we share
as human beings are far more powerful than the forces
that would drive us apart. Frank, respectful and open

10-37690

dialogue strengthens those who would resolve disputes
through negotiation and non-violence and weakens
those who would replace argument and civility with
rage, terrorism, violence, aggression and hatred.
Those who seek a partner for respectful dialogue
and those who work for just and lasting peace will
always have a friend in the United States.
Of course, recognizing our common humanity is
only the beginning of our task. Our words must be
matched with action, because, more and more, the
challenges of our interwoven age are common to all of
us, from climate change to nuclear proliferation to
pandemic disease. We need global solutions to global
challenges, and we need the respectful dialogue that
helps us find peaceful solutions to even the most
intractable problems.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to commend Your
Excellency for convening this briefing in order to
discuss the very important topic of intercultural
dialogue for peace and security.
In an increasingly globalized world, different
nations and civilizations live together and interact with
each other. Therefore, intercultural dialogue is a
permanent process with worldwide participation at all
levels and should be placed at the top of the political
agenda. At the same time, cultural diversity has
become one of the major political challenges to modern
democracies, citizenship, pluralism, social cohesion
and, above all, peace and stability among nations.
Hence, Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that
intercultural dialogue is one of the key issues of our
time.
History has shaped Europe as a multicultural,
multi-ethnic and multireligious continent. At the same
time, new realities such as migration and globalization
are expected to enrich its physiognomy, making it more
open, deeply democratic and more multicultural. This
pertains also to my country. The Balkans, as an area
characterized by countries that share many historic
events, with a richness of cultural and religious
diversity, are facing challenges and difficulties that
require a comprehensive response.
Alienation,
misconceptions,
exclusion,
marginalization and lack of knowledge about the
culture, traditions, beliefs and history of others
represent a serious threat and challenge to peaceful and

11

S/PV.6322

good relations among peoples and nations. Stereotypes
regarding religions and civilizations may have serious
political implications and create an atmosphere of
tension which can erupt into acts of violence, as we
have witnessed in many situations.
We are of the belief that intercultural and
interreligious dialogue can play an increasingly
important role in post-conflict societies, advancing
regional cooperation and solving some difficulties. It
can also be a useful tool of preventive diplomacy
aiming to defuse tensions, support mediation and
promote and encourage understanding.
Yet multiculturalism should not be defined
simply as a multitude of cultures with equal status, but
as a system based on common values and the
development of peace. Interculturality refers to a
constant interaction between cultures in the spirit of
building bridges among peoples. In that regard,
reinforcing intercultural dialogue, underlining shared
values and promoting the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means should be given the utmost priority.
Furthermore, the promotion of dialogue among various
cultures, on the basis of tolerance and respect for
diversity, can result in the reduction of tensions and
contribute to international peace and security.
Bosnia and
Herzegovina considers that
international initiatives in the field of international and
intercultural dialogue, encompassing those carried out
by the United Nations, including the Alliance of
Civilizations, have beneficial effects and should be
widely promoted. In December 2009, Bosnia and
Herzegovina hosted a conference under the banner of
the Alliance of Civilizations. On that occasion, a
Declaration was adopted endorsing the principles,
objectives and recommendations of the Regional
Strategy on Intercultural Dialogue, which aims to
contribute to the further building of bridges and
strengthening of trust through enhanced intercultural
dialogue and cooperation in the region. The
Declaration considers education, youth and media as
key instruments to build pluralistic, inclusive and
cohesive societies, and the Regional Strategy for
South-Eastern Europe was the first ever adopted in the
framework of the Alliance of Civilizations.
Intercultural dialogue as a tool of peacebuilding
is an indispensable instrument for fostering tolerance
and consolidating the values of justice, equality and
respect. It should be an integral part of nationally

12

owned peacebuilding strategies aiming at promoting
the culture of peace and turning pluralism into a source
of strength, with equality in diversity.
In a globalized world, where migration is an
inevitable phenomenon, the need for interaction among
individuals and groups and for understanding of
different cultures, traditions and beliefs will be even
greater. In that context, efforts should be made to
reduce the room for ignorance and stereotyping of
those who are different. We believe that tolerance is
essential for ensuring social cohesion. At the same
time, social cohesion is an important element for peace
and security, not only within a country but also
between countries.
In that respect, we are of the view that the
Security Council, with its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, can and
should do more in terms of preventive diplomacy and
promotion of intercultural dialogue as a mechanism for
maintaining peace and security. Efforts should be made
through a dialogue-based approach to problems,
including activities such as fact-finding missions, early
warning about potential conflicts and, in particular,
mediation and confidence-building measures.
We welcome the appointment of special
representatives and the use of good offices as
alternatives that can yield useful recommendations for
the peaceful settlement of disputes prior to preventive
deployment or enforcement measures.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina is convinced
that today’s briefing will strengthen our commitment to
dialogue as a tool that can contribute to achieving
peace and security in the world.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Mr. Prime Minister, your presence at this
meeting, which your country had the welcome
initiative to convene and for which we express our
gratitude, demonstrates once again Lebanon’s
commitment to the fundamental values of dialogue,
tolerance and peace. Intercultural dialogue is
fundamental to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Its daily practice promotes the
development and expansion of relations among peoples
and leads them to a better understanding of and
acquaintance with one another through what is deepest,
truest and most sacred for them.

10-37690

S/PV.6322

Promoting cultural diversity and its corollary,
dialogue, is the leitmotiv of the international
community as we celebrate 2010 as the International
Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures. The Security
Council cannot stand of the sidelines of this major
wave that is calling on the peoples and civilizations of
the whole world to come together though intercultural
dialogue.
My delegation attaches great importance to our
meeting today as a means of establishing synergy
between intercultural dialogue and the maintenance of
international peace and security. In an international
environment buffered by numerous currents, especially
those
generated
by
new
information
and
communications technology, the world is increasingly
becoming a global village, and the need to bring
peoples and cultures together is emerging as an
powerful necessity for building peace in the minds of
humankind. This need has been heightened by new
challenges and threats to international peace and
security such as international terrorism and religious
extremism. In this context, seeking through dialogue
means for compromise among religions, ethnic groups
and civilizations is an indispensable tool for promoting
peace between nations.
The crises and armed conflicts that characterize
much of the current international security environment
are fuelled by our passions, our blind selfishness and
our refusal to listen to others in a spirit of humanism
and humility. It is by setting aside our cultural and
individual differences that we will gradually come to
understand that what unites us as human beings is far
more important than what divides us.
From this standpoint, there is a need for the
Security Council, through its many peacekeeping
missions, to give priority to dialogue and the
reconciliation of peoples and ethnic groups emerging
from conflict. When they are effective, these two tools
contribute significantly to the restoration of social
cohesion and lasting peace. The examples of Rwanda,
Liberia and Sierra Leone illustrate this.
Here, the media also have an important role to
play in promoting intercultural dialogue and bringing
together peoples, communities and races. If there is
one thing we must strive to banish from our hearts and
minds, it is prejudice and misunderstanding among
peoples of different cultures and religions, which are
often the causes of crises and conflicts. The principles

10-37690

and ideals of the United Nations are founded on the
paradigm of a pluralistic world where intercultural
dialogue drives our common humanity.
We can spare present and future generations from
the sorrows of war, religious intolerance, terrorism and
nuclear threats only if we are able to integrate into our
thoughts and actions the cross-cutting values that,
instead of pitting our differences against one other,
incorporate them lastingly into the body of humanity.
It is through intercultural dialogue that we will
grasp the very essence of true peace: a peace which
unites and does not divide us, which champions and
does not stifle the other, and which, finally, celebrates
and does not destroy the diversity and multiplicity of
our shared heritage.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, Mr. Prime
Minister, I should like to extend a warm welcome to
you and to thank the Lebanese presidency for having
organized this meeting to discuss the importance of
intercultural dialogue as a means of safeguarding
international peace and security.
Lebanon is a living example of successful
intercultural dialogue in itself. That, coupled with your
personal
commitment
to
promoting
better
understanding among different cultures, makes this
meeting all the more meaningful and relevant as it is
taking place under the Lebanese presidency, and in
particular with you yourself in the Chair. We fully
support your efforts to consolidate the foundations of
peace and stability in Lebanon. Lebanon’s success in
openness and cultural diversity represents a beacon of
hope for the entire region.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for having made
room in his busy schedule to brief us today. I also
thank him for his kind words in response to my
country’s co-sponsorship of the Alliance of
Civilizations.
Likewise, I wish to welcome the participation in
our meeting today of Mr. Alistair Burt of the United
Kingdom.
The reason behind the creation of this universal
body 65 years ago was “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. Today we are equally
committed to the same ideals and endeavour to achieve
this goal in a security environment that is even more
challenging. Indeed, since the establishment of the

13

S/PV.6322

United Nations, the international security environment
has been transformed dramatically. Today we live in a
globalized world where more and more people from
different cultures interact constantly, shrinking the
world in unprecedented ways. As such, and as never
before, we witness global challenges having local
impacts, while local events have the power to impact
the whole world.
We also live in an increasingly complex world
where, in addition to conventional risks, new and
evolving threats emerge, posing enormous challenges
to international peace and security. Indeed,
asymmetrical risks such as terrorism, extremism,
xenophobia and religious and cultural stereotyping
present growing sources of concern for our collective
security. Given that many of these risks recognize no
national boundaries, securing and maintaining peace
today remains an even more difficult task for the
international community.
Another obvious reality we can speak about in
today’s world, so full of uncertainties, is that it is
beyond the capacity of any single country to tackle
these new challenges alone. That is why the
international community is compelled to adopt
cooperative approaches and strengthen effective
multilateralism. All of this in turn necessitates better
understanding among nations, enabling them to rise
above classic stereotypes, reject us-and-them
mentalities and engage in genuine dialogue aimed at
attaining our common objectives.
We believe that the United Nations, as the sole
international forum with universal membership, must
take the lead towards that end and exert every effort to
promote intercultural dialogue. And, given the negative
security implications of any failure to do that, the
Security Council should also assume its fair share of
responsibility while dealing with conflict situations.
That is true also because we know today that our
security cannot be ensured by military means alone.
Intercultural misconceptions are sometimes at the core
of the conflicts with which we have to grapple in the
Council. Hence, we need comprehensive strategies that
address the root causes of these misconceptions, be
they historical, cultural, social or economic. Issues
related to intercultural dialogue should therefore have
their rightful place in our policy formulations. As you
mentioned in your introductory remarks, Mr. President,
peace in the Middle East is certainly one of those areas

14

that would benefit from such a dialogue. Overall,
respect for different cultures and dialogue help
moderation and reconciliation in conflict situations.
To this end, we should first and foremost
acknowledge cultural diversity as an integral part of
the common heritage of humanity and as an asset for
the advancement of humankind. To achieve respect and
understanding among cultures, we should accept
differences, fight ignorance and prejudice, identify
commonalities, amplify voices of moderation in our
societies, and encourage dialogue at every level. Only
then will our quest for social peace and harmony be
attained.
Due to its history and geography, Turkey has a
special understanding of the need to promote
intercultural dialogue. Indeed, over centuries Turkey
has historically, geographically and socially straddled
and bridged many different cultures and tried to create
an environment of mutual understanding among them
conducive to peace, stability and prosperity. Our
thinking has been firmly based on dialogue and
cooperation, and we have always been a strong
advocate of cultural tolerance, diversity and
moderation. That is also why Turkey feels a special
responsibility to actively contribute to the promotion of
dialogue and mutual understanding in its region and
beyond. For we know by experience that intercultural
dialogue plays a constructive role in the fields of
conflict
prevention,
crisis
management
and
peacebuilding.
This is also precisely the reason why, together
with Spain, we have co-sponsored the Alliance of
Civilizations initiative. Indeed, the Alliance of
Civilizations, which was launched by the Prime
Ministers of Turkey and Spain in 2005 under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, is founded on the
very principle that different cultures and civilizations
can live together in peace provided that they have a
better understanding of the values and principles that
unite them.
Since its inception, the Alliance of Civilizations
has provided a sound platform to this end, and today it
has become a truly global peace initiative aimed at
breaking down walls of misperception, connecting
people and building bridges towards peaceful
cohabitation. Today, the Alliance serves as a global
facilitator to promote sustainable dialogue among
various stakeholders, including young people, women,

10-37690

S/PV.6322

parliamentarians, the media, civil society and the
private sector.
We are pleased to see a growing number of
Member States embrace and act upon the ideals of the
Alliance. In this framework, we welcome the United
States as the latest member of our Group of Friends,
bringing the total number to 120. Such wide
recognition and support makes us all the more hopeful
for the future, as only the commitment of Member
States to the ideals of cultural diversity can carry the
Alliance of Civilizations agenda forward.
As noted by the Secretary-General, our meeting
today has proved to be very timely for the Alliance of
Civilizations initiative as well, since the third Forum of
the Alliance will take place in a few days, on 28 and
29 May in Rio de Janeiro. We are confident that
today’s meeting and the Rio Forum will provide further
impetus for an inclusive and open platform for
intercultural dialogue.
Our history reminds us that cultural ignorance has
been one of the obstacles to peace and development.
Today, the risks are even greater in that regard.
Therefore, so long as we empower prejudice and
ignorance rather than peaceful coexistence and respect,
conflict and poverty will continue to prevail to the
detriment of all humankind.
Let us not forget that human development,
security and peace are ultimately indivisible and that
they are vital for our progress. Intercultural dialogue in
this regard will make our efforts easier and stronger
while we tackle these challenges in a collective
manner. In other words, effective multilateralism will
only benefit from a better understanding among
different cultures, as it will break down the barriers to
multilateral cooperation in many areas of common
interest. In this context, it is my very sincere belief that
our continued efforts in this direction will produce a
more tolerant and peaceful world for future
generations.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
highly appreciate your presence in the Security Council
today, Sir, and thank the Government of Lebanon for
its initiative of organizing this important meeting of the
Council, at which we have the opportunity to reflect on
a topic that is and should be of particular importance to
the Organization. The great majority of Member States
have a multi-ethnic makeup that promotes diversity
and plurality in contemporary society.

10-37690

All cultures and civilizations without exception
make their own contribution to enriching humankind in
the sense that respect for and acceptance of religious,
ethnic and cultural diversity are essential values that
strengthen the purposes and principles set out in the
United Nations Charter. My delegation welcomes
today’s discussion because we are convinced that the
active promotion of the culture of peace and dialogue
among civilizations, in which cultural diversity is
respected and encouraged, should prove to be a
fundamental value governing relations between States.
In the first decade of the twenty-first century,
armed conflict, terrorism and the most serious
violations of human rights — including genocide and
crimes against humanity — have exacerbated suspicion
and fear among various societies. Misperceptions,
ignorance and prejudice often lead to acts of violence
that threaten international coexistence. That is why it is
essential that we counter stereotypes and false
assessments that help to create patterns of hostility and
undermine trust among societies and individuals.
However, racism, xenophobia and intolerance in
all their manifestations are too deeply rooted in
contemporary reality, despite binding legal agreements
and the good diplomatic intentions that have emerged
in recent years. Intercultural dialogue undoubtedly has
a special role to play in promoting mutual
understanding and improving relations among nations.
The Security Council must, among its responsibilities,
join in efforts to promote greater rapprochement among
cultures in order to overcome prejudice and strengthen
reconciliation initiatives based on respect, tolerance,
diversity, fairness and justice. To that end, the Council
must be mindful of all extremist movements that
threaten international peace and security.
We also feel that, when we speak of intercultural
dialogue for peace and security, we should also
incorporate notions of vital importance to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, such as the
strengthening of democracy and the rule of law, the
promotion and protection of human rights, and respect
for international humanitarian law. The integration of
those elements into the decisions adopted by the
Security Council undoubtedly contributes to a culture
of peace and to respect for traditions and beliefs.
Mexico feels that we should promote the added
value of multicultural societies. While in theory the
benefits of diversity are recognized, in practice some

15

S/PV.6322

sectors fear that it could weaken the State, cause
conflicts and hold back development. We must
demolish this myth in order to promote tolerance in
favour of international peace and security.
As a nation with a deep-rooted multiethnic and
pluricultural character resulting from its history,
Mexico has a very rich and varied culture which is fed
daily by the combination of all groups and individuals
of the most diverse backgrounds, including the
Lebanese immigration and groups and individuals who
make up the Mexican nation. That is why we attach
particular importance to the dialogue between cultures.
This dialogue transcends borders whenever it deals
with the ongoing communications and interrelations
that flow between those groups and societies associated
with the natural movements of persons who, for
various reasons, emigrate to other parts of the world
but also maintain close links with their countries of
origin.
The free flow of persons should be accompanied
by cultural understanding, tolerance and constructive
dialogue in favour of open societies that respect
plurality and difference.
Mexico is part of the Group of Friends of the
initiative known as the Alliance of Civilizations, which
seeks to prioritize dialogue and the search for mutual
understanding among various cultures, both within our
own societies as well as in relations among the
peoples. Among its guiding principles the Alliance
stresses appreciation for the diversity of civilizations
and cultures, not only as a basic characteristic of
human society, but as an engine of its progress. Thus
its mechanisms are directed at promoting harmony and
easing conflicts between different societies.
My country hopes that the Middle East will
become an example of this in upcoming years,
enjoying peace and security for all States, including
Israel and Palestine.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to welcome you,
Your Excellency, Prime Minister Hariri, and to thank
you for organizing and presiding over this important
debate on intercultural dialogue for peace and security.
We thank the Secretary-General for his statement. We
also welcome the participation of The Honourable
Alistair Burt, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
Government of the United Kingdom.

16

This debate provides an opportunity to focus on
an important issue, particularly in view of General
Assembly resolution 62/90, which declared 2010 the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures.
We are convinced that promotion of intercultural
dialogue is one of the ways to foster peace and
security.
Some of the current conflicts in some parts of the
world could be attributed to a misperception and
misinterpretation of diverse cultures and beliefs. Such
misperception can also adversely affect or even fuel
hatred, stereotypes and discrimination. In this context,
therefore, dialogue and a deeper understanding
between cultures play a significant role in addressing
misconceptions and also help in fostering mutual
respect and peaceful coexistence.
We commend the work of the Alliance of
Civilizations, which has made important progress in
bringing cultures closer together and strengthening
intercultural understanding. Promoting intercultural
dialogue is also essential in building a multilateral
system based on mutual respect and in reinforcing
common interests. Discussions such as this on
intercultural dialogue create awareness and promote
international solidarity, tolerance, stability and peace.
In this increasingly globalizing world, respect for
cultural and religious diversity not only enriches
national identity but also promotes dialogue among
civilizations. That helps in creating an environment
conducive to exchange of information, building mutual
trust and understanding. Intercultural dialogue,
cooperation and harmonious coexistence contribute
significantly to the maintenance of international peace
and security. They also help in clarifying the values of
various cultures and faiths, thereby avoiding
generalizations and misconceptions.
We are convinced that as the international
community seeks to prevent and resolve conflicts and
to deal with new threats, intercultural dialogue can
play a useful role in tackling those issues. We therefore
salute UNESCO’s continued commitment to promoting
intercultural understanding, as well as the outcome of
the 2008 World Conference on Dialogue, held in
Madrid, and the Second Forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations, held in Istanbul in 2009.
It is critical to expand and strengthen crosscultural contacts among various groups, including
youth, civil society, the media and academia. It is

10-37690

S/PV.6322

important to continue promoting intercultural dialogue
for peace, for security and for development.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all I would like to express my gratitude to you,
Sir, Prime Minister Hariri, for presiding over this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement.
While the pursuit of peace, development and
cooperation has become a major trend of our times, the
world has also witnessed the emergence of new
challenges to international peace and security. The
interlinking of traditional and non-traditional security
threats, the incessant outbreak of regional conflicts and
hot-spot issues, terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction are threats that we cannot
afford to ignore. Discrimination and prejudice against
religions and cultures have given rise to violent
conflicts and strife and have caused unprecedented
clashes and friction among civilizations. The
international
community
bears
the
common
responsibility of strengthening cooperation to respond
to those challenges, and it faces the arduous task of
bridging
differences
and
seeking
common
understanding.
China supports Lebanon’s initiative to hold this
thematic debate and believes that this meeting will help
promote intercultural dialogue, enhance mutual
understanding and peaceful coexistence among
countries and maintain international peace and security.
Strengthening
interfaith
and
intercultural
dialogue is in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and is conducive to
preventive diplomacy, peaceful settlement of disputes
and post-conflict peacebuilding. It will also help the
United Nations better fulfil its responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security.
Here I would like to emphasize the following
points. First, different faiths and cultures should be
treated equally on the basis of mutual respect. While
faiths and cultures vary in terms of the era of their
origins and development, there is no hierarchy among
them in terms of merit. All are a crystallization of
human wisdom and have contributed to the progress
and development of human society and thus deserve
equal respect. Different faiths and cultures should learn
from each other and coexist peacefully.

10-37690

Secondly, intercultural dialogue should be
strengthened in an open and inclusive spirit. History
has shown that dialogue with other civilizations leads
to mutual enrichment and development. In a post-crisis
situation, strengthening intercultural dialogue is highly
practical. Dialogue and discussion represent the best
way to resolve differences and prevent conflict.
Countries should adhere to the concepts of openness,
inclusiveness and cooperation, and strengthen dialogue
to overcome barriers, dispel misunderstandings and
resolve disputes in order to prevent or reduce outbreaks
of conflict.
Thirdly, we must show respect for differences and
settle conflicts by peaceful means. Conflicts often
result from the alienation, prejudice, discrimination
and even hatred that can arise from differences. Our
world should be varied yet harmonious. We believe
that we should recognize and accept the diversity of
our world and the differences among civilizations. We
are opposed to linking terrorism to any particular
nation, ethnic group or religion. The international
community should function on the basis of mutual
trust, mutual benefit, equality and cooperation. It
should use peaceful means, such as mediation,
negotiation and good offices, to resolve problems,
settle disputes and promote the solution of regional
hot-spot issues in order to build a harmonious family of
States.
China supports and actively participates in the
efforts of the international community to promote
interfaith and intercultural dialogue and cooperation,
and has been a constructive partner in multiple United
Nations initiatives and mechanisms relating to dialogue
among civilizations and the culture of peace. China is
willing to continue to work with the international
community to strengthen intercultural dialogue and
build bridges of communication and cooperation, with
a view to creating synergies promoting the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
advancement of common human development, and the
building of a harmonious world.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria joins other
delegations in thanking Prime Minister Hariri for
taking the time to come to New York to preside over
today’s Security Council meeting. We also welcome
the presence of Mr. Alistair Burt, Under-Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, and thank him for his very insightful
contribution. We welcome the Secretary-General and

17

S/PV.6322

appreciate his thoughtful remarks. Both the theme and
the presence of Prime Minister Hariri attest to
Lebanon’s commitment to the ideals and objectives of
the United Nations.
After all the statements that have been made
around this table this morning, we are left in no doubt
that dialogue and understanding are important
instruments for international peace and security,
particularly in a pluralistic society like ours. The
United Nations is a fitting mosaic of our diversity, yet
its Members are united in the common purpose of
practicing tolerance and living together in peace with
one another.
Therein lies the significance of the theme chosen
by Lebanon for this debate. One cannot place a limit on
the power and value of dialogue in promoting mutual
cooperation, understanding, tolerance, respect for the
views and interests of others, and, ultimately, unity in
diversity. The idea of a culture of peace, dialogue of
civilizations, interfaith dialogue and other similar
concepts are not new to the United Nations. Indeed,
they are the bedrock of international cooperation. It
would seem, however, that there is a gap that
Lebanon’s initiative today will, we hope, help to fill.
What is required is the political will and determination
to promote these concepts as genuine tools for conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
There is no doubt that the search for international
peace and security would benefit from new approaches
and new perspectives.
Living as we do in a world that is integrated and
interdependent, we should cultivate and embrace a
culture of dialogue and understanding, rather than guns
and soldiers, to settle our differences. Nigeria knows at
first-hand the great challenges and benefits of a
pluralistic society. The bringing together of peoples of
diverse languages, traditions, cultures and religions has
culminated in an expansive country that has witnessed
enormously trying times and moments, but whose
innate capacity to remain united has become almost
unbreakable.
Nigeria is determined to preserve its unity and
diversity, not only for itself but also to help its
neighbours. We draw from our diversity the strength to
promote peace and contribute to efforts to maintain
peace and security elsewhere. Indeed, our national
ideals are encapsulated in our motto of “Unity and
faith, peace and progress”. Inter-community and

18

interfaith dialogues are some of the key instruments
promoted and encouraged by my Government, with the
full participation of civil society, united in the
objective of promoting harmony and peaceful
coexistence.
While considerable progress is being made within
countries to promote dialogue and understanding for
peace and stability, we believe that a great deal needs
to be done at the international level. We risk missing
out on the benefits of the global village in which all are
able to realize their different aspirations and potential
in peace and harmony. For this reason, we must all
commit to promoting dialogue as a real tool of
preventive diplomacy.
Nearly four decades ago, the late Emperor Haile
Selassie of Ethiopia warned that a philosophy that
holds one race to be superior and another inferior could
lead to war. This admonishment has played out in
different theatres around the world, fuelled by
differences in religion, ethnicity, language and culture,
with dire consequences. The time has come for us to
heed the words of Article 1 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights: “All human beings are
born free and equal in dignity and rights”. Respect for
diversity is necessary for durable peace and security.
Let me thank you once again, Mr. President, for
choosing the theme of intercultural dialogue for peace
and security as a complement to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would to join
other speakers in welcoming you, Sir, to the Security
Council today. We thank you for presiding over this
important debate and for your important remarks. We
also appreciate your commitment and that of your
country to the cause of intercultural dialogue for peace
and security. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his participation and his statement.
In an increasingly interconnected world, the need
for nations to promote peace and prosperity through
dialogue, understanding and tolerance has become ever
more important. In order to help prevent conflict, we
must do everything we can to improve understanding
among different cultures and religions, both at the
global level and within our respective countries and
regions. Dialogue aimed at enhancing mutual
understanding must involve respect for different values
and beliefs. At the same time, dialogue must be based
on the full respect for all universally accepted human

10-37690

S/PV.6322

rights and fundamental freedoms and on the principle
of the rule of law.
Important work has been done by various United
Nations bodies to underline the importance of and
enhance intercultural dialogue. We also wish to
acknowledge the initiatives taken by the SecretaryGeneral and by individual Member States. The United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, initiated by Turkey
and Spain, has become a significant global forum for
intercultural exchange and the enhancement of mutual
understanding. Austria has been an active member of
the Alliance from its very inception in 2005 and will be
represented by Foreign Minister Spindelegger in the
upcoming third annual Forum in Rio de Janeiro. We
look forward to hosting the fifth annual Forum,
scheduled for 2012 in Vienna.
Austria has a long tradition of dialogue initiatives
between cultures and religions. Our activities focus on
areas where we believe that we can find common
ground, such as the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We also attach great importance
to the promotion of social, cultural and religious
pluralism and successful management of diversity.
Fostering equal rights and opportunities for women and
promoting their role and leadership in interreligious
and intercultural dialogue are among the priority
objectives of Austria’s engagement in this field. In this
context, in 2008 Austria and Lebanon successfully
initiated a joint project entitled “The Role of Women in
Dialogue: Empowerment and Consolidation”.
Dialogue with Muslim communities and Islam
has rightly attracted attention in recent years, in
particular in Europe. I have to say that my country has
specific experience in this area. In 2012, Austria will
celebrate the centennial of legal recognition of Islam in
our country, the first decision of this kind to be taken
historically in Western Europe and a step that is of
course linked to the historical experience we share with
our neighbours at the Council table, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Just a few days ago, the Third
Conference for European Imams and Religious
Advisers took place in Vienna, with the support of the
Austrian Government. Later this year, we will host the
first Arab-European Young Leaders Forum, which aims
at encouraging emerging leaders from Europe,
including Turkey, and the Arab world to develop
partnerships for better understanding and enhanced
cooperation.

10-37690

Together with Indonesia and Singapore, we have
started a series of bilateral dialogue programmes.
Based on the first diplomatic staff exchange in the field
of intercultural dialogue with Indonesia, Austria will
continue such exchange activities with other countries
in cooperation with the League of Arab States. We
would be happy to see other countries join this
initiative.
In your remarks, Sir, you touched upon the
conflict in the Middle East, which is clearly one of the
areas where a meaningful dialogue between both sides
is essential and indispensable in the search for common
understanding. To that end, dialogue efforts should be
concentrated on concrete goals and objectives in order
to contribute to building trust and to generate real
added value. We obviously also share the view that
Jerusalem, with its unique heritage and tradition, can
and should play a key role as a place of dialogue and
encounter among cultures and civilizations.
We believe that the Security Council can make
important contributions to promoting dialogue among
cultures and civilizations with a view, in particular, to
enhancing international peace and security in relation
to relevant situations on its agenda. The Council could
more actively encourage steps towards meaningful
dialogue to help prevent and manage conflict and to
build sustainable peace, both in international and intraState conflicts, where appropriate.
Effective dialogue will normally result in
compromise solutions that balance the interests of
various actors. That being said, the Council needs to
insist at the same time that the principles of the rule of
law, the needs of transitional justice, human rights and
fundamental freedoms be respected. Intercultural
dialogue as a means of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding can be truly effective
only if all sectors of the societies concerned are
included.
The Council should therefore stress that women’s
contributions need to be integrated into dialogue
efforts, pointing to the vital role women can play in
re-establishing post-conflict societies, fostering
tolerance and building sustainable peace.
When considering the promotion of intercultural
dialogue as a means of conflict prevention and
mediation, conflict resolution or peacebuilding, the
Council could also intensify cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, which in many

19

S/PV.6322

instances have the advantage of being well acquainted
with local and regional dynamics.
In conclusion, I wish to thank you once again,
Sir, for this opportunity to reflect upon the issue of
intercultural dialogue for conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding, as well for the
important insights you have shared with us based on
your country’s unique experience in this field.
The President: I would like to thank all members
for their participation here today, and add that we
should not wait for disaster to happen before we react.

20

We say this in the very same building where we work
to prevent disasters, conflicts and wars. I believe that
intercultural dialogue is key to avoiding conflicts,
especially if it is combined with the rule of law and
very strong political will.
(spoke in Arabic)
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

10-37690
