204

General Assembly - Fortieth Session

9. Takes note of the measures taken by the bodies and
organizations of the United Nations system to promote
equal employment opportunities for disabled persons and
urges them to continue their efforts m this field;
I 0. Endorses, in particular, the terms of reference proposed in the report of the Secretary-General5 5 for the
United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year of
Disabled Persons, henceforth to be called the Voluntar}
Fund for the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons:
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
administer donated funds, using them for projects under
the present structure of the Trust Fund. and m addition to
make new provisions in order to offer a selection of projects to donor countries which might be willing to finance a
particular programme under the "Special Purpose Contributions";
12. Reaffirms that the resources of the Trust Fund
should be used to support catalytic and innovative activities in order to implement further the objectives of the
World Programme of Action within the framework of the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, with priority
given, as appropriate, to programmes and projects of the
least developed countries;
13. Requests all bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system administering assistance projects to take
into account the concerns of disabled persons in their projects for the rehabilitation of the disabled and their integration into society, as well as to include disabled persons in
their overall planning objectives;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the imple.
mentation of the present resolution:
15. Further requests the Secretary-General to mclude
in the report requested in paragraph 14 above information
on preparations for the meeting of experts to evaluate progress at the mid-Decade, as provided for in paragraph 16
of resolution 37/53 and paragraph 13 of resolution 39/26,
as ~ell as information on the establishment of inter-organ1zat1onal task forces, as recommended by the Advisory
Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons
at its third and fourth sessions and by the General Assembly in paragraph 17 of its resolution 36/77 in order to provide support services for the exchange of technical information and transfer of technological know-how and other
activities in the fields of prevention, rehabilitation and
equalization of opportunities in developing countries
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda nf its
forty-first session the item entitled "Implementation of the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons
and United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons"
96th plenary meetrng
29 Novemher 1985

40/32. Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 351171 of 15 December 1980 m
which it endorsed the Caracas Declaration, annexed· to
that resolution, and urged implementation of the conclusions relating to the new perspectives for international cooperation in crime prevention in the context of development adopted by the Sixth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,'''
_ 56 See .\~1xth_L'r:utt•d Natwns ( ,,ngrt'Ss un thi' l'rt.'~·,•nflur1 oj ('r1me und /!1,

Treatment o(Ojjendt'rs. Carac/J.\ ..'5 fo!(ust s Septemb,,, /980 rt'pwt pre
pared by the Secreranat (l 1rnted "'-la11on•- puhlicaHon Sales No F R I IV
chap I. sect C

Recalhng also its resolution 36/ 2 I of 9 November 1981.
in which the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Pre-

vention of Cnme rnd the Treatment of Offenders was
mvited to consider current and emerging trends in crime
prevention and criminal justice, with a view to defining
new guiding principles for the future course of crime prevention and cnminal justice in the context of development
needs. the goals of the International Development Strategy
for the Third Unill'd Nations Development Decade8 and
the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 21
takmg into account the political, economic, social and cultural circumstances and traditions of each country and the
need for crime pre\ ention and criminal justice system'i to
he rnnsonant with the principles of social justice.
Recalling further its resolution 39/ I l 2 of 14 December
1984. in which the Secretary-General was requested to
ensure that the substantive and organizational work of the
Seventh Congress was fully adequate for its successful outiOme.

!: mphasizrng the responsibility assumed by the United
Nations in crime prevention under General Assembly resolution 415 (V) of I December 1950, which was affirmed
by the Economic and Social Council in its resolutions 731
F 1XXVIII) of 30 July 1959 and 830 D (XXXII) of 2
August 1961, and 111 the promotion and strengthening of
mtemational co-operation in this field in accordance with
Assembly resoluti,rns .102 I (XX VII) of 18 December
19:2, 32/59 and J:' 60 of8 December 1977, 35/171 of 15
I)ecember 1980 and 361 21 of 9 November I 981,
Bearing 1n mind the theme of the Seventh Congress,
( ·rime prevention for freedom, justice, peace and devd<1pment", and the importance of preserving peace as a con,.liuon for development and international co-operation.
Welcoming the fact that the Congress, in accordance
wnh General Assembly resolution 39/ 112. paid particular
attention to the question of illicit drug trafficking.
·llarmed by the growth and seriousness of crime in
many parts of the world. including conventional and non,·onventional criminality, which havr a negative impact on
development and the quality of life.
( 'onsideringthat crime. particularly in its new forms and
dimensions, seriously impairs the development process of
'Tiany countries, a~ well as their international relations.
Voting that the function of the criminal justice system is
'O contribute to the protection of the hasic values and
1orms of society.
·I ware of the importance of enhancing the efficiency and
. :tfectiveness of criminal justice systems.
Voung that to limit etfecti vely the harm caused by
modem economi,: and unconventional crime, policy
measures should he based on an integrated approach, the
mam emphasis being placed on the reduction of opportu~1t1es to commit c-1me and on the strengthening of norms
.md attitudes agai11st 11,
I ware of the importance of crime prevention and crimi11al justice, which t·mbraces policies, processes and instituaons aimed at co11trolling criminality and ensuring equal
.md falf treatmeni for all those involved in the criminal
1ustice process,
Hind/iii that tht mcorporation <>f crime prevention and
,T1minal justice policies in the planning process can help to
ensure a better lift· for people throughout the world, promote the equality ,if rights and social securit)', enhance the
•·ffrct1veness ,,f , •ime [)revenl.it111 •-'.SIJCl1alh m 'iUcl'

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ V _ L_ _

Resolutions adopted

on

the__.':!poi:t5

of

the

Third

C o m m i t t «

___

_

_____ _

205

spheres as urbanization, industrialization, education,
health, population growth and migration, housing and
social welfare, and substantially reduce the social costs
directly and indirectly related to crime and crime control
by ensuring social justice, respect for human dignity, freedom, equality and security,
Convinced that due attention should be paid to crime
prevention and criminal justice and the related processes,
including the fate of victims of crime, the role of youth in
contemporary society and the application of United
Nations standards and norms,
Determined to improve regional, interregional and international co-operation and co-ordination to achieve further
progress in this area, including effective and full implementation of the resolutions of the Seventh Congress,
Having considered the report of the Seventh United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment ofOffenders, 57 the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 58 and the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the conclusions of the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment ofOffenders, 59 all
submitted in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
39/112,
I. Expresses its satisfaction with the report of the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders and with the preparatory
work carried out by the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control, as the preparatory body for the Congress, at
its seventh and eighth sessions and by the regional and
interregional preparatory meetings convened in co-operation with the regional commissions, interregional and
regional crime prevention institutes and interested Governments;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations of the Sixth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders and of his report on the conclusions of the Seventh Congress;
3. Approves the Milan Plan of Action, 60 adopted by
consensus by the Seventh Congress, as a useful and effective means of strengthening international co-operation in
the field of crime prevention and criminal justice;
4. Recommends the Guiding Principles for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in the Context of Development and a New International Economic Order6 1 for
national, regional and international action, as appropriate,
taking into account the political, economic, social and cultural circumstances and traditions of each country on the
basis of the principles of the sovereign equality of States
and of non-interference in their internal affairs;
5. Endorses the other resolutions adopted unanimously by the Seventh Congress;
6. Invites Governments to be guided by the Milan Plan
of Action in the formulation of appropriate legislation and
policy directives and to make continuous efforts to implement the principles contained in the Caracas Declaration
and other relevant resolutions and recommendations
adopted by the Sixth Congress, in accordance with the economic, social, cultural and political circumstances of each
country;

7. Also invites Member States to monitor systematically the steps being taken to ensure co-ordination of
efforts in the planning and execution of effective and
humane measures to reduce the social costs of crime and
its negative effects on the development process, as well as
to explore new avenues for international co-operation in
this field;
8. Invites the Comrruttee on Crime Prevention and
Control to review, at its ninth session, the Milan Plan of
Action, the resolutions and recommendations adopted
unanimously by the Seventh Congress and their implications for the programmes of the United Nations system
and to make specific recommendations on the implementation thereof in its report to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1986;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to examine, at its first regular session of 1986, the report of the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control and the recommendations of the Seventh Congress for further implementation of the Milan Plan of Action in order to provide,
within the United Nations system, overall policy guidance
on crime prevention and criminal justice. and to undertake periodically the review, monitoring and appraisal of
the Milan Plan of Action:
10. Urges the United Nations system, including the
regional and interregional institutes in the field of crime
prevention and the treatment of offenders and the relevant
non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to become
actively involved in the implementation of the recommendations of the Seventh Congress;
I I. Also urges the Department of Technical Co-operation for Development of the Secretariat and the United
Nations Development Programme to give their full support to projects of technical assistance, in particular to
developing countries, in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice and to encourage technical co-operation
among developing countries;
I 2. Requests the Secretary-General to make every
effort to translate into action, as appropriate, the relevant
recommendations and policies stemming from the Milan
Plan of Action and the Guiding Principles for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in the Context of Development and a New International Economic Order and to
ensure that the other resolutions and recommendations
adopted unanimously by the Seventh Congress are followed up adequately;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his report to
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, to initiate a review, as a matter of urgency, of the functioning and
programme of work of the United Nations in the field of
crime prevention and criminal justice, including the
United Nations regional and interregional institutes, paying special attention to improving the co-ordination of relevant activities within the United Nations in all related
areas in order to establish priorities and ensure the continuing relevance and responsiveness of the United
Nations to emerging needs, and to submit the final report
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 1987;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to circulate
the report of the Seventh Congress to Member States and
intergovernmental organizations in order to ensure that it

57 Seventh United Nations Congress on rhe Preventwn of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, Milan, 26 August-6 September /985: report prepared
hy the Secretariat (United Nations publication. Sales No. E 86.IY.I).

60 See Seventh United Narum, ( ·ongres, on the Prevent/On o{Cr,me and the
Treatment of Offenders, Milan . .'o August-6 Septembn /985: report prepared
hv the .\'perctariat (United Nati0n, publication, Sales No. E.8&.IV. I). chap. I.

58 A/40/482 and Corr. I and 2
59 A/40/751.

sect. A
'" l/•11/

,,•et. H

206

General Assembly

is disseminated as widely as possible. and to strengthen
information activities in this field:
15. Requests the Secretary-General to rnbmit to the
General Assembly, at its forty-first session, a report on the
measures taken to implement the present resolution:
16. Decides to include in the proviswn;il agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled"·( 'rim,· r•revention and
criminal justice".
<J6th plenary meeting
29 N,,1•cmher !Qfi5

40/33.

United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Administration of Juvenile .Justice (Tht>
Beijing Rules)

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 6 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights 7 and the International Covenant on Economic
Social and Cultural Rights,' as well as other international
human rights instruments pertaining to the rights of young
persons,
Also bearing in mind that 1985 was designated the Inter
national Youth Year: Participation. Development, Peace
and that the international community has placed 1mpor
tance on the protection and promotion of the rights of the
young, as witnessed by the significance ;cittacht'd t,) th,
Declaration of the Rights of the Child."-'
Recalling resolution 4 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders," 1 which called for the develop
ment of standard minimum rules for thf" administration ot
juvenile justice and the care of juveniles which could serv1
as a model for Member States.
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision
1984/153 of 25 May 1984, b) which the draft rules were
forwarded to the Seventh United Nations ( 'ongress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders. held
at Milan, Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985
through the Interregional Preparaton Meeting ht'ld at
Beijing from 14to 18 May 1984, 64
Recognizing that the young, owing to their early stage of
human development, require particular care and assistance with regard to physical, mental and social development, and require legal protection in conditions of peace
freedom, dignity and secunty,
Considering that existing national legislation, policies
and practices may well require review and amendment in
view of the standards contained in the rules,
Considering further that, although such standards ma)
seem difficult to achieve at present, m view of existing
social, economic, cultural, political and legal conditions
they are nevertheless intended to be attainable as a poliC\
minimum,
1. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, the Secre
tary-General, the United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders and other United Nations institutes in the
development of the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice;
2. Takes note with apprecia/lnn of the report ,if th1·
Secretary-General on the draft l nited Nations Standan \
62 Resolution 1386 (XIV)
63 See Sixth United Nations Congress on the l'rcver11<or1 of Cnme and th,

Treatment of Offenders, Caracas, 25 August 'Septemher /C/80 report pr,•
pared by the Secretarial IUnited Nations r,nh!,cat,,,,, \ale, No F ~ I IV,,
chap. I, sect R

fortieth Session

\.1mimum Rules for thf" Administration of Juvenile Jus1 I( 1.•:"'

t ·ommends the Interregional Preparatory Meeting
t1eld at Beijing fo, having finalized the text of the rules
,ubmitted to the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders for
Pnsideration and final action:
..i
Adopts the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice recom
mended by the Seventh Congress, contained in the annex
1:0 !he present resolution, and approves the recommendauon of the Seventh Congress that the Rules should be
known as "the Beijing Rules";
', Invites Member States to adapt, wherever this i~
necessary, their national legislation, policies and practices.
particularly in traming juvenile justice personnel, to the
lk,jing Rules and Teo bring the Rules to the attention ofrel,·vant authorities and the public in general;
n. Calls upon the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control to formulate measures for the effective implementat10n of the BeiJing Rules, with the assistance of the
United Nations institutes on the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders;
Invites Member States to inform the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Beijing Rules and to
report regularly to the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control on the results achieved;
t1. Requests Member States and the Secretary-General
to undertake research and to develop a data base with
respect to effective policies and practices in the adminisltation of juvenile Justice;
'i. Requests the Secretary-General and invites Member
States to ensure the widest possible dissemination of the
text of the Beijing Rules in all of the official languages of
the United Nations, including the intensification of information activities 1n the field of juvenile justice;
l 0. Requests rhe Secretary-General to develop pilot
projects on the implementation of the Beijing Rules;
I I. Requests the Secretary-General and Member States
to provide the necessary resources to ensure the successful
,mplementation of the Beijing Rules, in particular in the
areas of recruitment, training and exchange of personnel,
research and evaluation, and the development of new
alternatives to institutionalization;
12. Requests the Eighth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
to review the progress made in the implementation of the
Beijing Rules and of the recommendations contained in
the present resolution, under a separate agenda item on
,uvenile justice;
13. Urges all relevant bodies of the United Nations
~)'stem, in particular the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the United Nations institutes for the prewntion of crime and the treatment of offenders, other
mtergovemmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to collaborate with the Secretariat and to
take the necessary measures to ensure a concerted and sustamed effort, within their respective fields of technical
competence, to implement the principles contained in the
tkijing Rules.

96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985
o4 See "Report of the Interregional Preparatory Meeting for the Seventh
l lmted Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
"ffenden; on topic IV youth, crime and justi~" (NCONF 121 'IPM/I ).
"· 1 Af\)NF11114 1ndror,I
