A/RES/70/130

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 February 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 29 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/482)]

70/130. Violence against women migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on violence against women migrant
workers and those adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women, the
Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, and also recalling the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women, 1
Reaffirming the provisions concerning women migrant workers contained in
the outcome documents of the World Conference on Human Rights, 2 the
International Conference on Population and Develop ment, 3 the Fourth World
Conference on Women 4 and the World Summit for Social Development 5 and their
reviews,
Reaffirming also the provisions concerning women migrants contained in the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Develo pment, 6
and calling upon States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants regardless of migration status, especially
those of women and children, and to encourage their active participation, as
appropriate, in processes that contribute to decision-making, planning and
implementation of policies and programmes for sustainable development at all
levels,
Reaffirming further that the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women 7 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 8 and
_______________
1

Resolution 48/104.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
5
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
6
Resolution 66/288, annex.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
8
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
2

15-16884 (E)

*1516884*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/130

Violence against women migrant workers

the Optional Protocols thereto, 9 as well as other relevant conventions and treaties,
provide an international legal framework and a comprehensive set of measures for
the elimination and prevention of all forms of discrimination and violence against
women and girls and for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 10
and acknowledging that the 2030 Agenda covers the achievement of gender equality
and empowerment of all women and girls and the protection of labour rights and
promotion of safe and secure working environments for all workers, including
migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious
employment, and also acknowledging the need, inter alia, to end all violence and
discrimination against them,
Acknowledging the role of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), including in supporting national efforts,
to increase women’s access to economic opportunities, including for women migrant
workers, and to end violence against them, in the light of the UN-Women strategic
plan, 2014–2017, 11 which has among its six goals increasing women’s access to
economic opportunities, and preventing violence against women and girls and
expanding access to services for survivors, and ackno wledging the policy and
programmatic work of UN-Women on empowering women migrant workers,
Reaffirming the outcomes of the Fourth World Conference on Women, the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 4 and of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”, 12 and their reviews,
Welcoming the political declaration adopted by the Commission on the Status
of Women at its fifty-ninth session on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of
the Fourth World Conference on Women, 13 and taking note, in particular, of the
pledge to take further concrete action to ensure the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
documents of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the agreed conclusions adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-seventh session, 14 and taking note,
in particular, of the commitment, as appropriate, to further adopt and implement
measures to ensure the social and legal inclusion and protection of women migrants,
including women migrant workers in countries of origin, transit and destination,
promote and protect the full realization of their human rights and their protection
against violence and exploitation, implement gender-sensitive policies and
programmes for women migrant workers and provide safe and legal channels that
recognize their skills and education, provide fair labour conditions and, as
appropriate, facilitate their productive employment and decent work as well as
integration into the labour force,
_______________
9

Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378; and vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
11
UNW/2013/6.
12
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
13
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I,
sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
14
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
10

2/11

Violence against women migrant workers

A/RES/70/130

Recalling the declaration of the United Nations High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development, 15 held on 3 and 4 October 2013, which
reaffirmed the need to promote and protect effectively the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status,
especially those of women and children, and to address international migration
through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a
comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of
countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human
rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their
vulnerability,
Recalling also that the declaration recognized that women and girls account
for almost half of all international migrants at the global level and the need to
address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and girls by, inter
alia, incorporating a gender perspective into policies and streng thening national
laws, institutions and programmes to combat gender-based violence, including
trafficking in persons and discrimination against them, and emphasized in this
regard the need to establish appropriate measures for the protection of women
migrant workers in all sectors, including those involved in domestic work,
Taking note with appreciation of the adoption by the International Labour
Conference on 16 June 2011, at its 100th session, of the Domestic Workers
Convention, 2011 (No. 189) and Recommendation No. 201 on decent work for
domestic workers, of the International Labour Organization, and the entry into force
of the Convention on 5 September 2013, and inviting States to consider ratifying it,
encouraging States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women to take note of and consider general recommendation
No. 26 on women migrant workers adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women in November 2008, 16 and encouraging States parties
to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families 17 to take note of and consider general
comment No. 1 on migrant domestic workers adopted by the Committee on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in
December 2010, 18 acknowledging that they are complementary and mutually
reinforcing,
Recognizing the urgency of combating trafficking in persons in all its forms,
including for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour, particularly of women
migrant workers, and in this regard taking note of the adoption by the International
Labour Conference on 11 June 2014, at its 103rd session, of the Protocol to the
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and of Recommendation No. 203 on
supplementary measures for the effective suppression of forced labour, of the
International Labour Organization,
Recognizing also the increasing participation of women of all skill levels in
international migration, driven in large part by socioeconomic factors, and that this
feminization of migration requires greater gender sensitivity in all policies and
efforts related to the subject of international migration,
_______________
15

Resolution 68/4.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/64/38), part one,
annex I, decision 42/I.
17
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
18
CMW/C/GC/1.
16

3/11

A/RES/70/130

Violence against women migrant workers

Recognizing further that the demand for migrant care work appears to be
rising, where the failure to resolve care deficits and secure public provision of care
has increased the demand for care work, particularly in the private sphere, and that
some migrant workers engaged in informal care work, particularly women, face
serious human rights abuses owing to the invisible nature of their workplace, while
many benefit from the economic opportunities offered by care work,
Recognizing the roles and responsibilities of and need for cooperation among
all stakeholders, in particular countries of origin, transit and destination, relevant
regional and international organizations, the private sector and civil society, in
promoting an environment that prevents and addresses violence against women
migrant workers, including in the context of discrimination, through targeted
measures, and in this regard recognizing the importance of joint and collaborative
approaches and strategies at the national, bilateral, regional and international levels,
Recognizing also that women migrant workers have the potential to foster
equitable, inclusive and sustainable growth and human development through the
economic and social impacts, as a result of their work, on countries of origin and
destination, and underlining the value and dignity of their labour, including the
labour of domestic and care workers,
Recognizing further the particular vulnerability and needs of women and their
children at all stages of the migration process, extending from the moment of
deciding to migrate, and including transit, engagement in formal and informal
employment and integration into the host society, as well as during their return to
and reintegration in their countries of origin,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing reports of grave abuses and
violence committed against migrant women and girls, including gender -based
violence, sexual violence, domestic and family violence, racist and xenophobic acts,
discrimination, abusive labour practices, exploitative conditions of work and
contemporary forms of slavery, inter alia, all forms of forced labour and trafficking
in persons,
Recognizing that one of the key causes of the labour exploitation suffered by
migrants, including women migrant workers, is linked to the unscrupulous practices
of some recruitment agencies and informal brokers that charge high recruitment
fees, and noting with concern the reports of abuse committed by some recruitment
agencies and employers,
Recognizing also that the intersection of, inter alia, gender, age, class, race an d
ethnic discrimination and stereotypes can compound the discrimination faced by
women migrant workers and that gender-based violence is a form of discrimination,
Reaffirming the commitment to respect, protect and promote the human rights
of all women, including, without discrimination, indigenous women who migrate for
work, and in this regard noting the attention paid in the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 19 to the elimination of all forms of violence and
discrimination against indigenous women, as appropriate,
Noting that the priority theme of the sixtieth session of the Commission on the
Status of Women will be “Women’s empowerment and its link to sustainable
development” and that migration can enable equitable, inclusive and sustainable
_______________
19

4/11

Resolution 61/295, annex.

Violence against women migrant workers

A/RES/70/130

growth and human development for countries of origin and destination, migrants
and their families, and in this regard recognizing the potential role of women
migrant workers in contributing to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,
Concerned that many migrant women who are employed in the informal
economy and in less skilled work are especially vulnerable to abuse and
exploitation, underlining in this regard the obligation of States to protect the human
rights of migrants so as to prevent and address abuse and exploitation, observing
with concern that many women migrant workers take on jobs for which they may be
overqualified and in which, at the same time, they may be more vulnerable because
of poor pay and inadequate social protection, and in this regard taking note of the
adoption by the International Labour Conference on 12 June 2015, at its
104th session, of Recommendation No. 204 concerning the transition from the
informal to the formal economy,
Emphasizing the need for objective, comprehensive and broad-based
information, including sex- and age-disaggregated data and statistics, and gendersensitive indicators for research and analysis, and a wide exchange of experience
and lessons learned by individual Member States and civil society in the formulati on
of targeted policies and concrete strategies to specifically address violence against
women migrant workers, including in the context of discrimination,
Realizing that the movement of a significant number of women migrant
workers may be facilitated and made possible by means of fraudulent or irregular
documentation and sham marriages with the object of migration, that this may be
facilitated through, inter alia, the Internet and that those women migrant workers are
more vulnerable to abuse and exploitation,
Recognizing the importance of exploring the link between migration and
trafficking in persons in order to further efforts towards protecting women migrant
workers from violence, discrimination, exploitation and abuse,
Recognizing also that the vulnerabilities documented for women migrant
workers highlight increasingly complex migration contexts and channels, where
migrant workers may find themselves in life-threatening situations when entering
other countries,
Encouraged by some measures adopted by some countries of destination to
alleviate the plight of women migrant workers residing in their areas of jurisdiction
and to promote access to justice, such as the establishment of gender -sensitive
protection mechanisms for migrant workers, facilitating t heir access to mechanisms
for reporting complaints or providing assistance during legal proceedings,
Underlining the important role of relevant United Nations treaty bodies in
monitoring the implementation of human rights conventions and of the relevant
special procedures, as well as of the supervisory mechanisms of the International
Labour Organization in monitoring the implementation of labour rights instruments,
within their respective mandates, in addressing the problem of violence against
women migrant workers and in protecting and promoting their human rights and
welfare,

5/11

A/RES/70/130

Violence against women migrant workers

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
violence against women migrant workers; 20
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General
on the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, 21 which highlights, inter alia, that overall progress in the
implementation of the Platform for Action has been particularly slow for women and
girls who experience multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and that
marginalized groups of women, including migrant women, are at particul ar risk of
discrimination and violence;
3.
Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant International Labour
Organization conventions, including the Migration for Employment Convention
(Revised), 1949 (No. 97), 22 the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143),23 the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997
(No. 181) 24 and the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), and to consider
signing and ratifying or acceding to the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 17 the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 25 the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea
and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 26 the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 27
and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 28 as well as all other
human rights treaties that contribute to the protection of the rights of women
migrant workers, calls upon States parties to comply with their relevant obligations
under international law, and also encourages Member States to implement the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons; 29
4.
Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on the human rights of migrants submitted to the Council at its seventeenth
and twentieth sessions, 30 in particular their elaboration of the vulnerabilities and
challenges faced by irregular migrants, including negative public perceptions an d
limited access to protection, assistance and justice, and of the report of the Special
Rapporteur submitted to the Council at its twenty-sixth session, 31 in particular the
focus of its thematic part on labour exploitation of migrants, covering some of the
most common manifestations of labour exploitation affecting migrants;

_______________
20

A/70/205.
E/CN.6/2015/3.
22
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 120, No. 1616.
23
Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
24
Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
25
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
26
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
27
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
28
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
29
Resolution 64/293.
30
A/HRC/17/33 and A/HRC/20/24.
31
A/HRC/26/35.
21

6/11

Violence against women migrant workers

A/RES/70/130

5.
Encourages all United Nations agencies and special rapporteurs on
human rights whose mandates touch on the issues of violence against women
migrant workers to improve the collection of information on and analysis of those
areas within their mandates relating to the current challenges facing women migrant
workers, including in supply chains, and also encourages Governments to cooperate
with the agencies and special rapporteurs in this regard;
6.
Calls upon all Governments to incorporate a human rights, gender sensitive and people-centred perspective in legislation, policies and programmes on
international migration and on labour and employment, consistent with their human
rights obligations and commitments under human rights instruments, for the
prevention of and protection of migrant women against violence and discrimination,
exploitation and abuse, to take effective measures to ensure that such migration and
labour policies do not reinforce discrimination, and, where necessary, to conduct
impact assessment studies of such legislation, policies and programmes in order to
identify the impact of measures taken and the results achieved in regard to women
migrant workers;
7.
Calls upon Governments to adopt or strengthen measures to protect the
human rights of women migrant workers, including domestic workers, regardless of
their immigration status, including in policies that regulate the recruitment and
deployment of women migrant workers, to consider expanding dialogue among
States on devising innovative methods to promote legal channels of migration, inter
alia, in order to deter irregular migration, to consider incorporating a gender
perspective into immigration laws in order to prevent discrimination and violence
against women, including in independent, circular and temporary migration, and to
consider permitting, in accordance with national legislation, women migrant
workers who are victims of violence to apply for residency permits ind ependently of
abusive employers or spouses, and to eliminate abusive sponsorship systems;
8.
Encourages Governments to seek to address the push and pull factors
surrounding women’s irregular migration, including the need to resolve care deficits
in labour-importing countries and to regulate, formalize, professionalize and protect
the terms and conditions of employment in care work, in line with national law and
applicable obligations under international law;
9.
Urges Governments to enhance bilateral, regional, interregional and
international cooperation to address violence against women migrant workers, fully
respecting international law, including international human rights law, as well as to
strengthen efforts to reduce the vulnerability of women migrant workers by
promoting decent work, by, inter alia, adopting minimum wage policies and
employment contracts in accordance with applicable laws and regu lations,
facilitating effective access to justice and effective action in the areas of law
enforcement, prosecution, prevention, capacity-building and victim protection and
support, exchanging information and good practices in combating violence and
discrimination against women migrant workers and fostering sustainable
development alternatives to migration in countries of origin;
10. Also urges Governments to take into account the best interests of the
child by adopting or strengthening measures to respect, promote and protect the
human rights of migrant children, especially girls, including unaccompanied girls,
regardless of their immigration status, so as to prevent labour and economic
exploitation, discrimination, commercial sexual exploitation, sexual harassment,
violence and sexual abuse in the workplace, including in domestic work;

7/11

A/RES/70/130

Violence against women migrant workers

11. Further urges Governments to strongly encourage all stakeholders,
especially the private sector, including employment agencies involved in recruiting
women migrant workers, to strengthen the focus on and funding support for the
prevention of violence against women migrant workers, in particular by promoting
the access of women to meaningful and gender-sensitive information and education
on, inter alia, the costs and benefits of migration, rights and benefits to which they
are entitled in the countries of origin and employment, overall conditions in
countries of employment and procedures for legal migration, as well as to ensure
that laws and policies governing recruiters, employers and interme diaries promote
adherence to and respect for the human rights and, where applicable, labour rights
of migrant workers, particularly women;
12. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the
transparent, safe, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of remittances of migrants to
their countries of origin or to any other countries, including, where appropriate, by
reducing transaction costs and implementing woman-friendly remittance transfer,
savings and investment schemes, including diaspora investment schemes, in
conformity with applicable national legislation, and to consider, as appropriate,
measures to solve other problems that may impede women migrant workers’ access
to and management of their economic resources;
13. Encourages States to consider designing and implementing financial
literacy training programmes for women migrant workers and, where appropriate,
their families, and other programmes that may contribute to the full development
impact of migration;
14. Calls upon States to address the structural and underlying causes of
violence against women migrant workers through education, dissemination of
information and awareness-raising, by promoting their empowerment and access to
decent work and, where relevant, their integration into the formal economy, in
particular in economic decision-making, and by promoting their participation in
public life, as appropriate;
15. Calls upon Governments to promote access to adequate health-care
services for women migrant workers and their accompanying children;
16. Also calls upon Governments to recognize the right of women migrant
workers and their accompanying children, regardless of their immigration status, to
have access without discrimination to emergency health care, including in times of
humanitarian crises, natural disasters and other emergency situations, and in this
regard to ensure that women migrant workers are not discriminated against on the
grounds of pregnancy and childbirth and, in accordance with national legislation, to
address the vulnerabilities to HIV experienced by migrant populations and support
their access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support;
17. Encourages Governments to ensure the appropriate use of voluntary and
confidential HIV testing and pregnancy testing to prevent unwarranted barriers prior
to and during migration;
18. Urges States that have not yet done so to adopt and implement legislation
and policies that protect all women migrant workers, including those in domestic
work, to include therein, and improve where necessary, relevant monitoring and
inspection measures in line with applicable International Labour Organization
conventions and other instruments to ensure compliance with international
obligations and to grant women migrant workers in domestic service access to
gender-sensitive, transparent mechanisms for bringing complaints against
8/11

Violence against women migrant workers

A/RES/70/130

recruitment agencies and employers, including terminating their contracts in case of
labour and economic exploitation, discrimination, sexual harassment, violence and
sexual abuse in the workplace, while stressing that such instruments should not
punish women migrant workers, and calls upon States to promptly investigate and
punish all violations of their rights;
19. Calls upon Governments, in cooperation with international organizations,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other stakeholders, to
provide women migrant workers who are victims of violence, irrespective of their
immigration status, in line with domestic legislation, with the full ran ge of
emergency assistance and protection and, to the extent possible, gender -sensitive
services that are culturally and linguistically appropriate, in accordance with
relevant international human rights instruments and applicable conventions;
20. Also calls upon Governments to ensure that legislative provisions and
judicial processes are in place for women migrant workers’ access to justice, to
enhance, develop or maintain legal frameworks and specific gender -sensitive
policies to explicitly meet their needs and rights and, where necessary, to take
appropriate steps to reform existing legislation and policies to capture their needs
and protect their rights;
21. Further calls upon Governments, in particular those of the countries of
origin and destination, to put in place penal and criminal sanctions, in order to
punish perpetrators of violence against women migrant workers and intermediaries,
and gender-sensitive redress and justice mechanisms that victims can access
effectively and that allow their views and concerns to be presented and considered
at appropriate stages of proceedings, including other measures that will allow
victims to be present during the judicial process, when possible, and to protect
women migrant workers who are victims of violence from revictimization, including
by authorities;
22. Urges all States to adopt and implement effective measures to put an end
to the arbitrary arrest and detention of women migrant workers and to take action to
prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of the liberty of women migrant
workers by individuals or groups;
23. Encourages Governments to formulate, implement and refine training
programmes for their law enforcement officials, immigration officers and border
officials, diplomatic and consular officials, judiciary, prosecutors, public sector
medical staff and other service providers, with a view to sensitizing those public
sector workers to the issue of violence against women migrant workers and
imparting to them the necessary skills and attitude to ensure the delivery of proper,
professional and gender-sensitive interventions;
24. Also encourages Governments to promote coherence between migration,
labour and anti-trafficking policies and programmes concerning women migrant
workers, based on a human rights, gender-sensitive and people-centred perspective,
to ensure that the human rights of women migrant workers are protected throughout
the migration process and to enhance efforts to prevent violence against women
migrant workers, prosecute perpetrators and protect and support victims and their
families;

9/11

A/RES/70/130

Violence against women migrant workers

25. Calls upon States, in accordance with the provisions of article 36 of the
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, 32 to ensure that, if a woman migrant
worker is arrested or committed to prison or custody pending trial, or is detained in
any other manner, the competent authorities respect her freedom to communicate
with and have access to the consular officials of the country of her nationality and,
in this regard, to inform without delay, if that woman migrant worker so requests,
the consular post of her State of nationality;
26. Invites the United Nations system and other concerned intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with Governments, within existing
resources, towards a better understanding of the issues concerning women and
international migration, and to improve the collection, dissemination and analysis of
sex- and age-disaggregated data and information in order to assist in the formulation
of migration and labour policies that are, inter alia, gender -sensitive and that protect
human rights, as well as to aid in policy assessment and to continue to support
national efforts to address violence against women migrant workers in a coordinated
way that ensures effective implementation, enhances their impact and strengthens
positive outcomes for women migrant workers;
27. Encourages Governments, in accordance with their applicable legal
obligations, to formulate national policies concerning women migrant workers that
are based on up-to-date, relevant sex-disaggregated data and analysis, in close
consultation with women migrant workers and relevant stakeholders throughout the
policy process, and also encourages Governments to ensure that this process is
adequately resourced and that the resulting policies have measurable targets and
indicators, timetables and monitoring and accountability measures, in particular for
employment agencies, employers and public officials, and provide for impact
assessments and ensure multi-sector coordination within and between countries of
origin, transit and destination through appropriate mechanisms;
28. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries
of origin, transit and destination, to avail themselves of the expertise of the United
Nations, including the Statistics Division of the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat, the International Labour Organization and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women),
to develop and enhance appropriate sex-disaggregated national data collection,
analysis and dissemination methodologies that will generate comparable data, and
tracking and reporting systems on violence against women migrant workers and,
wherever possible, on violations of their rights at all stages of the migration process,
and:
(a) To further study the costs of violence against women, including migrant
workers, to the women themselves, their families and their communities;
(b) To analyse the opportunities available to women migrant workers and
their impact on development;
(c) To support the improvement of macrodata on migration costs and on
remittances, for appropriate policy formulation and implementation;
29. Requests Governments and international organizations to take
appropriate measures to give due consideration to the declaration of the United
Nations High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development, 15 held in
_______________
32

10/11

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

Violence against women migrant workers

A/RES/70/130

New York on 3 and 4 October 2013, in order to ensure that the human rights and
human development aspects of women’s migration are adequately integrated into
national, regional and international development policy and practice, such as
poverty reduction strategies and strategies aimed at implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development;
30. Encourages the United Nations system and related entities to continue
and step up their efforts and promote partnerships with all stakeholders, including
civil society organizations, and to coordinate their work in support, as appropriate,
of effective implementation of relevant international and regional instruments in
order to enhance their impact through concrete positive outcomes for the
advancement of women migrant workers’ rights;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive, analytical
and thematic report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the
problem of violence against women migrant workers and on the implementation of
the present resolution, taking into account updated information from the
organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the International Labour
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, UN -Women and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as the reports of special
rapporteurs that refer to the situation of women migrant workers and other relevant
sources, such as the International Organization for Migration, including
non-governmental organizations.
80th plenary meeting
17 December 2015

11/11
