S/PV.6489

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
:

Sixty-sixth year

6489th meeting
Friday, 25 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2011/73)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-24382 (E)

*1124382*

S/PV.6489

(S/2011/73). I also appreciate the opportunity to
exchange views with the Council on the most recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau. There has been
progress in the political and security environments in
the country, although the situation remains complex
and tenuous.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (S/2011/73)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in this
meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau, to the Council table.
Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome His Excellency Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Júnior.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
At this meeting, I will give a briefing, pursuant to
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/73, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
I now give the floor to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: It is a privilege for me to present
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)

2

With the Council’s permission, I will focus today
on four main areas: the efforts deployed to enhance the
stability of State institutions and to jump-start
implementation of the security sector reform
programme for the defence sector; the progress made
in the national dialogue and conference process; the
latest developments with regard to the fight against
impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime; and
finally, the complex relationship between the national
authorities of Guinea-Bissau and international partners.
The Council will recall that, in its presidential
statement of 22 July 2010 (S/PRST/2010/15), the
Security
Council
requested
the
international
community and the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
support the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in its efforts to strengthen and
stabilize State institutions in the country. As the
Council is already aware, ECOWAS and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
have developed a road map in support of the
implementation of the security sector reform
programme and to help enhance the stability of State
institutions in Guinea-Bissau. The ECOWAS
Mediation and Security Council adopted the road map
on 24 November and submitted it to ECOWAS heads
of State and Government for final endorsement. It is
important to continue to impress upon the leadership of
Guinea-Bissau and ECOWAS the importance of
materializing their plans for jump-starting the security
sector reform programme in the defence and security
sectors to contribute to the stabilization process in
Guinea-Bissau without delay.
At the national level, the adoption of the road
map by the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council
gave new impetus to efforts by technical partners to
jump-start the process. On 10 December, the National
Security Sector Reform Steering Committee, cochaired by the Minister of Defence, expressed its full
alignment with the road map and called on the
leadership of Guinea-Bissau and ECOWAS to expedite
its final endorsement.

11-24382

S/PV.6489

In addition, on 6 December, the National Popular
Assembly endorsed a bilateral agreement worth
$30 million between the Governments of Angola and
Guinea-Bissau to support security sector reform. That
agreement provides for the completion of a number of
tasks that fall under the ECOWAS-CPLP partnership
and the road map and should complement regional
efforts to help the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
advance its national priorities on security sector
reform. In January, a first group of Angolan military
and police officers was deployed to Guinea-Bissau to
work on plans to rehabilitate military infrastructure and
fine-tune training plans with their national
counterparts. We are told that the bulk of the Angolan
team will be deployed by the end of this month.
In recent weeks, I have continued to work with
the national authorities, in particular the President and
the Prime Minister, to underscore the importance of a
continuing firm commitment on the part of all national
stakeholders, in particular the political and military
leadership, to the ECOWAS-CPLP partnership and the
road map. In addition to my efforts with the national
authorities, in December I also wrote to Mr. James
Victor Gbeho, President of the ECOWAS Commission,
to reiterate the urgency of the adoption of the road map
at the level of ECOWAS heads of State and
Government in order not to lose momentum.
Furthermore, consistent with the provisions of
resolution
1949
(2010),
which
requested
comprehensive information detailing the proposed
modalities, timing and resources relating to the
implementation of the ECOWAS road map, I proposed
to the President of the ECOWAS Commission that
ECOWAS and CPLP experts begin working together
with national counterparts without further delay, with a
view to developing realistic timelines and benchmarks
in accordance with conditions set by international
partners, to enable us to revert to the Security Council
in a timely manner. I remain confident that the United
Nations will be in a better position to report to the
Security Council in the next progress report of the
Secretary-General, following the deployment of the
joint United Nations-ECOWAS-CPLP assessment
mission requested in the resolution. That exercise will
also be important for finalizing the ongoing
benchmarking exercise that is jointly being conducted
by UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team in
order to finalize the mission’s strategic work plan with

11-24382

the appropriate benchmarks
UNIOGBIS exit strategy.

and

to

devise

the

I would like to emphasize the positive momentum
generated by the partnership between ECOWAS and
the CPLP and the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
which in recent months has had a critical impact on the
political and security environment in the country.
President Malam Bacai Sanhá and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Júnior have maintained a close dialogue
in recent months on major domestic issues, including
on the decision to release the military officers who
were detained without due process since the 1 April
events. On 20 January, on the occasion of National
Heroes’ Day, both leaders publicly claimed their
mutual respect and their resolve to strengthen the
stability of national institutions. That move prompted
the military leadership to confirm, through the Chief of
General Staff, that the military would continue to stay
out of politics, and to pledge support for the
Government throughout the rest of its term and the
tenure of the current legislature, until 2012.
Progress was also made in recent weeks on the
national dialogue process, which is expected to result
in the holding of the national conference in mid-2011.
With the financial and technical support of
UNIOGBIS, a series of eight national consultations
were organized in December and January with
personnel from the defence and security forces. Those
efforts, which took place amidst important
consultations on the issue of the ECOWAS-CPLP road
map for support to security sector reform in GuineaBissau, have revealed a profound desire for change
among the rank and file.
The consultations, which also involved
representatives from Government institutions, civil
society and the media, alongside parliamentarians,
deplored the negative connotation of the armed forces
in Guinea-Bissau and its responsibility in the
successive crises faced by the country. The first round
of consultations with the defence and security forces
came up with a series of recommendations, including
on the need for a separation of roles for the defence
and security sectors; a career structure; mobility based
on merit; and an improvement in conditions of service.
The next step in the national dialogue will involve
consultations in March with the diaspora in the
subregion and Europe, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, as well as nine
regional conferences, to be held in April and May

3

S/PV.6489

throughout the country, to conclude the preparatory
process for the national conference.
Another area under institutional reform where
progress was made in recent months was the
constructive debate on a possible review of the GuineaBissau Constitution. In their statements at the opening
of the last session of Parliament, on 19 November
2010, President Malam Bacai Sanhá and the Speaker of
Parliament insisted on the need to consider that reform
as a priority for the stability of State institutions. At the
initiative of the parliamentary commission in charge of
the review of the Constitution, and in collaboration
with the Bissau Faculty of Law, UNIOGBIS organized
a series of debates and seminars for members of
Parliament representing all four political parties in
Parliament.
The purpose of those exercises, conducted in
December 2010 and January 2011, was to increase
awareness among the main political actors about
constitutional issues and to stimulate reflection on the
constraints of State-building processes in GuineaBissau, as well as to increase the capacity of members
of Parliament to comprehend the various aspects of the
Constitution-making
process
and
law-making
principles, structures and organs.
In 2011, UNIOGBIS will continue to support the
constitutional review process by opening up local and
regional venues for political dialogue between
members of Parliament and major national
constituencies, in order to collect views on the best
law-making arrangements, principles and political
options that could ensure lasting stability, security,
democracy and development in Guinea-Bissau.
In spite of these positive developments, much
progress is yet to be made on other important aspects,
in particular on the fight against impunity and the fight
against drug trafficking and organized crime. On the
fight against impunity, despite the release, in December
2010, of the former Chief of General Staff of the armed
forces and other army officers who were detained since
1 April 2010 without due process, not much progress
has been made on other fronts, such as the
investigations into the March and June 2009
assassinations.
I have continued to advocate for more clarity and
transparency from the judicial authorities of GuineaBissau, so as to mobilize support among international
partners to complete these investigations. However, I

4

regret to note that both the Government of GuineaBissau and the Office of the Prosecutor General have
yet to present an accurate status of these investigations,
and there are increased concerns in Guinea-Bissau that
the release of all officers detained in connection with
these investigations would once again amount to an
attempt to freeze the process.
With regard to the fight against drug trafficking
and organized crime, several measures taken by the
Government are worth mentioning. They include, as
the Council knows, the establishment of a transnational
crime unit, under the framework of the West Africa
Coast Initiative, with the support of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL. I am also
pleased to note the decision of the Government, in
January, to close the Cufar airstrip in the south of the
country, which has been used for illegal flights. In
addition, on 11 January, Presidents Sanhá and Condé
agreed in Guinea-Conakry to join forces in the fight
against drug trafficking by enhancing collaboration
between the national anti-narcotic agency of Guinea
and the transnational crime unit of Guinea-Bissau.
Furthermore, on 10 February, the Guinea-Bissau
Judiciary Police held a drugs-burning ceremony near
Bissau, attended by the Minister of Justice — who is
present here — the General Prosecutor, representatives
of the diplomatic community and journalists. Fourteen
kilograms of cocaine, approximately 800 kilograms of
cannabis and 71 grams of crack, seized between 2007
and 2010, were burned. In their statements both the
Minister of Justice and the Prosecutor General said that
the ceremony showed the authorities' commitment to
combat the scourge and rejected rumours that drugs
seized were reintroduced into the market.
Finally, on 22 February, the Prosecutor General
issued a decree specifying the competence of the
Judiciary Police alone for investigations into drugtrafficking-related cases. The implementation of that
decree will facilitate the work of the Judiciary Police
and cooperation among relevant police institutions.
While these developments are encouraging, it is
important, in my view, that the Government continue to
demonstrate its resolve to fight this scourge, including
by mobilizing adequate human and financial resources
for the newly established transnational crime unit.
Meanwhile, arrangements to allow for foreign vessels
to patrol territorial waters off Guinea-Bissau and
conduct joint policing activities with Guinea-Bissau

11-24382

S/PV.6489

police would also be a sign of the firm commitment of
the Government to achieving progress on this
important issue.

upcoming consultations with the EU and to meet with
ambassadors of EU member States accredited to Bissau
but resident in Dakar.

I cannot conclude without addressing the
important role that regional and international partners
continue to play in the stabilization of the political and
security environment in Guinea-Bissau. Besides the
partnership with ECOWAS and the CPLP — which has
yet to materialize on the ground — it is important to
stress that the improved political and security
environment was largely influenced by the
announcement, in December 2010, that the country had
reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
completion point. That development gave rise to
cautious optimism and boosted the morale of the
Government of Carlos Gomes Júnior, who is here with
us, who has worked for the improvement of the
macroeconomic context of Guinea-Bissau. Yet these
encouragements from the international community
should not be interpreted by the leadership of GuineaBissau as a sign that the negative trends and effects of
the events of 1 April 2010 have been fully addressed.

In my view, these steps are a demonstration of the
change of approach by the leadership of GuineaBissau, which seems to be ready to use this window of
opportunity offered by the consultations with the EU to
address in earnest those issues that prompted the
disengagement and suspension of EU support for
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau. It is my hope
that these consultations will produce tangible results
and contribute to re-engaging the EU as a key partner
in support of the reforms in Guinea-Bissau, alongside
the African Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP and their
member States.

The decision on 3 February by the European
Commission and the Council of the European Union to
launch consultations with the authorities of GuineaBissau, in accordance with article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement, is yet another demonstration of the
continuous concerns among international partners with
regard to the remaining triggers of instability in the
country.
I am encouraged, however, with the constructive
response by the national authorities of Guinea-Bissau
to the European Union (EU) invitation for consultations,
conveying that the authorities of Guinea-Bissau shared
the concerns articulated by the EU in its
communication with regard to the sources of instability
in the country and the need to address them. The
Government also took positive steps in sending a
delegation headed by its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
who is also present, and including the spokesperson of
the President, the Chief of Staff of the Chief of General
Staff of the armed forces and a representative of the
League of Human Rights — also in the room — to
several European capitals to meet bilaterally with the
relevant stakeholders and prepare the consultations that
are scheduled to be held in March in Brussels.
In parallel, the Prime Minister travelled to Dakar
to seek regional support for Guinea-Bissau in the

11-24382

The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing, and I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, Prime Minister of GuineaBissau.
Mr.
Gomes
(Guinea-Bissau)
(spoke
in
Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): Allow me, first of all, in the name of the
Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and in
my own name, to greet all those present and to thank
the Council for the opportunity and the honour given
me to address the members of the Security Council. As
this is the first time that I participate in a Security
Council meeting, I would like to underline the special
appreciation I have for the role played by this body in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
My country recognizes and is grateful for the
efforts of the United Nations to promote stability and
peace through its permanent representation in Bissau,
which provides the Secretary-General with pertinent
information on the evolution of the situation.
This meeting is taking place at a very specific
moment in our national life, with the beginning of
consultations with the European Union, in the context
of article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement, to discuss
commitments related with human rights and the rule of
law. As a prelude to these conversations, the
institutions of the Republic and civil society
considered it important to carry out information and
sensitization measures in relation to some actors and
development partners, thus creating bridges for
dialogue to help our Government overcome the
difficulties that characterize our current relations with
some of our domestic and foreign partners.

5

S/PV.6489

It is in this context that I recently visited the
neighbouring Republic of Senegal, where I shared
some of my preoccupations and reflections with the
representatives of friendly countries. And it is in this
context that I must place this statement, in which I will
deal with some of the recent political and economic
developments and share with the Council our vision
and perspectives for the future and the possible options
for us to overcome together the difficult challenges that
face our country.
Allow me then to talk about the efforts that the
people and Government of the Republic of GuineaBissau have undertaken to promote the changes that are
taking place in the country and which have contributed
in an irreversible manner to the achievement of peace
and stability.
The political context in Guinea-Bissau during the
present legislature was negatively affected by the
various manifestations of instability that occurred in
2009 and 2010, in spite of the positive signs that we
saw at the beginning. The November 2008 legislative
elections led to the establishment of a parliamentary
majority, demonstrating a certain return to governing
stability. With the formation of a new Government in
January 2009, since the middle of this year GuineaBissau has demonstrated that it has made a true break
with the past, showing its readiness to govern
effectively and efficiently and guarantee progressive
improvement in its people’s living conditions.
However, the tragic events of 1 and 2 March
2009, which led to the deaths of two of the country’s
high-ranking figures — the President and the Chief of
Staff of the armed forces — and later of two important
politicians, had a devastating effect on the country’s
image and illustrated the fragility of the political
situation and of the state of national development. It is
important to note, however, that the Government’s
determined efforts mitigated the impact of those events
so that they affected neither the constitutional order nor
the economic and administrative reforms. The
successful holding of early presidential elections
renewed hopes for a new political cycle with strong
institutional stability, based on a genuine majority and
a Government and President backed by this
demonstration of political force.
However, the military uprising of 1 April 2010,
the arrest of the former Chief of Staff of the armed
forces and the naming of a new military leadership put

6

the issue of political instability on Guinea-Bissau’s
agenda, provoking the concern of the entire
international community. The violence and political
instability of these events showed that the democratic
process in our country has not been completely
consolidated. It is clear that to guarantee the rule of
law it is not enough to have a progressive constitution
that lays out the principles and rules of the democratic
process, or to hold successful elections.
It is in that context that we had to deal with a
number of questions: for instance, how to overcome
successive political and military crises; how to restore
a minimal social equilibrium; whether the military
officers involved in the uprising should be part of the
solution or the problem, or be marginalized in the
dialogue; and the consequences that might arise from
this or that position.
As the Council no doubt understands, the answers
to all of these questions in a fragile State, with a
precarious defence and security system, cannot be
answered by the Government alone. The Government
has no doubt of the urgency and necessity of reform in
the areas of defence, security and justice. In truth, there
is now a national consensus that reforming defence and
security would be a good way to resolve the problems
we have encountered in this sector, because it involves
ipso facto a vision and strategy for the modernization
and transformation of the security and armed forces
into actors for peacemaking and consolidation of the
rule of law. In the specific circumstances under which
we had to take decisions, it seemed to us important to
strengthen dialogue between the actors in order to
reduce fear and uncertainty. That was and continues to
be done, both at the level of military units and in
society in general.
However, it is not enough to have political will
and the capacity to identify and diminish the risks that
threaten the climate of peace and stability in the
country; it is necessary to act with determination. In
that context, the lack of financial resources, or their
conditionality, has been one of the main obstacles
negatively affecting the dynamic of the process. It does
not seem to us legitimate to try to achieve reform
without the active participation of those who will
benefit from it, and even less legitimate to make it
conditional on strategies or realities that are not
relevant to Guinea-Bissau. It is important to state
firmly that it is Guinea-Bissau that must conduct the
processes of reform, because only with Guinean

11-24382

S/PV.6489

ownership of those processes can reform succeed and
achieve its goals.
In spite of the difficulties I have mentioned, the
Government has successfully carried out significant
reform measures. In 2008, it conducted a biometric
census of the armed forces, and a year later completed
a census of the volunteers fighting for liberty and
security. The Government finalized and adopted the
priority plan for reform of the security and defence
sectors and its corresponding operating plan, which
will give reform greater impetus. Beyond the physical
rehabilitation of barracks as a way to dignify our
military and police’s living conditions, these efforts
include measures that will help boost retention and
professionalization in our military forces and the
creation of a pension fund and associated programmes.
This has made possible a review of the legal
framework for the new mission and mandate of the
defence and security forces; the official launch, in June
2010, of a national awareness-raising campaign on the
reform of the defence and security sectors; and the
establishment of a special pension fund that will ensure
immediate payments for military officers reaching
retirement age. The fund, which is based on the
voluntary contributions of development partners and of
the Government itself, will be independently managed
by a financial institution through a competitive public
process, which has already begun, in order to ensure
transparency and security.
The National Popular Assembly has been
provided with a documentation centre in order to
improve the technical capacity of its special committee
on defence and security with a view to allow it to
better track the reform process and improve political
and democratic control over that process. Utilizing
domestic resources and with the participation of
military engineers, we have rehabilitated the Amura
fortress in Bissau, as well as some barracks. We have
also rehabilitated barracks in Gabú and Quebo using
foreign resources. And we have established a training
centre for security forces as a prelude to setting up a
future police academy, whose installations have
already been delivered to the Ministry of the Interior.
A national computer laboratory and training
centre has been officially up and running since 2010.
The centre’s goal is to augment training for agents
working on internal security and criminal investigation.
The centre has already graduated 380 members of the
Public Order Police, the Judiciary Police, the Security

11-24382

and Information Service and the Migration Service.
Training for the security forces in Bafatá and Gabú has
been conducted to help deal with child trafficking and
the eradication of violence, especially gender-based
violence.
We have also created and deployed a model
police squad, in the context of a new policing paradigm
based on citizenship and community policing. We have
begun the process of registering, selecting and
certifying security agents, in an effort to reshape and
develop the capacity of those forces. And we have set
up units for surveillance and investigation to combat
drug trafficking and transnational crime. All of these
activities demonstrate the Government’s commitment
to implementing reform and making clear our desire to
respect the commitments we have made with our
development partners.
Our lack of resources was partially addressed,
and received an important boost from, the help
provided to our Government — including significant
technical, material and financial contributions — from
the Government of Angola, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. As the Council is
aware, the Republic of Angola, our brother and friend,
is demonstrating in practice the solidarity it has shown
on the political level, ensuring that we can take reforms
forward. It is important to note, however, that the
financial resources provided, although significant and
relevant, are not yet enough to cover all the
subprogrammes I have mentioned.
Another factor threatening social stability is the
weak capacity of our justice sector to deal with crime.
This leads to the perception that our country has
become a place of impunity. We are aware that the
State has a diminished capacity to punish owing to the
lack of prisons, the continuing disobedience of certain
groups and corruption. An ongoing issue in that regard
pertains to delays in investigating and carrying out
arrests in crimes involving high State officials. This
generates suspicion and uncertainty about the State’s
true attitude towards such crimes.
I wish to reiterate that the Government I lead will
continue to make every effort, as is its obligation, to
carry out its functions, within the material, technical
and financial means available to the national
prosecutor’s office. It is important to mention here that
the Government continues to wait for the support that it

7

S/PV.6489

requested from the international community after the
tragic events in March. Those requests — made
through the Secretary-General, the African Union,
ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries — are intended to help investigations avail
themselves of the technical support of international
experts, as occurred in the Republic of Guinea, our
neighbour.
It is also important to underscore the sweeping
institutional changes currently under way to reform the
judicial system and improve its functioning in line with
full respect for democratic principles, especially the
separation of powers. Like security and defence sector
reform, the judicial reform outlined in the recently
approved national plan for the justice system is based
on human resources and training and focused on
respect for the rule of law, so as to build a new justice
system where impunity has no place.
Another destabilizing factor is the use of our
country as a transit point for drugs. That is an abuse of
our country, which we condemn and which poses a
grave threat to the peace and security of our subregion.
However, it is important to note that our country does
not reap profits from drugs, nor does it produce drugs.
On the contrary, it has combated the scourge of drugs
with all the capacity that it possesses. The
rehabilitation of prison facilities and technical training
of the police are part of this endeavour, which will gain
greater momentum with the entry into force of the
ECOWAS plan and the West Africa Coast Initiative. In
this context, our country has just created another unit
to combat transnational crime that includes the
involvement of the ministries of justice, the interior
and finance.
Recent drug seizures, with the help of the
military, the confiscation and public auction of
airplanes used in drug trafficking, the destruction of
landing strips and the physical destruction of drugs,
ammunition and explosives are concrete signs of our
efforts and evidence that they are producing positive
results. Of course, the success of this effort to combat
drug trafficking requires financial, material and
technical support on a more consistent basis and on a
larger scale.
In our view, the strategy outlined by our
Government and presented at the International
Conference on Drug Trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, held
in Lisbon in 2007, must be reviewed and strengthened

8

so that it can incorporate the phenomenon of terrorism,
which is today closely linked with drug trafficking.
Terrorism has been increasingly felt in our subregion,
owing to the fragility of our States, their lack of control
over vast areas of their territory and the protection and
support that terrorists receive from drug barons and
drug cartels. For that reason, countries such as GuineaBissau, which are involved against their will in the
drug trafficking cycle, deserve special attention from
the international community, because the risks from the
possible infiltration of terrorist networks in their
territory are extremely grave, with unpredictable
consequences for regional and world security.
In that context, the agreements to combat drug
trafficking that we have signed with the United States
of America and Venezuela must be implemented
swiftly, in particular with a more active presence by the
African command recently created by the American
Government. As I have said before, Guinea-Bissau is
not a narco-State and it does not have the resources
necessary to successfully confront drug trafficking and
terrorism on its own.
Lack of dialogue has also been identified as an
obstacle to social stability and is being addressed with
the creation of bridges of dialogue among Guineans. In
August 2010, an initiative of the National Popular
Assembly, with the support of the President of the
Republic, began the process of dialogue and listening
to society in general and to members of the Assembly
in particular. A large number of initiatives have been
launched, among which I wish to highlight the holding
of a national peace and reconciliation conference that
brought together all of the country’s stakeholders.
Finally, institutional cooperation among the
various branches of Government has been strengthened
through a permanent dialogue and joint action between
the President and the Prime Minister on the main issues
facing the country. Concrete results include greater
alignment on foreign policy issues, which has served to
stabilize foreign relations.
Recent developments in the economic sphere are
very promising. The gains that we have made can be
expanded if the continued engagement and support of
the international community can be assured. The
country has just been granted a significant forgiveness
of debt — about $1.2 billion — as a result of the
progress achieved in macroeconomic stabilization, the
implementation of economic reforms and the

11-24382

S/PV.6489

improvement in the business environment. With regard
to the management of public finances, the reforms have
led to improved fiscal performance and helped to
reduce the primary deficit. The increase in internal
revenue and budget support will allow the Government
to stabilize some payments, especially salaries of
public employees and payments on the internal debt,
thereby contributing to a recovery in economic
confidence, liquidity of the banking system and the
easing of social tensions.
With regard to improving the business climate,
reforms aimed at reducing bureaucracy, simplifying
and facilitating the creation of companies and licensing
entrepreneurial activity have been instituted. With the
objective of attracting foreign direct investment, a vast
restructuring programme has been started in certain
sectors, including energy, telecommunications and
ports.
In the social sector, there is slow improvement in
health and education indicators and the country still
faces great challenges in addressing the Millennium
Development Goals. Life expectancy is still low, as are
health and education indicators. And poverty still
afflicts a large part of the population. In spite of the
progress that we have made and the internal dynamics
that have given a great many opportunities for
Guineans, the country is still caught in the trap of
poverty. Tragically, poverty continues to affect over
60 per cent of the Guinean population. Poverty is at the
root of great social ills, instability, tension and crime.
The chronic privations that affect certain segments of
our society are the cause of behaviours that undermine
peace and stability. Guinea-Bissau, because of its small
territory, its small and young population and its strong
economic potential, has more than enough potential
resources to eliminate poverty.
Given the development challenges faced by our
country, with our strengths and weaknesses, the
Government has reviewed its global poverty reduction
strategy. Under our second national poverty reduction
strategy, in the next five years we will continue to
focus on modernization and policies that seek to
improve access to social services, as well as strengthen
sectors with the greatest growth potential, such as
agriculture, agro-industry, fisheries, tourism and
mining. The strategy seeks to generate rapid and
durable growth through the diversification of sectors
and the opening up of the economy to regional and
international trade and foreign investment. This

11-24382

requires significant expansion of the private sector and
improved transparency in the investment climate.
Success depends on effective support of the
international community — particularly in social
sectors, rehabilitation and building basic infrastructure
that was in large part destroyed during the politicalmilitary conflict.
The country’s economic success depends on
political stability and peace. Therefore, reforms in the
defence, security, justice and public administration
sectors will continue to be our priorities. It is clear to
me that the forward and backward steps of the process
of consolidating democratic governance may cause
reservations in some partners’ decisions to continue to
provide support to Guinea-Bissau. However, I want to
draw attention to the fact that some people fear change
due to a lack of knowledge or information. Such fear
was evident among the military class, who considered
that reform would lead to negative consequences for
their social standing and their quality of life. The
intensive sensitization campaigns and strategic debates
of the reconciliation process have led to positive
results in this regard.
Instability and cyclical crises must not be
considered as destiny. Guinea-Bissau is not a failed
State. We recognize the fragility of our institutions, but
we are determined to proceed with broad, strategic and
structural reforms, intensify the fight against drug
trafficking and promote durable, sustainable economic
growth. We have a very ambitious agenda for our
country. Its concretization depends on a number of
factors, including internal and external efforts.
The Government continues to stress the need for
greater involvement of the international community.
My country has received encouraging signs from some
States that, while concerned about the problems that
we face, believe that if Guinea-Bissau continues the
course that generates peace and progress, it has
immense opportunities to take the path to development.
The European Union is a global actor, central to
the development of peoples. We believe it should
continue to carry out its actions in the country, which
are very positive and contribute to changing the lives
of the people for the better and make it possible to
promote the changes that we all desire.
We count on the support of all members of the
Security Council in the consultations that we will soon
begin with the European Union. The quality of the

9

S/PV.6489

report just presented to the Council (S/2011/73) is
unequivocal proof that Council members follow
closely the events in our country and that GuineaBissau’s efforts and commitment deserves the
Council’s trust.
Taking advantage of our participation in this
important meeting, we cannot but manifest our concern
over the events that occurred following the presidential
elections in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as the recent
demonstrations in Tunisia and in Egypt —
repercussions of which remain to be seen in other
countries in North Africa and in the Middle East. As a
country in difficulty, one that has known the
consequences of war and violence, we exhort the
United Nations and all peace-loving countries to
mobilize in order to find rapid solutions, avoiding
further catastrophes the impacts of which could be
devastating for the future of our democracies and of the
world in general.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to all members of the Security Council
here present and to express my satisfaction at this
meeting, which in my opinion has been valuable in
bringing us closer at such a crucial moment in the
political and economic life of my country.
The President: I thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior for his presentation.
I will now give a briefing in my capacity as Chair
of
the
Guinea-Bissau
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission.
I extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Carlos Gomes Júnior, Prime Minister of GuineaBissau, and thank him for his presentation. I also
warmly welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
National Defence, Justice and for Economy, Planning
and Regional Integration, and other members of the
delegation of Guinea-Bissau. The presence of such a
high-level delegation in this meeting, and in the
meeting of the configuration that we held yesterday, is
a clear signal of the country’s commitment to
increasing its cooperation with the international
community.
I commend the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau
for the comprehensive presentation he has just made,
which enables us to better appreciate the many
challenges and the opportunities facing Guinea-Bissau.
I also thank the Special Representative of the

10

Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his
briefing and his commendable work in Bissau.
In the past few months the configuration has
focused its work on specific areas, notably security
sector reform, the rule of law, combating drug
trafficking and impunity, addressing concerns of youth
and women and supporting institution-building. We
have not lost sight of the importance of encouraging
job creation and promoting a more vigorous economy
as crucial elements of a peacebuilding strategy.
In a meeting of the configuration on 22
November 2010, members were briefed by
representatives of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. Those representatives
highlighted the notable progress made by GuineaBissau in recent years in the areas of macroeconomic
management and public finance, resulting in economic
growth, low inflation and an increase in revenue
collection. It was their assessment that Guinea-Bissau
was on track to reach the completion point of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative
(HIPC). Building on the discussions with the IMF and
the World Bank, the members of the configuration
were encouraged to support the deliberations of the
Boards of the IMF and the World Bank concerning
Guinea-Bissau.
Last December, the Boards of the IMF and the
World Bank declared that Guinea-Bissau had reached
the completion point of the HIPC Initiative and
decided to support debt relief for the country in the
amount of $1.2 billion. I am confident that the
measures adopted by the international financial
institutions will help lead Guinea-Bissau into a
virtuous cycle, since they will, among other positive
effects, normalize Guinea-Bissau’s relations with
external creditors — especially members of the Paris
Club, the International Development Association and
the African Development Fund — possibly leading to
further debt relief; send a positive signal to
international donors and investors; reduce the country's
dependence on budgetary aid; expand its fiscal space
for social programmes; and demonstrate and recognize
the progress that the Government of Guinea-Bissau has
made in macroeconomic management, which will
surely strengthen the civilian authorities and
institutions of the country. A window of opportunity
has reopened for Guinea-Bissau.

11-24382

S/PV.6489

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his latest
report (S/2011/73), key economic and public
administration reforms are moving forward as the
Government of Guinea-Bissau seeks to improve fiscal
discipline. Economic growth was expected to reach
4 per cent in 2010, compared to 3 per cent in 2009. The
Government has also succeeded in increasing tax
revenues in the context of fiscal reforms and
anticipates that in 2011 it will have the budgetary
resources to cover spending beyond the payment of
salaries.
It is also worth noting that the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) Joint Steering Committee approved the
2011-2013 Peacebuilding Priority Plan for Guinea
Bissau, which identifies priorities for the next two to
three years, notably to strengthen democratic
institutions and the rule of law, to revitalize the
economy and to reactivate basic social services. In this
regard, we welcome the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to allocate up to $16.8 million of the
PBF to the implementation of the Priority Plan.
I am encouraged by the progress that GuineaBissau has made to reverse the negative effects of the
events of 1 April 2010. The release of Vice-Admiral
Zamora Induta and other senior officers is emblematic
of those efforts. I also note in that respect the positive
steps taken by the country’s leadership, especially by
President Malam Bacai Sanhá and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Júnior, to demonstrate their renewed
commitment to pursue enhanced dialogue and political
negotiations.
The people and the Government of Guinea-Bissau
are doing their part to overcome the setbacks of the
recent past. The members of the configuration
encourage the leadership of the country to take further
concrete steps in fighting impunity and enhancing the
rule of law and civilian control of the military.
Security sector reform is of fundamental
importance. The members of the Peacebuilding
Commission
configuration
for
Guinea-Bissau
welcomed the road map supported by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries for the
implementation of security sector reform in GuineaBissau and expected its timely endorsement by
ECOWAS. They encouraged the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to fully commit to its implementation.

11-24382

The fight against drug trafficking is an issue of
grave concern to the members of the Commission.
Fighting illicit drugs effectively requires functioning
State institutions, especially in the areas of justice and
security, as well as firm political will. We emphasize
the importance of a regional approach and the role
played by ECOWAS in this regard.
Both as individual Governments and collectively,
we must all do more and do better to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS regional action plan
and the West Africa Coast Initiative. In this respect, we
welcome the letter of Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Júnior to the Secretary-General of 27 October 2010
expressing the complete engagement of the
Government of Guinea-Bissau in energetically
pursuing the fight against the plague of drug trafficking
and the organized crime associated to it. The signing of
a memorandum of understanding by the Ministries of
Justice, Interior and Finance establishing a
transnational crime unit in Guinea-Bissau is a further
positive step in the right direction. We now look
forward to the designation of the members of the unit
and to discussing ways in which the Peacebuilding
Commission can support such efforts.
International efforts to help consolidate peace in
Guinea-Bissau should not rest solely upon securityrelated cooperation. In order for peace to take hold, the
foundations for socio-economic development must be
strengthened. We need to support capacity-building and
assist the country in revitalizing its economy. At the
end of the day, it is a dynamic economy and the
creation of job opportunities that will generate the
revenues needed for the provision of basic services to
the population and allow the State to function in a
sustainable manner.
We must take advantage of this positive
momentum. More than ever, engagement and
cooperation with Guinea-Bissau is necessary to assist
the country in building democratic governance and
effectively
addressing
key
challenges.
The
international community should step up its support to
Guinea-Bissau to help enhance national political
stability, promote reconciliation, combat impunity and
organized
crime
and
foster
socio-economic
development.
We must persevere in our collective efforts to
support Guinea-Bissau. This requires that national
authorities continue the ongoing efforts to fully restore

11

S/PV.6489

international confidence. It also means that
international partners should look beyond the setbacks
of the recent past and support long-term political and
economic stability in the country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

12

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions on the
subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

11-24382
