United Nations

S/PV.6421*

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6421st meeting
Thursday, 11 November 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Radmanović
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Sumi
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 8 November 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/575)

* Reissued for technical reasons on 8 December 2010.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-63264* (E)

*1063264*

S/PV.6421

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 8 November 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/575)
The President: At the outset, I should like to
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Nebojša Radmanović, Chairman of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to Mr. Radmanović.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Croatia and
Serbia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Vilović
(Croatia) and Mr. Starčević (Serbia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2010/575, which contains a
letter dated 8 November 2010 from the SecretaryGeneral transmitting the thirty-eighth report of the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Inzko: I thank the Council for giving me the
opportunity today to present my fourth report as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
thirty-eighth report altogether. I hope that my
presentation will provide a better understanding of the
overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where we
stand now and what challenges we will face in the
period ahead.
It is now exactly 15 years since the Peace
Agreement ending the hostilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina was concluded in Dayton. Since that day,
there has been significant progress in the country and
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s membership of and
successful work in the Security Council is just one
example of the many improvements that we have seen
in the past 15 years.
In that respect, it is a great pleasure to have
President Radmanović here, representing Bosnia and
Herzegovina in this forum. Let me also take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Radmanović on his
re-election to the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on assuming the Chairmanship of the
Presidency yesterday.
Let me also congratulate every citizen in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the European Union (EU) decision
earlier this week to allow visa-free travel for all
Bosnians to all the Schengen countries of the European
Union. That is a very significant decision, which shows
the EU’s commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European future. But it also demonstrates that Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s political leaders can address
difficult reform if they muster the necessary political
will.
Moreover, the regional situation in the Western
Balkans has continued to develop positively. In the
summer, the Croatian and Serbian Presidents made
ground-breaking visits to Bosnia and Herzegovina that
underlined the need for reconciliation and regional
cooperation. As recently as last week, Serbian

10-63264

S/PV.6421

President Tadić apologized for Serbia’s role in the 1991
Vukovar massacre. In a similar fashion, the new
Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, Bakir Izetbegović, offered his own apology
to Serbia for the crimes committed against innocent
civilians by the Bosnian army during the war. Those
are positive acts and gestures of reconciliation, which
have had a positive impact in the region and in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
However, despite the improved atmosphere in the
region, the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains complex. Today, 15 years after
the signing of the Dayton Agreement, there is still
insufficient dialogue and compromise. Sadly,
nationalist agendas inside the country have continued
to prevail over cooperation and compromise. The
European Commission’s progress report published just
two days ago accordingly confirmed that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not living up to its potential and that in
the past year the country has only made limited
progress in addressing the conditions for European
integration. Basically, there has been no progress on
key reforms required for Euro-Atlantic integration in
the past year.
Unfortunately, the developments of the past year
are symptomatic of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the past four years. Whereas there
was substantial progress in the first 11 years after the
war, in the past four years there has been stagnation
and time has been largely wasted. The fundamentals of
the country and its institutions, including their
constitutional framework, have been challenged on a
regular basis. Let me give the Council some concrete
examples.
First, there has been a fundamental change in the
rhetoric and verbal attacks against the State. Leading
politicians from Republika Srpska have frequently
referred to the future independence of their entity while
claiming that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
“impossible country”, and therefore not sustainable.
The same leaders have also repeatedly denied rulings
by two international United Nations courts, the
International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, that
genocide took place in Srebrenica, thus further
increasing tensions. I want to underline that, despite
that rhetoric, the Federation-based parties have stopped
challenging the existence of Republika Srpska almost
entirely. However, the leading Bosnian Croat party, the

10-63264

Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
has called for a separate Croat entity. That may not be
realistic, but it is nevertheless unnecessarily increasing
the tensions in the country.
Secondly, the State-level institutions have not
worked to their full potential during the past four years,
due mainly to political obstruction. In comparison with
the previous State-level Parliament, in the period 2002
to 2006, the outgoing Parliament has adopted one third
less legislation.
Thirdly, there has also been a marked increase in
unilateral actions, with the entities adopting and
implementing legislation with little regard for the State
and/or the other entity. Republika Srpska in particular
has adopted a number of laws that challenge European
partnership priorities or that aim to dismantle Statelevel reforms. There have also been similar, but less
frequent, developments in the Federation.
The problems to which I have referred have lead
to a political stalemate and clear stagnation during the
past four years. As a result, as confirmed by the
European Commission’s progress report, there has been
only limited progress in addressing EU-related reforms.
To name just two, in the past year State-level
authorities have failed to address the December 2009
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights with
regard to discrimination against some citizens in
Bosnia and Herzegovina who are prevented from fully
participating in public affairs and receiving
appointments to certain State-level institutions.
Similarly, a State-level census law has not been
adopted, as the political parties could not agree on the
future implementation of the census results. It will now
be up to the new legislature to deal with this issue. But
it is unlikely that Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able
to hold a State-level census in 2011 together with the
other countries in the region and in the world.
Equally, there has been very little progress in
implementing the objectives and conditions for the
transition or the closure of the Office of the High
Representative that have been determined by the Peace
Implementation Council.
On the State property objective, there has actually
been regression, as the Republika Srpska National
Assembly adopted its own law on State property,
which — if it enters into force — would register all
State property in that entity to Republika Srpska. If the

3

S/PV.6421

law is formally enacted, it will make a comprehensive
negotiated solution on State property impossible.
Consequently, that would make the closure of the
Office of the High Representative substantially more
difficult.
Furthermore, similar to the situation with State
property, there has been no progress in addressing the
defence property objective since my last report. As a
result, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards
NATO has stalled, as it has not been able to meet the
conditions for implementing NATO’s membership
action plan. Equally, Republika Srpska authorities
continue to fail to meet the outstanding requirement for
the termination of the supervision of Brcko.
Due to the lack of progress, the Peace
Implementation Council has not been able to decide
about the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, as already foreseen in 2006. The Peace
Implementation Council will meet again later this
month to consider the situation. In essence, however,
the decision about the closure or transition of my
Office depends on the readiness of Bosnian political
leaders to meet the objectives and conditions that have
been set.
Despite the increasingly difficult situation on the
ground and despite the lack of progress in addressing
the conditions for the closure of my Office, in July
2010 I unilaterally reduced my staff by over 20 per
cent. When I arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina last
year, my Office still had 220 employees; now it has
160. Of course, many years ago, my Office had 800
employees. I also handed over the responsibility to vet
certain appointed entity and cantonal officials to the
respective local authorities, in a spirit of transition and
more local ownership.
It was in that overall atmosphere that I have
described that general elections were held last month.
The international media portrayed those elections as a
watershed event in the future of the country that will
determine whether it will move forward towards EuroAtlantic
integration
or
backwards
towards
disintegration owing to increasing calls for secession
coming from the smaller entity.
The Bosnian election authorities conducted those
elections efficiently. International election-observation
missions concluded that the elections were generally
held in accordance with international standards. The
turnout for the general elections was around 57 per

4

cent, which is the highest turnout in any election since
2002. At the same time, if we compare this election
with the elections in 2006, there was an 18 per cent
increase in the number of voters. This is good news
that shows citizens increasingly care about the future
of their country.
At the same time, the elections were held on the
basis of the current election law, which is not in line
with the European Convention for Human Rights. This
does not affect the legitimacy of the elections, but this
problem must be addressed urgently after the formation
of the new Government.
Let me underline that Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
order to become fully sustainable and to move forward
towards Euro-Atlantic integration, will need political
leaders that are ready to change the way they conduct
politics. Zero-sum politics will need to be replaced by
politics based on compromise and a readiness to meet
each other half way. I cannot overemphasize this point.
This is fundamental for a stable and forward-looking
country. In this regard, the responsibility for what
happens in the next four years is firmly in the hands of
the incoming authorities. They have a choice to make
and, when they make it, they must take responsibility
for what follows.
The choice facing Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
whether it survives as a State or whether it is divided.
It will definitively continue to exist. The partition of
the country or secession are not solutions. If it were
possible to partition Bosnia and Herzegovina
peacefully, it would have happened in 1992. It was,
however, not possible then and it is not possible today.
The partition of the country would also be a triumph
for the Milošević-led policy of the past. Instead, the
choice facing Bosnia and Herzegovina is whether it
chooses to reintegrate and reform, and in so doing join
the EU and NATO, or whether it chooses stagnation
and isolation.
In light of the situation I have described, there is
still a need for the international community to remain
fully focused on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must
continue to accompany the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the Euro-Atlantic path, and the
international community must make it clear to the
incoming Governments what we expect from them in
the period ahead. As a first step to recreating the
momentum, we must urge politicians to form
Governments at all levels that are focused on the

10-63264

S/PV.6421

Euro-Atlantic
agenda.
However,
Government
formation — especially at the State-level — may take a
long time, especially since some politicians have made
clear their desire to roll back previously agreed reforms
and to devolve a number of competencies from the
State to the entities.
Furthermore, we must insist very vocally that
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s territorial integrity and
constitutional framework be preserved. Unfortunately,
this emphasis is still necessary. We must make clear
that only Bosnia and Herzegovina as one country has a
future in the EU and NATO and that rhetoric about
Bosnia and Herzegovina being an impossible State
must stop.
Beyond those basic issues, we need Bosnia and
Herzegovina to progress with urgency towards both the
European Union and NATO. This is in Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s interest as well as in the international
community’s interest. In this regard, we should
strongly encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to address
the main problems identified in the European
Commission’s progress report, such as the European
Court of Human Rights ruling, the census law and
other key European partnership priorities. We should
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to address the five
objectives and two conditions that have been set for the
transition and closure of the Office of the High
Representative. Finally, we should encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina to start a step-by-step process of
constitutional changes in order to make a country that
is self-sustainable and efficient in dealing with the
challenges of Euro-Atlantic integration. We are
speaking here not of the centralization of a State or the
strengthening of centralized institutions; we are
speaking here of strengthening the efficiency of State
institutions.
In 10 days, we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. In this context, we
need to ensure that we do not leave the job in Bosnia
and Herzegovina unfinished. As I have argued before,
the presence of the European Union Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR) with an executive mandate
is still important. I must underline that it is important
that sufficient troops be left on the ground to provide
adequate levels of reassurance to the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In this respect, I strongly recommend
the renewal of the Security Council resolution on
EUFOR next week.

10-63264

Our continued attention on Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the way to get to the objective that we
all want to reach, where Bosnia and Herzegovina can
move towards full Euro-Atlantic integration under its
own steam — and that means with full ownership and
the full responsibilities that go along with it. I am truly
convinced that this possibility can become a reality,
and I will, as High Representative and also as the
Special Representative of the EU, continue to dedicate
all my efforts to assisting and supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts in this direction. I also count on
the continued support of the Council in this regard.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Radmanović (spoke in Bosnian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): It is an
honour to address the Security Council in the debate on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today’s debate will facilitate
a better understanding of the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the progress the country
has achieved in this last period.
Since the last report of the Secretary-General was
issued (see S/2010/235), many things have occurred in
Bosnia and Herzegovina that have changed the
situation in the country. There are many different
opinions and analyses among the political actors and
citizens regarding the progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Until now, the Presidency has not had a
unified position on this issue. Allow me, as the
Chairman of the Presidency, to present the view agreed
upon with the other two members of the Presidency on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with
possible future developments.
Today, it is popular to talk about Bosnia and
Herzegovina predominantly in gloomy terms, as was
recently done in this Chamber. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the ideal arena in which to test various
catastrophe theories. Unlike other, similar regions of
the world in which the international community is
engaged, Bosnia and Herzegovina on the whole
represents a positive example of the peacebuilding
efforts of the international community. This is
confirmed by numerous reports of relevant
international organizations, independent institutions
and non-governmental organizations. To be honest,
Bosnia and Herzegovina did experience a slight delay
in its reform and transition process in the past six

5

S/PV.6421

months. One reason is that this was an election year in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that the political entities
were focused more on the election campaign and
attracting voters than on the real problems of the
country.
This year we mark the fifteenth anniversary of
the signing the Dayton Peace Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Fifteen years ago, Bosnia and
Herzegovina emerged from a tragic conflict that had
destabilized the country and the entire region. Today,
15 years later, we wonder what and how much we have
achieved of all that was signed and agreed. Let me say
this: With the combined efforts of the international
community and local authorities, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress in the postwar period, which is a positive example compared to
many similar critical areas in the world. It would be
difficult to find an example of a peace agreement in
modern European or world history that was more
rapidly and successfully implemented. Those who are
dissatisfied with the pace of progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are seeking a remedy by challenging the
very foundations of the existing Peace Agreement,
which will only lead us to new conflicts and disputes.
Since the end of the war, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has implemented all key elements of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. A stable peace has been established; the
country has been functioning according to the
constitutional grounds set out in the Dayton Peace
Agreement; most refugees and displaced persons have
recuperated their property and many have returned to
their homes.
Consequently, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
success story compared to other territories in the region.
Six general parliamentary elections have been held, the
last few of which were completely organized by local
authorities. Domestically, a single economic space has
emerged. The macroeconomic indicators of the
economy are stable, showing a slow but positive
upward trend. A value-added tax has been successfully
introduced. Reforms of the defence sector and the
armed forces have been successfully implemented.
Following the initial arrests of indicted war criminals
by international military forces, most of the others
have been arrested and extradited to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The
Hague by the local authorities. War crimes trials have
been processed in the national courts.

6

Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a member of
the Council of Europe and other international
organizations, the country joined the NATO
Partnership for Peace and became a member of the
European Free Trade Association, leading to its signing
a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union (EU). The country has fulfilled 174
requirements for a visa-free regime with the EU and a
positive decision has already been made. Reforms are
ongoing in public administration, justice, higher
education, the public broadcasting system and the
harmonization of the Constitution with the European
Convention on Human Rights and the European Court
of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
I recall that, as a result of the favourable
development of the political and security situation in
Bosnia, NATO has reduced its troops in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its presence to the headquarters in
Sarajevo. The European Union Force has also reduced
its forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a result of the
apparent progress in achieving a secure and stable
environment.
There are differing views in Bosnia and
Herzegovina regarding the role and future status of the
Office of the High Representative. The political
representatives of one people are of the opinion that
the Office of the High Representative should
permanently remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
the representatives of the others believe that its closure
is necessary and that its functions should be transferred
to the EU Special Representative. While there may
have been reasons after the war for the Office of the
High Representative to exist, 15 years later they have
been significantly reduced.
The latest report of the European Commission on
Bosnia stated that Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot take
further steps in the process of European integration
until the transition of the Office of the High
Representative to the Special Representative of the
European Union is complete.
All the changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina must
be based on the rule of law. The full implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement is therefore imperative.
The Dayton accord is primarily an agreement, not a
framework from which one can pick and choose only
that which is agreeable while shirking one’s other
obligations. In regard to the decisions of the Office of
the High Representative amending annex 4 of the

10-63264

S/PV.6421

Accord, it is clear that legal agreements should be
changed only in respect to the way they were adopted,
if not otherwise agreed on. Discussions on these issues
will therefore continue.

pressure. Agreement, understanding, equality and
tolerance are the essence of all reforms in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and should be encouraged, commended
and approved.

The problem of building a functional State cannot
be solved merely by changing the constitutional and
legal procedures for promulgating decisions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, aimed at greater or lesser
centralization or decentralization. This is a simplistic
and dangerous solution to the country’s complex and
sensitive political problems. In a complex and
multi-ethnic country like Bosnia and Herzegovina,
such an approach would bring the Government’s
legitimacy into question and disturb a region that is
still not fully stable.

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Nebojša
Radmanović, Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Special Representative of the
European Union for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report (see S/2010/575, annex).

National reconciliation and trust are basic
prerequisites for building a functional State, and that
cannot be achieved without prosecuting all war
criminals of all nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Hague Tribunal has recognized Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s cooperation in this matter, rendering any
other comments on it unnecessary.
There has been a lack of understanding of the
problem of the return of refugees on the part of local
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, partly, of
the international community. In reality, no country in
the world has done more for the return of refugees than
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sustainable returns of
refugees remain a challenge, and in this area Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs the support of the international
community. In addition, the international community
needs to deal with the fact that within 500 kilometres
of the Western Balkans — encompassing Croatia,
Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina — legal standards
on the right to return vary, resulting in further injustice
for the refugee population.
Every country in the Western Balkans is currently
progressing towards the status required for admission
to the European Union, and while Bosnia and
Herzegovina may lag behind its neighbours, it is not as
far behind as some contend.
All of these are reasons for encouraging Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its journey towards membership of
the European Union, to which it rightfully belongs;
towards the rapid transition of the Office of the High
Representative; and towards enabling Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders to negotiate and act in
accordance with their agreements without external

10-63264

Mexico commends Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
active participation as an elected member of the
Security Council, demonstrating the progress that this
country has made in recent years in a context that is
not without its difficulties. Its progress in moving
strategically closer to the European Union and in
developing more flexible relations with its neighbours
in a more cooperative atmosphere is an important step
forward in consolidating Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
role on the international stage and in promoting
regional stability.
My delegation believes that, in order to
consolidate lasting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the main political forces of the country
must step up their dialogue and reach an understanding
among themselves. We therefore welcome the fair and
orderly holding of the general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 3 October. We are convinced that this
is the path that must be taken.
We regret, however, the divisive rhetoric
employed by one of the parties, which does not
contribute to the creation of a political climate
conducive to the process of internal integration,
peacebuilding and reconciliation. Nor is it a promising
sign for these efforts that there are those who seek to
challenge the work and the authority of the High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union. The political actors involved must
promote negotiation and conciliation as the only way
to overcome differences constructively and to avoid
confrontations that may endanger the country’s
stability and constitutional framework. There is no
doubt that a Government of unity is the way to achieve
national reconstruction and eventual integration into
Euro-Atlantic institutions.

7

S/PV.6421

I would like to stress the importance of the
international community’s ongoing support for the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to strengthen the rule of law. That is why we support
the High Representative’s recommendation that the
presence of the European Union force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina be maintained in 2011, given its relevant
role in continuing to provide peace and security to the
population through the support of the Office of the
High Representative.
We believe that respect for and the strengthening
of national justice institutions are fundamental
elements of the fight against the impunity of those
responsible for serious crimes committed in the past,
and in order to promote national reconciliation and the
rule of law. We welcome the adoption of the revised
strategy for the implementation of annex 7 of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, concerning the return of
displaced persons and refugees. We are confident that
this step will make an important contribution to the
voluntary and sustainable return of the 113,000 people
who remain internally displaced, more than 7,000 of
whom are living in conditions of poverty.
We reiterate our call on the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the countries of the region
to cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, in order to allow it to
effectively fulfil its mandate, particularly by
contributing information to the open cases of war
crimes and crimes against humanity that the Tribunal is
currently investigating, with a view to serving justice
and contributing to post-conflict reconciliation and
stabilization efforts in the region.
In conclusion, we reiterate Mexico’s support for
the work of the High Representative, and we hope that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to overcome its
differences once and for all and consolidate a
democratic, multi-ethnic State in which its citizens,
like all those of the Balkans region, will be able to
enjoy a more stable and prosperous future as an
integral part of Europe.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Radmanović. We listened
attentively to his assessment of the situation in that
country. We are grateful to the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for presenting the

8

report on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see S/2010/575, annex).
As we see it, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains complex, although we do not
wish to overdramatize it. The general elections, a very
important milestone for the country, were held in a
calm and peaceful manner. There are no direct threats
to the Dayton Peace Agreement. The viability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State is reaffirmed by its
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council and by the successful work of its delegation in
this principal organ of the United Nations.
In these circumstances, the further continuation
of the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which enjoys extraordinary Bonn powers,
no longer has meaning and has become
counterproductive. Any unilateral step taken by the
High Representative will only exacerbate the situation
and provoke a response from the Bosnian sides.
The Bosnians’ successful holding of elections in
accordance with international standards, as confirmed
by international observers, attests to the maturity of
Bosnian statehood and the ability of its citizens to take
decisions about the future of their country without
external guardianship. The international community
should work constructively with those leaders who
were elected by the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the Republika Srpska.
In our view, the main task of the international
community in the post-election period is to transfer full
responsibility for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the Bosnians themselves. In practical terms, this
means ensuring conditions conducive to transforming
the Office of the High Representative into a mission of
the European Union Special Representative. In the
framework of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, we agreed on a road map to
that end — the 5+2 formula. Following the formation
of the structures of power in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the entities, it is now necessary that we return to
that task.
It is unacceptable to link the 5+2 formula to the
achievement of objectives in the framework of the socalled Euro-Atlantic agenda for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The High Representative spoke at great
length — perhaps too great a length — of that today. It
is especially unacceptable to link it to the achievement
of constitutional reform, which would run counter to

10-63264

S/PV.6421

the programme, collectively agreed upon by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council,
for closing the Office of the High Representative.
The lessons learned from the Butmir initiative
demonstrate that the imposition from the outside of
ready-made blueprints can only complicate dialogue
among Bosnians and lead to an unjustified
encouragement of one side. We believe that, with
respect to an issue so fundamental to the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, it will be possible to identify
any corrective adjustment only with the consent of all
three constituent peoples, as stipulated in the Dayton
Peace Agreement.
We agree with the view that it would be advisable
to
begin
without
delay
implementing
the
recommendations set forth in December 2009 by the
European Court of Human Rights. They can and must
be implemented on the basis of compromise among the
Bosnian sides. We cannot endorse an expansive
interpretation of the opinion of the European Court of
Human Rights or attempts on that pretext to achieve a
fundamental revision of the entire Dayton construction.
Any step towards constitutional reform should be
strictly within the Dayton legal framework.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Radmanović
for his statement. We also thank the High
Representative
for
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing. We
commend his efforts to promote the political process
under the Dayton Peace Agreement.
We support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to complete the implementation of the Dayton accord
and to achieve the goals of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, which will ultimately
lead to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We welcome the progress achieved by
Bosnia and Herzegovina on several issues, in particular
the stabilization of the security situation, the holding of
free and fair elections in October, and the fulfilment of
the European Union conditions concerning visa
liberalization.
However, several daunting challenges remain.
The pre-election circumstances overshadowed the
situation and led to the interruption of important
reforms. We regret the rhetoric used to attack the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the sovereignty,
legislation and competencies of the State in the course

10-63264

of the election. We therefore urge all parties concerned
to reach a timely understanding on the formation of a
progressive Government and to engage in open
dialogue to achieve reconciliation and embark on the
path of reform that will ensure real progress for all
citizens, irrespective of their ethnicity.
It is imperative to create an environment
conducive to achieving progress on many issues,
particularly constitutional and economic reform, the
resolution of issues concerning State property,
particularly defence property, and the filling of key
public positions. The sustainable return of refugees is
vital to achieving lasting peace. We support the role of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
establishing justice in the region in order to avoid the
recurrence of past tragedies.
We believe that the international community
should continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in
its efforts to overcome its political difficulties and to
strike a balance between centralization and
decentralization. Fifteen years after the Dayton Peace
Agreement, we cherish the hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will make firm strides towards the
prosperity and stability to which all its citizens aspire.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. The current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is generally calm. We welcome the
smooth holding of the general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in October and the progress made in
security sector reform and the rule of law, as well as
the steady economic improvements.
We also note, however, that Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to face complex situations and
difficulties on its path towards stability and
development. China respects the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and all its ethnic communities in their
independent choice of paths to development. The
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the hands of its
peoples. The international community should respect
their ownership and leadership.
We hope that all the ethnic communities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will focus their attention on
the long-term interests of their State, effectively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement, actively
pursue dialogue, enhance political trust, and promote
national reconciliation. We look forward to the timely

9

S/PV.6421

formation of the new Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the completion of constitutional reform,
economic recovery, the establishment of the rule of law
and social development.
The maintenance of lasting peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Balkans is in the
interests of all parties, and sustained dialogue and
cooperation are the fundamental means to that end. We
support the efforts of the international community to
facilitate high-level political dialogue among the
various actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
pleased to note that the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, pursuant to his mandate under the
Dayton Peace Agreement, has pursued his contacts
with all political parties with a view to promoting unity
and cooperation among all the communities of that
country.
China welcomes the positive role played by the
European Union in the framework of the Dayton Peace
Agreement and supports the work of the Special
Representative and the European Union Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). We hope that
EUFOR will increase its support for the capacitybuilding of the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces
so that the country will be able to assume
responsibility for maintaining its own State sovereignty,
security and stability as soon as possible.
We welcome the help provided by the
International Monetary Fund to Bosnia and
Herzegovina to help maintain the country’s financial
and economic stability. China is ready to work together
with the international community in continuing to
provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with support to ensure
lasting peace, stability and development.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
extending a warm welcome to President Radmanović
and thanking him for his statement. I would also like to
congratulate him, as well as Mr. Izetbegović and
Mr. Komšić, for their elections as members of the
Council of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and for the successful conduct of the elections.
We are also pleased to see High Representative
Inzko among us again. I want to thank him for his
tireless efforts and leadership and for his
comprehensive report (see S/2010/575, annex) and the
insightful briefing he provided today.

10

In a few days, we will celebrate the fifteenth
anniversary of the signing of the Dayton of Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. These 15 years
have certainly not been easy. But, despite the
difficulties, there have been significant positive
developments. We can definitely say that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has proved itself to be viable as a State.
As such, the presence of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the Security Council is a clear sign of the confidence
that the international community has in the country.
In the same vein, we are pleased that the elections
held on 3 October were successfully carried out and
that they were characterized by international observers
as being generally in accordance with international
standards. We welcome the maturity displayed by all
components of the country and we hope that a broadbased Government will be formed soon to tackle the
many issues that lie ahead.
As a Balkan country itself, Turkey attaches great
importance to achieving lasting peace and stability in
the region. We consider a sovereign, democratic, stable
and functional State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
its internationally recognized borders, as an
indispensable prerequisite for achieving that objective.
That is why, in addition to our excellent bilateral
relations, as illustrated by the recent visits of our
President and Minister for Foreign Affairs, as
underlined once again in the report of the High
Representative, Turkey continues to make every effort
to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in its endeavours to
promote regional cooperation. Indeed, regional
ownership and inclusiveness should be a key element
in our quest for peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In this context, the Turkish initiative to hold highlevel trilateral meetings between Turkey, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, as well as between Turkey,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, has surely
contributed to the enhancement of regional
understanding and collaboration. In that regard, we
welcome the recent improvement in relations among
the regional partners. The visit of the President of
Serbia to Srebrenica, the decision of the Serbian
Parliament on Srebrenica, the declaration by
Mr. Izetbegović on crimes committed during the war
and a similar declaration by President Tadić on
Vukovar are positive steps towards regional
reconciliation. We encourage these acts and gestures,
which will promote regional cooperation and

10-63264

S/PV.6421

contribute to improving the daily lives of the peoples
of the region.

Board of the Peace Implementation Council are
unacceptable.

In the same vein, we welcome the decision of the
European Union to liberalize the visa regime applied to
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe
that this decision is yet another step that serves to keep
alive Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European perspective.
Furthermore, Turkey supports and appreciates the
efforts of the European Union to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take its rightful place in the European
family of nations, including by providing stability
through its Police Mission and Operation Althea.

Let me conclude by once saying that the past
15 years have clearly shown that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving in the right direction. We
support Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is up to Bosnians
to make their country prosper and to undertake the
necessary reforms to bring about a more viable State.
As such, we want to see all parties embrace a common
vision and act accordingly, rather than pursue narrow
ethnic interests. We therefore support the democratic
forces in the country and remain hopeful that the
democratic ideals and aspirations of the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will eventually overcome the
divisive tendencies.

As an active contributor to both of these missions,
Turkey supports the extension of the executive
mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
and remains ready to continue with its contributions.
We believe that the future of the region is closely tied
to that of Europe as a whole. We firmly support Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s aspirations to fully integrate into
Euro-Atlantic institutions. We hope that those
institutions will also embrace Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also hope that the internal difficulties impeding
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s effective cooperation with
NATO will soon be resolved.
Having mentioned the internal difficulties, we
cannot help but share the concerns of Mr. Inzko
regarding several aspects of the domestic situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular with respect to
the continued anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions that
challenge the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack of progress in the
reforms necessary for the integration of the country
into Euro-Atlantic institutions is a direct consequence
of the divisions and negative stances in the internal
political situation. I should say that this trend stands in
clear contradiction to the improved regional
atmosphere, and is thus all the more unnecessary and
counterproductive. Unilateral actions not only
complicate the functioning of the State, they also have
adverse consequences for those who promote them, as
they further delay the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
At this point, let me also underline that we firmly
support the High Representative in using the powers
granted to him to lead Bosnia and Herzegovina to a
better future. As such, the challenges to the authority of
the international community and that of the Steering

10-63264

On the other hand, we believe that the integration
of Bosnia and Herzegovina into Euro-Atlantic
structures will eliminate any feelings of exclusion,
instil confidence in the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and ensure its future as a strong, stable,
secure and whole European country. Turkey is fully
committed to this objective. We will do everything
possible to assist the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, without any distinction among them, to
achieve their rightful place in the international
community.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the High Representative for the
briefing that he has just given us and to assure him of
the support of France. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Radmanović, Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A few days ago, the 27 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the European Union decided to lift the shortstay visa obligation for citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is significant progress — first of all,
for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who will
now be able to travel more easily within Europe. But
this also means progress for political leaders, who can
see with this decision of the European Union the
specific results of their efforts. This decision also
shows to what extent the unity of the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in working towards a shared objective
can produce results. The European Union long ago
specified the conditions that needed to be met and,
indeed, once those conditions were met, the Union
honoured its commitments.

11

S/PV.6421

However, we regret that progress expected in
other areas has not been forthcoming. Thus, absent an
agreement between the two entities dealing with the
issue of the redistribution of defence property, the first
annual programme of the plan of action for accession
to NATO could not begin last September. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be given a new opportunity to launch
that programme next September.
The High Representative has unfortunately
referred to several difficulties and internal conflicts in
his last report (See S/2010/575), and we can only
subscribe to his analyses.
Gone is the time when the international
community took decisions in place of the leaders of
countries. Let us recall that, 10 years ago in Zagreb,
the European Union sought a European perspective for
all countries in the region. These prospects gradually
took shape in stages, road maps and criteria. One by
one, all countries of the region have seized this
opportunity and is preparing, each at its own pace, to
one day become a full member of the European family.
The Sarajevo summit held in June confirmed the
European Union’s commitment to that process.
At the same time, the European Union is helping
to stabilize Bosnia and Herzegovina with the European
Union Force Althea. For 10 years, the international
community has supported the Bosnian authorities and
helped them to build institutions capable of running the
country. Objectives and conditions have been laid out
to provide for a transition that will allow the Bosnian
authorities to decide their own future by themselves.
The international community will remain present in the
form of a strengthened Special Representative of the
European Union who will replace the High
Representative.
However, instead of taking advantage of these
opportunities, the leaders of the country, in particular
those of the Republika Srpska, as noted by Mr. Inzko
in his briefing, have been amplifying their criticism of
the international community that has steadfastly
supported the country for so many years. With
legislative elections approaching, recent months saw an
increase in public statements around the country that
are unacceptable in a country that is a member of this
Council and would like to become a member of the
European Union and NATO. We urge leaders to form a
Government as soon as possible following the elections
of 3 October. The electoral campaign should now come

12

to a close and allow the work suspended for this period
to continue.
We welcome actions undertaken recently in the
region, such as the adoption by the Serbian Parliament
last spring of a resolution condemning the Srebrenica
massacre, showing that dialogue and reconciliation
have their place in the Balkans and that the regional
cooperation so dearly sought by the European Union is
not in vain.
Once again, we call on the Bosnian leaders to put
into practice these initiatives at the national level and
finally to harness a positive momentum that would
confirm the European perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The future of the country depends on its
leaders, particularly those who have just received
mandates from their citizens. Today, it is up to them to
demonstrate courage and determination in solving their
problems.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first
warmly welcome High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Valentin Inzko, and thank him for the
report (see S/2010/575, annex) and his work. We fully
share his assessment of recent developments and the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would like to
reaffirm our full and continued support for him and his
office, as well as for his efforts to implement the
Dayton Peace Agreement and to engage Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its reforms towards joining the
European Union.
At the same time, let me warmly welcome
Mr. Nebojša Radmanović, the new Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We thank him
for his statement and for the special emphasis he has
placed on the European aspirations of his country —
aspirations that are shared by all the inhabitants of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me add on a more personal note that it is has
been and is good to sit next to Bosnia and Herzegovina
at this table as a neighbour, just as we are neighbours
in Europe. Every Austrian knows that if one takes a
ruler and places it on the map, the distance between
Vienna and Sarajevo is shorter than the distance
between Vienna and the western border of Austria.
Against this background, we also congratulate the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the recent
fulfilment of the requirements for visa liberalization,
which was confirmed by the Council of the European

10-63264

S/PV.6421

Union on Monday. Austria very much welcomes this
opportunity for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as an important step forward that will bring the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union
closer together. More frequent and flexible visits will
also lead to the intensification of business contacts.
This decision by the Council of the European Union
clearly demonstrates that where there is political will,
necessary reforms can be implemented effectively. We
hope that this spirit of reform will also be taken on by
the new Governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the same time, in line with the assessment of
the High Representative and the recent progress report
by the European Commission, we regret that Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made limited progress in many
areas of reform. The Constitution needs to be brought
in line with international and European standards,
including with rulings of the European Court of Human
Rights.
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to increase the
functionality and effectiveness of its State institutions
and to continue to cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, although
we have taken note of the overall positive evaluation
by Mr. Brammertz in this regard. Failure to implement
the conditions on immovable military property has also
delayed the implementation of the NATO Membership
Action Plan.
As an example of the capability of the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we are encouraged by the
professional handling of general elections by the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
assessment that the elections were generally held in
line with international standards. At the same time, we
hope that the Constitution will be adjusted and that
future elections will be open to all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in line with the European
Convention for Human Rights and its Protocol No. 12.
We call on all political parties to end the use of
divisive and nationalistic rhetoric. Here, I have to say,
we specifically share the concerns expressed by the
High Representative. Instead, a functional and
effective State-level Government needs to be formed
urgently to tackle the many outstanding reform issues.
The politicians of Bosnia and Herzegovina will, we
hope, work together to make further progress on the
country’s path towards the European Union and to
fulfil the 5+2 criteria set forth by the Steering Board of

10-63264

the Peace Implementation Council for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
In October, the European Union Foreign Affairs
Council again confirmed the readiness of the European
Union to continue the European Union Force Althea
with an executive military role beyond 2010 under a
renewed United Nations mandate, and we look forward
to next week’s adoption of the resolution extending the
authorization. The operation has started to provide
non-executive capacity-building and training support,
thus contributing to strengthened local ownership and
capacity. Austria will continue its commitment as a
troop contributor to the operation.
With a mandate extended until the end of 2011,
the European Union Police Mission has focused
specifically on fighting organized crime and corruption
as part of an overall effort to entrench the rule of law
in the country. The recent high-level visits by the
President of the European Council, Mr. Van Rompuy,
and Commissioner Füle underline the unequivocal
commitment of the European Union to the European
perspective for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Union’s preparedness to assume the leading
role in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the future. Members
of the Council know how strongly my own country is
committed to these aspirations and goals.
The Treaty of Lisbon has given the European
Union more effective policy tools from which Bosnia
and Herzegovina will also benefit, for example in the
form of a strengthened European Union presence in the
country.
Fifteen years after the signature of the Dayton
and Paris Peace Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
citizens deserve a qualitative step forward for their
country on the path towards European integration. We
encourage the political leaders of the country to put
Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly on the way towards the
European Union and, in doing so, they can count on
our support.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming His Excellency Mr. Nebojša
Radmanović, the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and thanking him for his comments.
Let me also welcome High Representative Inzko back
to the Council and thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and service in support of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.

13

S/PV.6421

Fifteen years ago this month, a Peace Agreement
was initialled in Dayton, Ohio, that helped end a
terrible war and established a framework for a lasting
peace. The United States made a commitment back
then to help Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve peace
and prosperity. We stand by that commitment today.

for provocative and divisive political rhetoric. Leaders
need to work together across ethnic and party lines.
The United States is concerned about the expressions
of public support by some politicians for war criminals
indicted or convicted by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. We also condemn denials of the
Srebrenica genocide, which are simply indefensible.
We are optimistic that Bosnia and Herzegovina
Such attitudes undermine respect for the rule of law,
can develop into a strong, stable democracy that
impede reconciliation and hinder inter-ethnic
respects the interests of all its citizens. The Bosnian
cooperation. We expect Bosnia and Herzegovina to
people have made enormous strides in the past 15 years.
meet all of its obligations towards the Tribunal, and we
Still, as the High Representative has indicated, much
expect it to take seriously its commitment to
more work needs to be done for the country to fully
implementing its domestic war crimes strategy.
realize its Euro-Atlantic future.
Thirdly, let me affirm United States support for
To move ahead with the closure of the Office of
the Office of the High Representative and the use of
the High Representative, the objectives set by the
executive powers when necessary. Numerous Security
Peace Implementation Council’s Steering Board on
Council resolutions have affirmed the High
State and defence property issues must be met, together
Representative’s Bonn powers and affirmative
with the rest of the 5+2 conditions. The defence
responsibility to exercise them to ensure peace,
property issue also prevents Bosnia and Herzegovina
stability and compliance with the Dayton Peace
from reaping the benefits of its NATO Membership
Agreement. All parties are required to respect and
Action Plan.
implement the High Representative’s decisions.
Constitutional reforms are also urgently needed to
Following the formation of Governments, we
address basic human rights concerns, make
expect Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders to make
Government more responsive to its people, and help
decisive progress on the outstanding elements of the
meet the requirements for Euro-Atlantic integration.
5+2 agenda for transition from the Office of the High
These decisions cannot be imposed from the outside,
Representative to an EU Special Representative. We
but the United States will remain engaged and we will
look forward to constitutional and other reforms
help however we can.
necessary for the country to present a credible
Let me make three points in addressing the High application for EU candidacy.
Representative’s report (see S/2010/575, annex). First,
We also note that the EU’s presence — the
the United States welcomes Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
recent achievements. International observers consider
(EUFOR) — continues to contribute to a safe and
the 3 October general elections generally free and fair.
secure environment. It should be maintained. We
We look forward to the formation of Governments that
support renewal of the EUFOR mandate, which the
can make progress on the pressing reform agenda. We
Council is currently discussing, and the continuation of
also welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress
a credible EU military presence.
towards meeting the conditions for European Union
(EU) visa liberalization, which will spur economic
The United States remains fully committed to the
development and open the door to greater regional framework established by the Dayton Agreement. We
integration. The United States further appreciates look forward to continued reforms as the country’s
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s assumption of significantly citizens and elected leaders assume full responsibility
increased responsibilities in the international for their future, eventually leading to Bosnia and
community, including its service on the Security Herzegovina’s full membership in the European Union
Council and its important contributions to the and NATO.
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I, too, extend a warm
Secondly, we share High Representative Inzko’s welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojša Radmanović,
concerns about what he describes as a deteriorating Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
political climate. Election campaigning is no excuse and thank him for his important statement. I also thank

14

10-63264

S/PV.6421

High Representative Valentin Inzko for his informative
briefing and the report (see S/2010/575, annex) before
us.

with the support of this Council, can and will succeed
in consolidating a fully functional and self-sustaining
State.

Brazil commends Bosnia and Herzegovina for
having held free, fair and credible general elections last
month. The vote should contribute to the consolidation
of democracy and help to strengthen key political
institutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina is also to be
commended for the calm that continues to prevail in
the country. Brazil acknowledges the role of the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
contributing to a safe and secure environment in the
country. We fully support renewal of the Security
Council’s authorization for the Force.

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Radmanović, and thank him for his
statement. We thank Mr. Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union
Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing.

Also positive is the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to develop its relations with its
neighbours. The completion of conditions for visa
liberalization with the European Union is also a
positive step on the path towards regional integration.
My delegation reiterates its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We support all efforts to strengthen the
State at the national level and, at the same time, to
preserve the rights and prerogatives of all communal
entities. The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
stable, prosperous and united country hinges on strict
respect for the pertinent international and domestic
legal provisions on the division of powers among the
different levels of Government.
We are therefore concerned by statements and
measures of the entities that question the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Challenges to the
Dayton Peace Agreement and its institutional
arrangements, as well as divisive rhetoric, should be
avoided. In this regard, we call on all actors to respect
the authority of and cooperate with the High
Representative. It is collaboration between and among
entities and between the entities and the State that will
lead to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition to a reinforced
European Union presence.
The international community should maintain its
active support for Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
pursuit for political stability and socio-economic
development. There is no future for a divided Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We hope that all concerned can come
to this conclusion, set aside differences and work
together. We are convinced that the Bosnian people,

10-63264

We commend the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its important contribution to the
stability of the country. We also commend the High
Representative for his efforts in facilitating the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. It is
important that all leaders in the country continue to
commit themselves to dialogue and peaceful
coexistence.
We are concerned by actions questioning the
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s State
institutions, as well as the continued challenges to the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. It is
important that all parties, including neighbours of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, uphold their commitments in
the spirit of good-neighbourliness and peaceful
coexistence, as enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
We call on the authorities of the Republika Srpska to
refrain from rhetoric and actions that challenge the
sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has continued to play an important
role in providing the reassurance needed by the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We salute the European
Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
cooperation with the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for contributing a safe and secure
environment. It is important, however, that every effort
be made to support the national security forces so that
they can assume their full responsibilities.
We welcome the progress that has been achieved
in the country in the area of the entrenchment of the
rule of law, particularly in terms of police reform and
coordinating the policing aspects of combating major
and organized crime.

15

S/PV.6421

We are concerned that the situation of refugees
and displaced persons remains unresolved. This is a
potentially destabilizing matter if not addressed in a
holistic way. We therefore call on the authorities to
ensure the implementation of the aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in dealing with refugees.
We commend Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
progress made in economic development, despite the
challenges brought about by the global financial and
economic crisis. We call upon the international partners
to support the country in its efforts to address these
challenges.
Finally, we once again commend the High
Representative and his staff for their good work.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
extend a warm welcome to the Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Nebojša Radmanović. I would also like to thank
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his
comprehensive briefing. I commend the devoted efforts
that he and his staff have exerted with sincerity and
great dedication to address the very complex and
sensitive issues on the ground in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I welcome the fact that the general elections held
in early October were conducted peacefully and
successfully overall. In the light of the large number of
issues that the country must address, we look forward
to the expeditious establishment of the Council of
Ministers and the early stabilization of the political
situation. In the post-election context, there are at least
two aspects that we find to be positive. The first is that
the Bosniaks are motivated to reconcile with Serbia, as
demonstrated by the apologies expressed by
Mr. Izetbegović, a Bosniak member of the Presidency.
This development is quite significant for the peace and
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
West Balkan region.
The second point is that there is strong
momentum for cooperation among the members of the
Presidency. Their constructive collaboration will show
other institutions in the country that the accumulation
of cooperation can actually produce improvements in
the country as a whole. We cannot be overly optimistic,
however, as there remain large gaps among the
positions of the various parties and ethnic groups.

16

We are particularly concerned about some acts
that have the potential to destabilize the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as indicated in
the report of the High Representative (see S/2010/575,
annex). The State property law adopted by the
Republika Srpska is a flagrant challenge to the
authority of the Office of the High Representative. We
note with regret that this law makes the possible
achievement of the 5+2 agenda difficult.
Japan has consistently supported the policy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding Euro-Atlantic
integration. In that connection, we welcome the
decision by the European Union (EU) Justice and
Home Affairs Council to grant the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina a visa exemption to European Union
countries. This could increase the incentive and
momentum among the Bosnian people towards
realizing European integration. We also hope that the
achievement of the 5+2 objectives will enable the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative at the earliest
possible date.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to require an active role on the part of the
High Representative until the transition to the EU
Special Representative takes place. Japan highly values
the activities of Mr. Inzko in bringing calm and
reassurance to the situation, and continues to support
him fully. We would like once again to reiterate that
the High Representative must maintain full authority to
fulfil his mission until his mandate comes to an end.
Finally, I would like to express Japan’s
appreciation for the role that the European Union Force
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is playing in that region,
and we support the renewal of its mandate now under
discussion in the Security Council.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to welcome the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Nebojša Radmanović, Chairman of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his important statement. I also thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for introducing his report (see
S/2010/575, annex). We share his views and support
his efforts for a strong and stable Bosnia and
Herzegovina, at home in Europe and in the world at
large.

10-63264

S/PV.6421

The periodic review by the Security Council of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a crucial
opportunity to take stock of developments in the
political and security situation in the country and the
region. The report that has been presented to us
highlights several areas of progress, which Gabon
welcomes.
First of all, on the political front, general
elections were held on 3 October. The successful
holding of the elections attests to the political maturity
of all parties involved and to their willingness to build
the country on a foundation of peace. The elections
should encourage all parties to move forward by
rejecting the ethnic rhetoric that has long undermined
the country’s political and social life. I urge the
Bosnians to continue to base the country’s progress
towards increased peace and stability on the virtues of
dialogue and tolerance.
The talks under way aimed at creating a
Government based on a broad consensus represents, in
my view, another major step forward in the process of
establishing the institutional mechanisms that are
crucial to political stability, economic and social
development and the strengthening of the country.
We also welcome the decision taken by the
European Union on 8 November to lift the visa
requirement for Albanians and Bosnians in the
Schengen area countries. This is a strong political
signal that demonstrates European Union commitment
to the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
that country’s progressive integration into the
European community.
These positive developments lead me to once
again urge the various political stakeholders to
accelerate their implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Gabon believes that it would be to their
benefit to strengthen their cooperation with the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR), NATO and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We must also continue to support
the parties in their efforts to achieve the five objectives
and two conditions set out by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, which are essential to
the effective transition from the Office of the High
Representative to that of the European Union Special
Representative.

10-63264

On the security front, Gabon welcomes the fully
stable security conditions throughout the country. In
that regard, my delegation commends the central role
of EUFOR to that end, in cooperation with the Armed
Forces of Bosnian and Herzegovina. I am of the view
that reform of the defence sector, which NATO fully
supports, will help strengthen security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
For Gabon, the presence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in this body is proof of the consideration
and respect it enjoys in the international community,
but also and above all, of its commitment to finding
peace and prosperity once again within and with
Europe. My country remains hopeful that the peace
process under way will be further strengthened by the
momentum towards unity, of which the ongoing
consultation and dialogue will be the main vectors.
Those two tools will open the path to a peaceful and
bright future for that country, which has long suffered
internal tensions.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I, too, would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nebojša Radmanović,
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
to the Council and to thank him for his statement. I
also thank the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko,
for his views on the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since his last report (see S/2010/235,
annex).
We are pleased with the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the Council’s last
meeting on this item (see S/PV.6319). In particular, we
note the successful conclusion of the sixth national
election last month. We congratulate the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on their commitment to
democracy, as demonstrated by their participation in
the elections. We welcome the decision to allow visafree travel to all Bosnians. Equally, we welcome the
European Union’s improved relations with the
country’s neighbours.
We recall with nostalgia the high hopes that
attended the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement
15 years ago. As we welcome the achievements of the
past 11 years, we also share the Secretary-General’s
concern over the limited progress made in
implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement and in
meeting the outstanding requirements set by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council

17

S/PV.6421

for the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union presence.
In the same vein, we observe that the reported
increase in provocative and nationalistic rhetoric
further undermines efforts towards achieving a stable
and peaceful country, fully integrated into
Euro-Atlantic structures. We encourage political
leaders to commit to the necessary reforms and to
ensure the completion of the five objectives and two
conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. They should also refrain from
nationalistic and anti-Dayton rhetoric, surmount their
differences and commit to dialogue.
We welcome the contributions of the regional and
international partners in support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s
progress
towards
Euro-Atlantic
integration. We encourage it not to relent in its efforts
to ensure that all outstanding issues pertaining to the
country’s integration into the European Union are
resolved speedily. We appreciate the role of the
European Union’s peacekeeping, in collaboration with
the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
ensure a safe and secure environment in the country.
We commend the High Representative for his
tireless efforts to promote the entry of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into the European Union and to facilitate
the implementation of the Dayton Agreement. We look
forward to a more collaborative effort between the
Office of the High Representative, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Government in ensuring the full implementation of
annex 7 of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to close the
chapter of displacement in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
2014.
It is a positive development that the economy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is showing signs of
improvement. Economic growth in the country is
essential to supporting efforts to sustain peace and
stability. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will need to continue the necessary reforms and to
work assiduously with its international partners to
improve the economy. We call on the international
community to continue to support the Government in
its efforts to foster economic progress, thereby
improving the lives of the average Bosnian.
Let me conclude by stating that Nigeria, along
with Council members, will remain focused in efforts

18

to support the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
achieve a prosperous and democratic country. We urge
all concerned to display more maturity, as we believe
that the Bosnian people can confront the current
challenges with the necessary political will.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I thank the High Representative for his very clear
report (see S/2010/575, annex) and express the United
Kingdom’s strong support for his ongoing work in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also thank His Excellency
Mr. Radmanović for attending this meeting so soon
after his swearing-in for a second term on the
Presidency, and congratulate him on his re-election.
The United Kingdom shares Mr. Inzko’s concerns
about the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Over
the past six months, there has been a worrying lack of
progress on key reforms and an escalation of divisive
anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions against Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s State-level institutions. In that context,
it is important to obtain the means to deal with the
challenges to Dayton.
We want to see transition from the Office of the
High Representative to the European Union Special
Representative, but only on the basis of the full
completion of the 5+2 conditionality. The level of
rhetoric highlighted in the report is of particular
concern. It is important that the Security Council make
very clear its unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s territorial integrity, as enshrined in the
Dayton Agreement.
We fully agree with the High Representative’s
call for the continuing mandate of the European Union
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). In the
context of the continued political tensions, EUFOR
fulfils an essential role underpinning stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We welcome the fact that the
October elections were conducted, as the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights has said,
generally in line with international standards. The
newly elected leaders now need quickly to form new
Governments at the federal and State levels, with the
reform agenda at the heart of their programmes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

10-63264

S/PV.6421

Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
extend my welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojša
Radmanović, Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We are also pleased to see again
among us His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union, and thank him for his briefing. The
report (see S/2010/575, annex) that he presented
accurately reflects recent developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we share the concerns that he
expressed in his report and his briefing. I would like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm Croatia’s full and
continued support for him and his Office.
Bearing in mind the existing shortcomings in
addressing the remaining objectives and conditions, as
well as the continuing challenges to the very
foundations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as established
by the Dayton Peace Agreement — the fifteenth
anniversary of which we will mark shortly — we agree
with the assessment that it would be premature to begin
the closure of the Office of the High Representative
this year.
I would like to make three brief points.
First, we welcome the fact that the October
elections were free, fair and generally organized in
accordance
with
democratic
principles
and
international standards. Croatia believes that elected
individuals and political parties should enter into
constructive dialogue on the formation of new
Governments at all levels so as to continue, as soon as
possible, with the process of reforms needed for EuroAtlantic integration.
Negotiations on constitutional reform should be
continued in the post-electoral period. Croatia
reiterates its call to political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to find strength and reach compromise on
key issues. Assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in
reaching sustainable stability and functionality is one
of our regional priorities. However, there will be no
progress without consensus, which has to originate
from within and enjoy the support of regional actors
and the international community.
For Croatia, the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and equality of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s three
constitutive peoples are the basic preconditions for the
country’s stability and sustainability. Croatia therefore
advocates for constitutional amendments that provide

10-63264

full equality for all constitutive peoples and citizens
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Secondly, Croatia’s strategic interest is the
stability, security and progress of South-East Europe.
We are pleased that the report recognized the improved
political environment in relations between countries in
the region. I would like to reiterate that Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina enjoy a close and friendly
relationship in many aspects. The high-level visits of
both President Josipović and Prime Minister Kosor
represent strong encouragement to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including as regards their viable return to their country,
primarily to Republika Srpska.
In the same vein, Croatia strongly supports the
clear and unambiguous European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We firmly
support all the countries of the region in their reforms.
We have invested a lot of effort in offering them our
assistance and experience on the European Union and
NATO integration path. We believe that membership in
the European Union represents the most suitable
framework for the overall development of all countries
of South-East Europe.
Therefore, we are particularly pleased with the
recent decision of the Council of the European Union
on the abolition of the visa requirement for citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina holding biometric passports.
This is a welcome step that not only brings real
benefits to the people, but may also reverse the trend of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lagging behind other countries
in the region in its rapprochement to the European
Union.
On the other hand, we regret that the invitation
extended by NATO to Bosnia and Herzegovina to join
its membership action plan, a step that Croatia strongly
and actively supported, has not been followed by the
start of its annual national programme. We call on the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all the
necessary measures in order to fulfil requirements
regarding State property.
Thirdly, as we have stated on many occasions,
there cannot be a Bosnia and Herzegovina without
Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their political and
cultural survival is vital for the continued existence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as these two elements are
closely intertwined. Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are the smallest and most vulnerable group. Their voice

19

S/PV.6421

should be considered on the basis of equality, both
ethnic and civic, as guaranteed in the Constitution and
as stemming from the history of the country. Croats
should have the equal right to participate in the
decision-making process and should not be out-voted,
especially at the level of the Federation.
Finally, the fight against impunity for war crimes
is crucial for the normalization of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia should not be declared complete without
bringing to justice the two remaining fugitives, Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić, who were indicted for the
most atrocious crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia. It is also important that
national courts fulfil their lasting responsibility and
address their war crime cases.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Let me, first of all,
warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Nebojša
Radmanović, Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
As on all previous occasions, the delegation of
Serbia has read the report on implementation of the
Peace Agreement (see S/2010/575) that has been
presented. We have also listened with keen interest to
the views expressed in the Council today. Serbia is
fully committed to continuing, in cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and other regional
stakeholders, activities aimed at bringing about full
reconciliation and lasting stability in the region. We are
convinced that the joint efforts and cooperation of all
the countries in the region, along with the
intensification of the efforts of the international
community, will contribute to the strengthening of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as one country.
Serbia is making great efforts to significantly
advance its relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, our
next-door neighbour and a friendly country. It is
precisely the continued development and promotion of
relations among States of the Western Balkans that will
bring us to the achievement of our common goal,
namely, integration into the European Union (EU).

20

We welcome democratic processes. In that spirit,
we also welcome the recently held elections, which
expressed the will of the people. We see them as an
important step forward in ensuring a peaceful and
prosperous future for all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in creating conditions for further
advancement towards the European Union.
In order to bring greater stability to the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country needs some
encouragement from the Union, as EU integration is a
common denominator of the aspirations of the peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Encouragement and
concrete support for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
integration into the European Union would go a long
way in bringing about further stability to the country.
Serbia has been a staunch advocate of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s inclusion into the EU’s liberalization of
the visa regime. We are very happy that this decision
has finally been adopted. That is exactly the muchneeded and strategically important signal of a
European future for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a signatory party and a guarantor of the
implementation of the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in accordance with resolution 1031
(1995), Serbia remains strongly committed to the
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and consistently
respects its territorial integrity and sovereignty. We
support the initiation of reform processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are of the opinion that the closure of
the Office of the High Representative and the
termination of the so-called Bonn powers would
contribute to finding a solution in that regard.
We call for the achievement of a sustainable
solution in the spirit of European values, with the
agreement of the representatives of the two entities and
the consensus of the three constituent peoples. Serbia
is encouraging the participants in that process to do all
that is needed to bring about such an agreement.
Our constructive approach to the search for a
solution is based not only on our support for the
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also on our
deep conviction that only dialogue and agreement can
bring about a solution that can be sustained in the
future. Every solution in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be followed by peace and stability and should
be reached by agreements that do not bring into
question the integrity of the country, for it is only a

10-63264

S/PV.6421

stable and prosperous region that can become a part of
the European family of nations.
Based on the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska, Serbia views the
development of its relations with the Republika Srpska
in the context of its efforts to intensify overall relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. Guided by its
commitment to a complete normalization and
substantively new relations, my country is devoted to
the further improvement of relations and has taken
important steps towards comprehensive regional
reconciliation. The declaration on Srebrenica of the
National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia
demonstrates clearly Serbia’s support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also its readiness to confront the past
and assume political responsibility for the future and
the well-being of the region. The Istanbul declaration
and the regular trilateral meetings of the Foreign
Ministers of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Turkey contribute and lend impetus to the further
promotion of good-neighbourly relations.
We are fully aware that regional and economic
cooperation provide a special impulse to the lasting
stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

10-63264

and the region of South-East Europe/Western Balkans.
The successful cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the framework of numerous
international and regional initiatives — such as the
Process of Cooperation in South-East Europe, the
Central European Free Trade Agreement, the Regional
Cooperation Council, the Central European Initiative,
the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative and others — is a good
example of the importance that we attach to the
promotion of regional cooperation and a common
European future. We are committed to furthering ever
better and more extensive regional cooperation and
integration so that we can find common answers to
regional challenges and cooperate in our efforts to join
the European Union.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I thank Mr. Radmanović and
Mr. Inzko for their participation in today’s meeting.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

21
