UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL,

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

th

1846

MEETING:

30 SEPTEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1846) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the ‘agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 September 1975’from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/ 11826) . . . . . T. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

.

S/PV. 1846

.
.,; ;. : i

NOTE,

.a!\ ‘symbdd of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures,,y@zzntionof such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
- ?,‘, ”‘: ::::.:;
.. >~~,~~:c;~~~~~~cument. L
%.>C
Documents of the ,Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council; The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to-resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1846th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 September
President:

Mr. Moulaye

EL HASSEN

(Mauritania).

sano(Mozambique),
Mr. Jaroszek(Poland),
Mr. Datcu
(Romania),
Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. Amerasinghe
(Sri Lanka), ,Mr. Shevel (Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republit of Tanzania and United Stated of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Before continuing
our discussion this afternoon, I
should like to inform members
of the Council
that I have received a letter from the Permanent
Observer fqr the Republic of South Viet-Nam, dated
30 September 1975, which I shall read out:

agenda (S/Agenda/l846)

of the agenda
“I have the. honour to request you to be kind
enough to authorize me to address the Council on
the question of the admission of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and of the Republic
of
South Viet-Nam to the United Nations.”

Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
Security Council (S/11826)
The meeting

1975, at 3 p.m.

was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
3. I should also like to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representatives of Guyana, Iraq, the United Republic of
Cameroon
and the United Republic of Tanzania
requesting that, during the present discus&on held by
the Council in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 3366 (XXX), an opportunity
be afforded
to the Permanent
Observers for the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
to present their views on the question
under discussion.

Adopfion of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 19 September 1975 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
Security Council (S/11826)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decision ‘taken previously
[1842nd-1845th meetings], I invite the ,representatives
of Algeria, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Dahomey, the German Democratic Republic,
Hungary, India, Laos, Madagascar, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambiqie,
Poland, Romania,
Senegal, Sri
Lanka, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and
Yugoslavia to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, according to Article 31 of the
Charter and the relevant provisions of the provisional
rules of procedure. I invite the representatives
to
whom I have just referred to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. The Council will now continue its consideration
of the item on its agenda, and, with the Council’s
permission,
speaking
as the representative
of
MAURITANIA,
I shall make a brief statement.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. Ghelev (Bulgaria), Mr. Sarin Chhak (Cambodia), Mr. Alarcbn (Cuba), Mr. Vejvoda (Czechoslovakia),
Mr.
Adjibadt?
(Dahomey).
Mr.
Florin
(German Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Sipraseuth (Laos),
Mr. Tiandraza (Madagascar),
Mr. Garcia Robles
(Mexico), Mr. Puntsagnorov
(Mongolia),
Mr. Chis-

6. The correctness of the position taken by the
majority
of the members of the Security Council
during the meeting of 6 August last 11834th meeting]
was strikingly confirmed by the General Assembly.
In resolution
3366 (XXX),
the General Assembly
recommended
that the Council immediately
and
favourably reconsider the requests for admission of the
two Viet-Nams.
Undoubtedly
then Assembly thereby

4. It is my intention
to request the Observer
for the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement after
the vote is taken, if there is no objection.
It was so decided.

1

wished, in a solemn manner, to draw the attention of
the Council’ to the injustice. of using the veto, particularly when it was a question of bringing the United
Nations even closer to its ideal of universality.

some calling for the dissolution of the United Nations
Command, others requiring the withdrawal of foreign
troops stationed in South Korea under the United
Nations flag, are. themselves
enough to demonstrate the concern felt by the Organization as it confronts .the responsibilities
that have fallen to it
throughout the existence of the Korean problem. This
ambiguity must be cleared up and the responsibility
of the United Nations has to be clearly defined
before the Security .Council examines the validity
of a request for admission from either of the two
parts of.Korea to the United Nations.

7. The General Assemblv. which is sovereign as far
as the admission of a new Member.is conceried, has
recognized,
for its part, that the two Viet-Nams
fulfil the conditions laid down by the Charter for
becoming Members of the United Nations. Hence we
cannot but regret that the United States has seen
fit, by a practice which we believed was a thing of
the past, to link the admission of the two Viet-Nams
to that of South Korea.

12. In speaking’ of -Korea, one fact should be
emphasized:
it is that both parts of Korea have
frequently, expressed their will to do everything
in their power to bring about the peaceful reunification of their country. Such a desire would a priori
exclude any resort to force ‘or violence and should
therefore be encouraged.
The joint communique
of 4 July 1972,* in which both North and South
Korea pledged themselves to continue the dialogue that
had already been initiated, should be supported and
encouraged:

8. Destiny perhaps intends that the Vietnamese.
people, having scored a victory. on the ‘battlefield,
should continue
their struggle in the diplomatic
sphere. But what we are sure’of is that the,,Vietnamese
people, thanks to their determination
and strengthened by the soundness of their cause and, the unanimous support of the international
community,
will
finally once again prevail. Already the resolution of
the General Assembly, which I referred to just now,
constitutes a valuable support to them and an undeniable victory.over
the refusal their applications have
met with.

13. To try’to force the entry. of either of the two
parts of Korea into the United Nations is an attempt
to perpetuate the division of Korea. If such a step
were adopted by the Organization,
we would have
the heavy responsibility
of having created an
irreversible
situation
that : contradicts
the deep
aspirations and the higher interests of the ‘Korean’
nation.

9. True the United ‘States has put forward certain
arguments, to justify its attitude. As for the .linked
admission of two States, while such a practice was
used in the past and in .a well-known international
political context, we do not believe that it can be
justified
today. We thought that the progressive
disappearance of the cold war and ‘of the mistrust
which was a characteristic of it was going to mean
that small countries would not be the .subject of con,frontations which appeared to us to be obsolete and
which have been condemned many times. At any
rate, to link the question of Korea with the-question
of the two Viet-Nams .can only be’ reminiscent
of
the unfortunate methods used during that era. :
”

14. The basic role incumbent on the United Nations
is to encourage’ everything
which brings peoples
together and which further .strengthens the unity of
nations. It is in the name of that principle and in
the evident interest of the Korean people as a ,whole
that my delegation felt it its duty to oppose the
inclusion in the agenda of the request for admission of
the southern part of Korea to the United Nations.
We shall be entirely prepared to support the request
for admission of Korea when both parts together
have jointly. expressed their ‘desire to make -that
request. It is in that way, moreover, that the United
Nations, and particularly the Security Council, has had
to resolve the cases of divided nations that have
come to request admission to the Grganization.

10. The Korean question, by its origin; its peculiarities, its political’ implications
and the controversies
which it has engendered and continues to engender
in the Organization;
is surely not: a question that
should be politically or legally linked with the request
for admission of the two Viet-Nams.
The Korean
question is still one ,of the major preoccupations
of the United Nations because ,of the commitments
that the Organization was obliged to assume’after the
signing of the Armistice
Agreement
of, 27 July
1953.’

15.’ The admission of the two, Viet-Nams ‘cannot
be connected with the question of .Korea. Furthermore, the Vietnamese
peoples deserve special.
treatment because -they are peoples that have made
enormous
sacrifices in order to reconquer their
liberty and their dignity. Such sacrifices, imposed
on ‘them by a ‘war unprecedented
in our history,
deserve our gratitude and our admiration.

11. The General Assembly, which is the supreme
body of the Organization,
must bear the main responsibility in seeking a solution of the Korean question,
because every State Member of the United Nations
is concerned over the situation prevailing at present
in the Korean peninsula. The various resolutions
adopted in recent years by the General Assembly,

16. Despite the passive attitude, adopted by the
Organization throughout the entire period of the Vietnamese tragedy, the Vietnamese peoples have, with!

with our comrades-in-arms
in the heroic country
that is today ‘the ,Republic of South Viet-Nam
and
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam., We know full
well that we were fighting in the same cause:
peace and security in the world. They struggled
above ,a11 for their independence,
for a chance to
represent their own interests themselves everywhere
throughout
the world. We believe that- when they
request,,as we did, admission to the United Nations,
they are but giving further concrete expression to their
independence and their resolve to continue to work
for the” consolidation
of peace-not
only in IndoChina but throughout the world. They have resolved
to share their experience with us all.

out any bitterness, come to request their admission to the United Nations, seeking to prove by this
gesture that once the war was over they intended to
forget the past and to forge links of friendship and cooperation with all countries, including the United
States. Our dutyl-and
I think this ‘is the duty of the
United States in partic,ular-is
to help them to forget the
past and to look with us towards the future. Therefore, we appeal to the United States to. display
generosity towards the Vietnamese peoples which
have suffered so and who have tried .not only to
forget the past but also to stretch out the hand of
friendship and co-operation.
17. And now,. in .my capacity as PRESIDENT,
I call on the next speaker, the representative
of
Mozambique,
to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

22. We are surprised to see that the *United States
and the United States alone refuses to admit that the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam are entitled to be independent and to
be represented among us. This isolated attitude
causes my” delegation and my people to feel some
doubt about the sincerity of the United States in its
relations with countries such as my own and its desire
to consolidate peace in Indo-China.
Would not the
United States stand to gain more by way of privilege’
and esteem, by demonstrating
through its goodwill
to the people of Viet-Nam
that the massacres, the
heavy bombing and the humiliations
inflicted on it
throughout
,many years are now part of history?
Why should, military
aggression against Vi&-Nam
be turned into diplomatic and moral aggression?

18. Mr. CHISSANO
(Mozambique)
(interprefation
jio-om French): It is .a great honour for me as the
representative of a country which has recently become
a Member of the Organization,
to be able directly
to greet the members of the Security Council, this
body which is so important for the life of the United
Nations. I wish to extend by greetings to .you, in
particular
Mr. President, as the representative
of
Mauritania,
a country which has done its duty inside
and outside the United Nations,
both in its own
capacity and in co-operation
with other members
of the Organization
of African Unity, for the liberation of my country and other .countries which were
under Portuguese colonial domination.

23. Does not the United States want complete
peace? Must.,the
rage of the people of Viet-Nam
against the United States, be perpetuated? Or is this
a continuation
of the cold war? If so, let us not talk
about detente,; let us not fool each other. We in
Mozambique,
like the people of Viet-Nam, are independent, and we have struggled to become so. We
and other countries like us suffer more from the
consequences of the cold war between the major
Powers. .That is why’ we struggled and still struggle
to continue to get rid of the &auses of cold war. That
is why we are wedded to our independence.

19.. It is for that reason, Sir, that my delegation
is extremely gratified to see you presiding over these
meetings of the Security Council, instructed, as it is,
by the overwhelming
majority of the members of the
General Assembly
favourably
to reconsider .-the
requests received from the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
for admission to membership in the ,United Nations.
20. The people. of Mozambique
carried on for
10 years an armed struggle against Portuguese colonialism. Our people was subjected to massacres and
torture, and our country was devastated. During that
period of struggle Portugal was our enemy and all
those countries which supported. Portugal were also
our enemies. But, since ours was a struggle for
peace and to create conditions which would make
it possible for us to initiate friendly relations with
all peoples and States throughout the world, today
we are in the United .Nations working side by side
,with Portugal and with the.United States, for example,
building a new world, one in which there is harmony
and greater security.

24, My delegation believes it is completely
wrong
to judge the merits of a country for admission to
membership in the United Nations on the basis of
the merits of other countries. We noted that the
delegation of the United States made a statement
during these meetings in order to discuss another
matter which was, not on. the agenda. Korea is not
Viet-Nam. The Council decided that the question of
the admission of‘the Republic of Korea would not
be discussed during these meetings.
Why, then,
are we discussing it? .
25. Mozambique,
Cape Verde, and Sao Tome and
Principe were admitted, yet the Republic of Korea
was not. The United States says it is not against
the admission of the two Vi&-Nams.
In that case
let their actions match their words. Let us admit

21. We believe that the United States of America
is as pleased at this fact as are all the other members of the international
community.
Despite the
distance separating us, we struggled side by side
3

31. My statement will deal with that highly specific
question. My delegation voted in favour of resolution
3366 (XxX)-which,
I might say, did not receive a
single opposing vote-and
we would venture to hope
even at this late hour in our debates that the result
of the voting which will take place in a few minutes
will be different from the result we had earlier. Of
course, we know that it will be different with regard
to the single abstention which was registered last
time, since the representative
of Costa Rica, in a
gesture which deserves ’ our full support
and
sympathy, has announced that his delegation will
this time vote in favour of those draft resolutions.

both Viet-Nams now; subsequently we can take up
the question of Korea on the basis of the merits
of that particular case.
26. My delegation entirely agrees with those who
have already stated that admission of the two Vietnamese States to the United Nations would be a
guarantee that the principle of universality would be
realized. But universality
is not the only valid
criterion for the admission of Members; therefore in
all cases we have to weigh the question of the
admission of a particular country on its own merits.
Otherwise the existence of the bodies and committees of the United Nations which study ,and recommend the admission
of new Members .:would be
.I
unjustifiable.

32. It is our hope, I repeat, that the result will
be different from last time. That hope is chiefly based
on three reasons. The first is the fact that General
Assembly resolution
3366 (XXX),
which is selfexplanatory and whose operative’ paragraphs I have
just read out, was adopted by an overwhelming
majority. There were only a few abstentions and there
were no opposing votes.

27. My delegation believes that the Jadmission of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam should be decided by unanimity
among,the Members of the United Nations and that
it was only in order to act in accordance with normal
procedures that this problem was referred back to
the Security Council for immediate and favourable
consideration. My delegation cannot see why the report
of the Council should still be a negative one, since
there are not, nor can there be, any fresh arguments
to lay before the General Assembly.

33. The second reason is one which I have already
stated in the plenary meeting when I explained our
vote there, on 19 September, but now I should like
to expand on that explanation. The second reason is
that we believe, as I then stated:

28. It would not spell defeat for thenUnited States
were it to reconsider its position, because it is only
a question of reconsidering an opinion in order to
bring it more closely into harmony with the process
of history and the sacred goals of the United Nations.

“that if there is any people in the world which
should indeed occupy a place-a place of honour,
I would say-in
the United Nations, it is the
people of Viet-Nam. Throughout history there is no
people who have struggled with greater heroism
and at the cost of greater suffering in winning their
full rights to independence
and self-determination.“3

29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I now invite the representative
of, Mexico to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

The third reason stems from our conviction
Mr. GARCIA
ROBLES
(Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, may I begin by
expressing my delegation’s
pleasure at seeing you
in the presidential chair of the Security Council at
this time and thanking you and all the members of
the Council for having granted our request to speak
in this debate. On the agenda of the meeting is a very
specific item-the
letter dated 19 September
1975
from the President of the General Assembly to the
President of the Security Council. In that letter, the
President of the Assembly informed the President
of the Council that at its 2354th plenary meeting,
on 19 September, the General Assembly adopted its
resolution
3366 (XXX),
the op.erative paragraphs
of which are very short. In paragraph 1, the Assembly
“Considers
that the ‘Democratic
Republic of VietNam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam should be
admitted to membership
in the United Nations”.
In paragraph 2, the Assembly “Accordingly
reques?s
the Security Council to reconsider immediately
and
favourably
their applications
in strict conformity
with Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the
United Nations”.

that:

30.

“any permanent
member of the Council who
attempts to impede entrance to the United Nations
of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
would be seriously
which those members
violating
commitments
explicitly
undertook
at the United
Nations
Conference on International
Organization,
held
at San Francisco in 1945.“3
34. I shall now very briefly recall those commitments. For this purpose I shall quote a few paragraphs
which I wrote in 1945, following that Conference,
when the memory of my participation
in the work of
the committee
of the Conference dealing with the
Security Council was still fresh in my mind. .This,
then, is what I said on the subject:
“In order to clarify the rather cryptic Yalta
text which is incorporated in the Dumbarton Oaks
draft, and accepting the invitation extended by the
inviting Powers at that time to shorten the discussions in the committee,
those delegations
that
4

had submitted amendments on the voting procedure
formed
a sub-committee
and put together a
questionnaire
containing 23 specific’ questions on
the,application
of that procedure.

“It is not to be assumed, however, that the
permanent
members,
any more than the nonpermanent members, would use their ‘veto’ power
wilfully to obstruct the operation of the Council.“4

“For more than two weeks, from 22 May to
7 June, representatives
of the four inviting countries” -at that time France was not yet a Member
of the United Nations-”
worked tirelessly to try
to arrive at an agreement as to the replies they
were to give to the aforementioned
questionnaire.

37. Another reason for taking this commitment
very
seriously is that, as all those who took part in the
San Francisco Conference will recall, this declaration was a decisive element in ending the crisis
which was endangering the very outcome of the San
Francisco Conference.

“Finally,
on 8 June, we distributed to the members of the committee the text of a joint statement
by the sponsoring Powers4 whereby those Powers,
without specifically replying to each one of the
23 questions put to them, defined their ‘general
attitude’ with regard to the veto.

38. In the/same
way, it is appropriate
to recall
the advisory..‘opinion
handed down in 1948 by the
International
Court of Justices to the effect that when
a request for admission is discussed the permanent
members of the Security Council do not have the
right to base themselves on another State’s support
or rejection
of another
applicant.
We jurists
certainly sometimes allow ourselves too much freedom
in the manner in which we interpret texts, but in
this case, even if we used not only the greatest
freedom, but even licence, it would not be possible
to change themeaning
of the advisory opinion of the
court.
”

“The text of the first paragraph of that statement,
which was included in an annex to the report of
the committee, reads as follows:
“ ‘Specific
questions
covering
the voting
procedure in the Security Council have been
submitted by a sub-committee
of the Conference
Committee
on Structure and Procedures. of the
Security Council to the delegations of the four
Governments
sponsoring
the Conference-the
United States of America, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Republic
of China. In dealing with those questions, the
four delegations desire to make the following
statement, of their general attitude towards the
whole question of unanimity of permanent members in the decisions of the Security Council. ,Z 94

39. That text, the text which the advisory opinion
itself says is the genuine, authentic text, is the
French text. In order to avoid any possibility of doubt,
I think it might be usefulto conclude this statement
by reading the authentic text, the French text.
.,
“The Court, . . . is of opinion that a Member of
the United Nations which is called upon, in virtue
of Article 4 of the Charter, to pronounce itself
by its vote, either in the Security Council or in
the General Assembly, on the admission of a State
to membership
in the United Nations,
is not
juridically
entitled to make its consent to the
admission dependent on conditions not expressly
provided by paragraph 1 of the said Article;

35. The rest of the statement was by and large
devoted to an explanation
of the reasons why the
.matters contained in what would become Chapters VI,
VII and VIII of the Charter had to be subject to the
rule of unanimity of the permanent members of the
Security Council. Those reasons in the last instance
were that, as was stated in paragraph 4 of the fourPower statement to which I have referred, the decisions and measures which the Security Council
would adopt in implementation
of those Chapters
might have “major
political
consequences”
which
might initiate “a chain of events which might, in the
end, require the Council under its responsibilities
to invoke measures of enforcement”.4

“and that, in particular, a Member of the Organization cannot, while it recognizes the conditions set
forth in that provision to be fulfilled by the State
concerned,
subject its affirmative
vote to the
additional condition that other States be admitted
to membership in the United Nations together with
that State.“*
..
40. These are the three main reasons why my delegation, even at this.late hour in our debate and, not
forgetting a statement made here two or three days
ago, is still hopeful that this time the Council will
be able to adopt draft resolutions S/ 11832 and S/ 11833.

36. Obviously,
the decisions of the Council which
have to do with the admission of new Members are
not included in that category of decisions, and therefore the commitment
entered into by the permanent
members of the Security Council in their statement
of 8 June 1945 is doubly applicable to those decisions. In paragraph 8 of that statement; they said
that:

41. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretation
from French):
If no other representative
wishes to speak at this
stage to explain his vote before the vote, I shall
take it that the Council is prepared to proceed imme* Quoted in French by the speaker.

5

1

diatelv to vote on draft resolutions
S/l 1832 and
S/11833. I shall therefore put to the vote the first
draft resolution, which appears ‘in document S/l 1832.

46. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
The Security Council has again declined to consider
the application
of the Republic of Korea, a State
fully qualified for membership in the United Nations.
The United States has accordingly again vetoed the
membership
applications
of the Republic .of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great ‘,,Britain and
Northern
Ireland,
United Republic
of @neroon,
United Republic of Tanzania.
Against:

United

47. In this era of dialogue, which was underlined
so distinctly during the recent seventh special, session of the General Assembly, the United States,
cannot accept that the admission -of a fully qualified
.applicant should be dependent on the wishes of a
non-Member
State.

States of America.

The result of the vote was 14 in favour and I against.

48: The Republic of Korea, with a population
of
over 35 miilion persons, has been duly constituted
as a State since 15,August 1948. It has had observer
status in the United Nations since 1949. It enjoys
diplomatic
relations with over 90 ‘States which are
Members of the United Nations. The Republic of
Korea has repeated its assurances ,that its admission
to the United Nations would in no way dilute its
hopes for peaceful reunification
on the Korean
peninsula. Indeed, membership in the United Nations,
with its dedication to peace and harmony, should
promote unification, not set it back.

The draft resolution was not adopted’Rt/ze negative
vote being that at a permanent member ofthe Council.
:<
42. I shall now put to the vote the second draft
resolution, which appears in document S/l 1833.
A vote was taken by show of hands.. -.I
In favour: Byelorrusian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland, United Republic <of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania.
Against:

United

49. The United States favours the admission of all
qualified States desiring membership,
including,
I
repeat, the Viet-Nams. The United States hopes that
the parties directly concerned in this impasse will
discuss the question urgently so that it may be resolved.

States of America:

;
.,
The result of the vote was 14 in favour and I against.

50. I should like to conclude, Mr. President, with
a statement of personal, and if I may say so professional, admiration
for the dignity and graciousness
with which you have guided us through. this difficult
if unavailing exercise.

The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative
vote being that of a permanent member of the Council.
43. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Several representatives have asked to explain their
vote after the vote, and I shall now call on them.

51. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Since no other member of the Council has asked
to speak in explanation ‘of his vote, I invite the
Observer ,for the Republic of South- Viet-Nam
to
take a seat at the Council table, in accordance with
the decision which the Council took a short time
ago, and to make his statement.

44. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (translation
from
Chinese): In disregard of the Charter of the United
Nations and the wishes of the overwhelming majority
of the Member
States as expressed in General
Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX)., the United States
representatives has once again vetoed the applications
of the Democratic
Republic of VietlNam
and the
Republic
of ‘South Viet-Nam.
The Chinese delegation considers that such a practice of the United
States is completely
unjustifiable.
We cannot but
express deep regret at it.

52. Mr. DINH BA THI (Republic of .South VietNam) (interpretation
from French): On behalf of
Mr. Nguyen Van Luu, Permanent Observer for the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
and on my own
behalf I should like first of all, Mr. President, to
thank most heartily you and the members of the
Security Council who were kind enough to invite
me to participate in this discussion. We should like
also to congratulate you warmly on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, an important office in which you have demonstrated the full
measure of your competence and authority. We are
particularly gratified at seeing you occupy that post,
since your country, the Islamic Republic of Mauri-

45. We believe that obstructionists
are bound to
fail and that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam will ultimately
obtain their legitimate seats and rights in the United
Nations. The Chinese ,delegation will continue to
work together with all justice-upholding
Member
States for the attainment
of the full rights of the
Vietnamese .people in the Unite,d Nations.
6

clearly

tania; has always,
under the enlightened
guidance
of President Moktar ,Ould Daddah; given f&m support, and assistance to the Vietnamese
people in
their just struggle for national liberation,
and since
a firm relationship
of deep friendship and militant
solidarity exists between our countries and is developing further.

resolution

59. Finally, we should like warmly to thank the
14 members bf the Security Council that have just
voted in favour of the draft resolutions
recommending the admission
of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of VietNam, as well as, the many delegations that were
kind enough to speak during the discussion in order
forcefully to support the just cause of the Vietnamese
people.

55. This abuse of its powers by the United States
is part and parcel of the manceuvres undertaken to
perpetuate the division of Korea. Thus the constantly
manifested
goodwill
of the Provisional
Revolutionary
Government.
of the’ Republic
of
South Viet-Nam and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
which have frequently
stated their readiness’ to establish normal relations
with the American Government
on the basis of the
Paris Accords on Viet-Nam,6
has been answered by
the United States by .the use, four times, of the veto,
by an embargo and even by a refusal to allow
American
organiiations
to send humanitarian
assistance to the people of Viet-Nam.
Such a policy
is quite obviously contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations, to the will of the peoples and even
the legitimate
interests of the American
people.
Does this not constitute
the sole reason for the
deadlock
on other problems
existing
between
Viet-Nam
and ‘the United States, problems which
could be solved now that peace has returned?

60. There can be no doubt that the United States
cannot in any way prevent the Vietnamese people
from playing their legitimate part and raising their
just voice for the common cause of all peoples:
peace, independence, democracy and progress in the.
world.
61. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
from French):
I thank the Observer for the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
for the friendly words he has addressed
to Mauritania and to me personally. I would assuie
the Observers for the two Viet-Nams that they can
count on the active solidarity and unfailing support
of the Government. and people of Mauritania.
62. As no other member of the Council wishes ‘to
speak; we shall now consider the ,Council’s report
to the General Assembly. In conformity
with the
third paragraph of rule 60 of its provisional
rules
of procedure,
“if the Security Council does not
recommend the *applicant State for membership.. . it
shall submit a special report to the General Assembly,
with a complete record of the discussion”. Following
my request, the Secretariat
has prepared a draft
special report. Memb~ers of the Council have before
them, in all the working languages,. a provisional
text of the draft special report of the Security Coun-

56. We are convinced that, following the veto thus
used for the second time against the admission of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and ,the Democratic
Republic .of Viet-Nani,
many ‘voices will be raised
to denounce this erroneous policy and demand that
the United States finally act in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and the will of almost
all the States Members of the United Nations as
7
.

Assembly

58. Once again we express our deep gratitude to
the socialist .countries, to the non-aligned countries
and to all the other peace-loving and justice-loving
countries that agreed with and supported the admission to the United Nations of the- Republic of South
Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of VietNam. The adoption of resolution
3366 (XXX) by
the General ‘Assembly, which constitutes a victory
for the Vietnamese people and the forces of progress,
is a severe condemnation
of the retrogressive policy
and obstinate attitude of the United States.

54. Quite obviously, the United States is deliberately
pursuing a policy of hostility,
which it has stubbornly practised for decades, against the Vietnamese
people, now preventing that people from occupying
its proper’ place and making its voice heard within
the United Nations, just as previously it sought by
all means in its power to oppose the basic, national
rights and the right to self-determination
of the
people of Viet-Nam.

_ I

in General

57. So far as we are concerned,
the Provisional
Revolutionary
Government
of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
and the Government
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam will continue to work, as they
have in the past, with all the forces for progress,
to ensure the defence of peace and security throughout the world, the independence
and freeddm of
peoples and the development
of relations of friendship and co-operation among nations.

53. Once again defying the majority opinion of the
General Assembly, clearly expressed in its resolution
3366 (XXX) and adopted by almost all the members
of the Security Council,
the United
States has
wrongly imposed a veto on the admission to the
United Nations
of the Republic
of South VietNam and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam.
The tendentious allegations of the American Government regarding universality
and representivity
can
deceive no one, as has been quite properly shown
by the many delegations which have taken part in
this discussion.

,

expressed

3366 (XXX):

cil on the admission to the United Nations of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam. This report must be submitted
to the General Assembly.
63. I would draw the attention of members of the
Council to paragraph 7 [subsequently paragraph 81
of the draft report, which contains a number of
blanks that must be filled in with the results of the
votes that have just taken place on draft resolutions
S/11832 and S/11833. Those blanks will be filled in
by the Secretariat before the report is submitted
to the General Assembly. Moreover, the Yfollowing
paragraph must be inserted after the present paragraph 5 of the draft report:
“In accordance with a decision taken at the
1846th meeting pursuant to a request of the
representatives of Guyana, Iraq, the United Republic of Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania
the Council agreed without objection to invite the
representative of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
to present his point of view on the question
included in the agenda.”
64. Are there any representatives
who wish to
comment on the draft report? The representative
of Iraq has the floor.
65. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): My delegation would
suggest that in paragraph 8 [subsequently
paragraph 91 of the draft report the phrase “As the
Security Council therefore does not recommend”
be replaced by the phrase “As the Security Council
therefore was unable to recommend”.
66. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Are there any objections
to the amendment
just
suggested by the representative of Iraq?
67. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I agree with the
amendment suggested by the representative of Iraq.
I would simply say that it is my understanding
that

the phrase will read: “As the Security
therefore was unable to recommend’*.

Council

68. .The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Are there any objections to the amendment proposed
by the representative
of Iraq, as supplemented
by
the statement of the representative
of the Soviet
Union?
69. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (translation
from
Chinese): I have no objection to the amendments
that have just been put forward. However, as now
drafted the beginning of paragraph 8 would read:
“As the Security Council therefore was unable to
recommend any of the applicant States”. We propose
that the word “any” should be deleted, and that it
should be stated specifically that “the Security Council... was unable to recommend the admission of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam to membership in the United
Nations”.
70. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
As there are no objections to the various amendments that have been proposed, I declare the amendments approved. If no member of the Council wishes
to make any comments on the draft special report,
and if there are no objections, I shall declare the
draft report approved as amended.
It was so decided.’
The meeting

rose at 4.40 p.m.
Notes

’ See Official Records of the Security Council, Eighth Year,
Suvokment for Julv. August and Seotember 1953. document
s/%V9.
2 Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Suoolement
No. 27. annex I.
‘:
’ Ibid., Thtrtieth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2354th meeting.
4 United Nations Conference on International
Omanization,
111/l/37.
s Admission of a State to the United Nations (Charter, Art. 4).
Advisorv Ooinion: I.C.J. Reoorts 1948. D. 57.
6 Uniied’Nations, Treaty Series. vol: $35.
’ OJkial
Records-.of the General Assembly, Thirfieth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/10273.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

&

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du .
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprits de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

IIO;IY’IMTb

Ws~aHwx

3x~ax
BameM
Haquii.

COMO

H3&4HIIII

OPI’AHH

3&f&i

06~e~~xeHHbIx

OpraXmaqxx

Haqwk

x ar-t?HTCTBax
BO xcex pafiOHaX
KHH~HOM
Mara3HHe
unw nmmme
Ce~qm

no npofiame

CONSEGUIR

m~axwk,

PUBLICACIONES

OE-bEARHEHHbiX
MOXHO

~ymwb

Mupa.
HaBOnHTe
cnpaemi
no anpecy:
OpraHH3aLtHR
HMO-Fiop~

wnki

,

HAIWH
B KHH)KHLIX
?&w-a06 H3AaxxRX
e
06-beAxHeHHbIx

XCeHeaa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

8241202-November

1983-2,200
