S/PV.8186

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8186th meeting

Thursday, 22 February 2018, noon
New York

President:

Sheikh Al Sabah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04815 (E)
*1804815*

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator to participate
in this meeting:
Mr. Lowcock is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: My colleagues and I have given the
Security Council a lot of updates on the situation in
eastern Ghouta over the past three months. I want to
start today by bringing members some voices directly
from eastern Ghouta. The Office of the Special
Envoy in Geneva has, just in the past three days,
received thousands of messages on instant messaging
applications from civilians there. They are pleading for
help. Here is one of them, from a humanitarian worker
in the area — a person well versed in international
humanitarian law:
“During the past two months, military operations
turned into a process of systematic targeting of
civilians. Most air raids have intentionally targeted
civilian residential buildings. Whole families
have died under the rubble. Today, and as battles
intensify, I call on you, as a father now expecting
my first child to be born, and as a humanitarian
worker trying to maintain what is left of life, to act
to stop the systematic operations against civilians
and open the roads for humanitarian assistance.”
Here are more voices.
“There are entire families being targeted.
A mother and her three children. Four pregnant
women; one died, another is in a critical condition,
2/19

22/02/2018

the third lost her baby, and the fourth is under
observation. A young girl lost both eyes, and it
is continuing.”
“We do not want war, we do not want war, we
do not want war.”
“Can you hear our messages, voices and fear?”
“Our situation is so tragic. Our basements are
not safe and lack basic needs. Help us, be with us.”
“Instead of saying ‘no more’, the world is
saying ‘one more.’”
As representatives of Member States, all here aware
that their obligations under international humanitarian
law are just that — they are binding obligations. They
are not favours to be traded in a game of death and
destruction. Humanitarian access is not a nice-tohave; it is a legal requirement. Counterterrorism efforts
cannot supersede the obligation to respect and protect
civilians. They do not justify the killing of civilians and
the destruction of entire cities and neighbourhoods.
The Council has been briefed in minute detail,
month after month, on the scale of the suffering of
the Syrian people. Our reports have indeed been
endless: dead and injured children, women and men;
airstrikes, mortars, rockets, barrel bombs, cluster
munitions, chemical weapons, thermite bombs, suicide
bombs, snipers, double-tap attacks on civilians and
the essential infrastructure they depend on, including
hospitals and schools; rape, illegal detention, torture,
child recruitment and sieges of entire cities reminiscent
of medieval times.
Over the past 24 hours, heavy shelling and aerial
bombardment of multiple communities in eastern
Ghouta have reportedly continued, resulting in the
deaths of at least 50 people and wounding at least
200. According to some sources, the total death toll
since 19 February is close to 300 people. Twentythree attacks on vital civilian infrastructure have
been reported since 19 February. At least seven health
facilities were reportedly hit on 21 February. The
only primary health-care centre in Modira town was
reportedly rendered out of service by airstrikes. A
hospital in Duma city sustained significant damage
from nearby barrel bombs. Also in Duma city, an
obstetrics centre was damaged A hospital in Jisrein
town was reportedly attacked, resulting in the death of
a nurse. The two Syrian Arab Red Crescent centres in
Duma city and Harasta town were reportedly damaged
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

by the bombardment. Meanwhile — and this is also a
point I have consistently emphasized — mortar shelling
from eastern Ghouta is reportedly killing and injuring
scores of civilians in Damascus city, too.
Members all know the statistics of this conflict.
They know that half the Syrian population has either
fled the country or faced repeated internal displacement.
These people have lost everything. They have seen
their homes destroyed, their neighbours killed, their
loved ones disappear. Everyone knows that the repeated
confirmed or alleged chemical attacks in Syria have
killed and terrorized Syrian civilians.
Eastern Ghouta is a living example of an entirely
known, predictable and preventable humanitarian
disaster unfolding before our eyes. Everyone knows
that nearly 400,000 people are besieged and that they
have been besieged for more than four years. Everyone
knows that in eastern Ghouta thousands upon thousands
of children are facing acute malnutrition the likes of
which we have not seen elsewhere in Syria since the
onset of the conflict. Everyone knows that more than
700 people are in need of urgent medical evacuation to
hospitals just miles away in Damascus city.
We have all seen in recent days the images of
bombs and mortars raining down on bakeries and
medical facilities. According to reports documented
by United Nations human rights colleagues, at least
346 civilians have been killed since the beginning of
this month and close to 900 people have been injured.
Members all heard the Secretary-General yesterday,
in the Chamber, describing eastern Ghouta as “hell on
Earth” and saying that we cannot “allow things to go
on happening in this horrendous way”. They also heard
him pleading for “the immediate suspension of all war
activities in eastern Ghouta” (S/PV.8185, p. 2).

S/PV. 8186

cross-line convoys, reaching just 67,200 people. Only
7,200 of those people were in besieged areas, less
than 2 per cent of the overall besieged population. In
2017, through November, approximately 53 cross-line
convoys reached people in need, an average of nearly
five convoys per month. A cumulative total of nearly
2 million people were reached in the first 11 months of
2017, or around 175,000 people per month. Therefore
in 2017 we reached 175,000 a month; in the past three
months we have reached 22,000 a month. Those are
not reports or allegations. We have complete, factual
information on this, because they are our convoys.
Moreover, the 2017 access levels were themselves
nearly 40 per cent below our access levels in 2016.
Access is not only limited on aid deliveries, but we
are also seeing growing challenges to our ability to
independently assess needs on the ground and to
monitor aid delivery.
When an entire generation is robbed of its future,
when hospital attacks have become the new normal,
when sieges of entire cities and neighbourhoods have
become a lasting reality for hundreds of thousands of
people, the international community must take urgent
and concrete action. I have said this before and I will
say it again. What we need is a sustained cessation of
hostilities, and we need it desperately — a cessation
of violence that will enable the immediate, safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian
aid and services, the evacuation of the critically sick
and wounded and an alleviation of the suffering of the
Syrian people.
The Council can still save lives in eastern Ghouta,
and elsewhere in Syria. I urge it to do so. Millions of
battered and beleaguered children, women and men
depend on meaningful action by the Council.

Earlier this week, UNICEF issued a blank
statement, as it could no longer find the words to
describe the brutality of this war. Its only message was
that “no words will do justice to the children killed,
their mothers, their fathers and their loved ones.”

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Lowcock
for his briefing.

This appalling violence is happening as we face
significantly increased constraints on our ability to
reach people trapped behind conflict lines. In recent
months we have encountered greater difficulties in
accessing people in hard-to-reach and besieged areas,
particularly through cross-line convoys, than during
any period since 2015. Since 1 December, for nearly
three months, we have been able to deploy only three

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
the prompt response to our delegation’s proposal to
convene a special meeting on the situation in eastern
Ghouta, in Syria. That certainly does not mean that
other problematic areas require any less attention. In
particular, not long ago, at our initiative, the Security
Council discussed the dire situation in Raqqa in detail.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

18-048153/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

And in general, over the past month we have revisited
Syria’s humanitarian issues more than once. I would
like to ask Council members to listen carefully to what
I have to say.
It is past time to discuss frankly what is going
on in this Damascus suburb. The mass psychosis in
global media outlets of the past few days, working
in coordination to circulate all the same rumours,
is certainly not contributing to an understanding of
the situation. When eastern Aleppo was in the news,
propagandistic disaster scenarios were put forward
for it — a city where, after it was liberated from the
terrorists, warehouses full of medicines and medical
equipment were discovered. At the time we demanded
that the Secretariat conduct an investigation, but
the report presented to the Security Council was
blatantly superficial.
We are constantly seeing images of the activities of
the White Helmets, who pass themselves off as rescuers.
They were long ago shown to be supported by generous
foreign assistance, and they work closely with terrorist
groups. As a general rule, they serve as the original
sources of well-rewarded disinformation. We are given
the impression that the whole of eastern Ghouta consists
of nothing but hospitals and that it is the hospitals that
the Syrian army is attacking. That is a well-known
tactic in information warfare. It is a very well-known
fact, however, that the militants everywhere make a
habit of locating their military facilities in medical
and educational institutions, but for some reason that
inconvenient truth is not advertised.
It would be a good idea to begin with the fact that
there are still several thousand defiant militants in
eastern Ghouta, including some affiliated with terrorist
organizations, mainly Jabhat Al-Nusra. Some time
ago, they breached the agreement on a cessation of
hostilities with an attack on an armoured tank unit of
the Syrian armed forces in Harasta. They are shelling
Damascus, and the intensity of the attacks increases
daily. Dozens of missiles are launched every day, and
not a single area of the capital has been spared. For
some reason, those statistics are not being taken into
account by United Nations representatives, although the
Permanent Mission of Syria distributes them regularly.
We have pointed out that in a 20 February statement,
an official representative of the Secretary-General
described factual information as “reported” (see
S/PV.8183). And today the Under-Secretary-General
talked about reported shelling. But those reports could
4/19

22/02/2018

easily have been verified by United Nations staff if
they had inspected the areas of destruction and visited
the victims.
The Russian Embassy facilities have been repeatedly
shelled, and each time the same delegations in the
Security Council have made up excuses to lay off
the blame for these terrorist acts. One is compelled
to conclude that someone is purposely helping the
criminals avoid accountability. Incidentally, we are
disturbed by the fact that not so long ago, representatives
of some delegations who view themselves as leaders
in the protection of human rights and international
humanitarian law quite seriously said that the damage
resulting from the shelling in Damascus did not reach a
level deserving of the attention given to eastern Ghouta.
Our immediate response was to ask how many people
have to die to attain, as it were, the gold standard of
sympathy? There has been no answer. Is it appropriate
to pass over the tragedies in Ramadi, Fallujah, Mosul
and Raqqa in silence while drumming up hysteria about
Madaya, Daraya, eastern Aleppo and eastern Ghouta,
encouraging militants to to further humiliate civilians?
Incidentally, the coalition forces’ methodical
destruction of Raqqa is extremely recent. The memory
of it is hardly likely to have faded so quickly. For some
reason, when the Coalition bombing flattened Raqqa,
no one sounded the alarm, demanded compliance
with international humanitarian law or proposed an
immediate ceasefire. Yes, the Coalition smoked the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) out of Raqqa.
We know that. But with that done, the United States
has forgotten about the city. No one is clearing any
mines there. Who is aware of the fact that as many as
50 returning civilians are blown up by mines in Raqqa
every day? Nor do we see much enthusiasm from these
famous activists about the worst humanitarian crisis of
our time, which happens to be unfolding against the
backdrop of the armed conflict in Yemen.
The militants have turned the people who are
left in eastern Ghouta into hostages who are not
allowed to leave the area under rebel control through
the Al-Wafideen checkpoint. The Russian Centre
for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides has urged the
illegal groups to lay down their arms and resolve their
status, but they broke off negotiations yesterday, on
21 February. It is quite obvious that they do not care
about the life and safety of the residents of eastern
Ghouta, whom they use as human shields to hide
behind. Their aim consists of continuing to negotiate
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

tactical and logistical advantages for themselves. That
does not seem to particularly worry these groups’
foreign sponsors, who might be able to exert crucial
influence on them. But no, they would rather maintain
the status quo and organize loud campaigns blackening
Syria and Russia.
Energy is also being wasted on fragmenting the
international efforts regarding a settlement in Syria.
Instead of giving due backing to the Astana de-escalation
process and the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in
Sochi, which have become an important support to
the inter-Syrian negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva, we see ongoing backroom
efforts designed to openly undermine the work
being done through those platforms. On top of that,
exclusive clubs are being created, one striking example
of which is the so-called International Partnership
against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons,
which undermines the established frameworks for
international cooperation on non-proliferation. We
know that preparations are being made for an unofficial
presentation of that initiative in Geneva. We would like
to reaffirm our position in that regard, which is that
in view of the neutral status of respected international
organizations such as the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
representatives of their secretariats should not be
associated with narrow initiatives such as these, which
do not enjoy universal support.
Many are now asking the logical question of how
de-escalation in eastern Ghouta and other problematic
areas of Syria can be achieved as soon as possible. The
delegations of Sweden and Kuwait have come up with
their recipe for this, in their role as informal monitors
of the humanitarian dimension of the Syrian conflict in
the Security Council. Their draft resolution — which
has now been officially prepared for a vote, despite the
fact that the authors know perfectly well that there is no
agreement on it — proposes an apparently simple idea,
which is the establishment of a ceasefire throughout
Syria for not less than 30 days. We would very much
like to know how such a truce will be guaranteed, but
we have had no intelligible answers. The important
thing, they say, is adopting the decision, and we can
come up with the details later. An issue as complex as
the Syrian conflict does not respond to such logic. We
have been through this before, including, once again, in
the case of eastern Aleppo.

S/PV. 8186

In principle, a ceasefire would be extremely
significant, and not just for ensuring the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The challenge is in how to achieve
it. What we need here is not resolutions for the sake
of resolutions, but measures that correspond to the
realities on the ground. We are constantly talking about
ensuring that the Security Council agrees on feasible
decisions that are not divorced from reality or that cater
to populist demands. This is about the credibility of the
principal organ of the United Nations, responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
in accordance with the Charter, whose purposes
and principles we were discussing only yesterday.
If we could stop the violence in crisis zones with
resolutions, we would already be living in a completely
different world.
It will take long and hard work with the sides
to the conflict to stabilize the situation so that the
parties can sit down at the negotiating table and
come up with the parameters for a ceasefire. There is
no other way. It will also be impossible to ensure on
paper that in 48 hours, or any other amount of time,
humanitarian convoys can get going and mass medical
evacuations begin. By the way, specific parameters for
normalizing a number of complex issues are currently
being formulated in Geneva, including by using the
potential of the specialist International Syria Support
Group. They include the Rukban camp for displaced
persons — where, we understand, the United States
military presence occupying the area has finally given
the United Nations written guarantees — the Yarmouk
camp, where the ISIL terrorists still have a presence,
and the Fua and Kefraya enclaves.
In that connection, I would like to know if the
authors of today’s initiative genuinely do not understand
its utopian nature or if there is some other purpose at
work here that has nothing to do with a desire to help
struggling Syrians. Unfortunately, the story of eastern
Aleppo in 2016 suggests that the second is true, and that
the aim is to start a fight so as to strengthen international
pressure on the Syrian authorities and slander Russia.
Besides that, it shifts the focus from the importance of
reviving the Geneva process as quickly as possible on
the basis of the agreements that the Syrians arrived at in
Sochi to indiscriminate accusations against the Syrian
Government. Will that improve Geneva’s chances
of success?
I will say it again to make sure that everyone hears
it one more time. Russia will continue to do everything

18-048155/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

possible to achieve peace in Syria and restore stability
to the Middle East. We call on our partners to do
the same in a spirit of constructive cooperation and
in cooperation with the United Nations, rather than
continuing to sow confusion, ramp up support for
jihadists and tear the region apart. For this draft
resolution to be meaningful and realistic, the Russian
delegation has prepared some amendments to it that we
will now circulated to Council members.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Russian Federation for calling for a meeting on the
horrendous situation in eastern Ghouta, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for his briefing. I will now make some brief
remarks on behalf of Sweden and Kuwait.
In seven years of war, the situation in the besieged
area of eastern Ghouta has never been worse. I would
like to thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for another briefing reminding
us of the horrific reality for citizens in eastern Ghouta
and of the Council’s responsibilities. Yesterday, in
this Chamber, the Secretary-General said that the
400,000 inhabitants of eastern Ghouta live in hell
on earth. His appeal to all of us in the Council was
to act — to immediately suspend all war activities
in eastern Ghouta, allowing for humanitarian aid to
reach all of those in need, allowing for the evacuation
of the hundreds of people that need urgent treatment
and that cannot be provided for and allowing the
possibility for other civilians to be effectively treated.
I want to take this opportunity to remind all parties,
as Mark Lowcock just did, of their obligations under
international law to protect civilians and hospitals and
other medical facilities.
The co-penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, have
put forward a draft resolution to respond to the
constant legitimate calls from the United Nations for
a nationwide cessation of hostilities for 30 days in
order to allow for humanitarian access and emergency
medical evacuations. Our draft resolution also calls for
the lifting of the siege directed against eastern Ghouta.
We plead to all Council members to come together to
support the draft resolution and to urgently adopt it so
that we can halt the incessant attacks against eastern
Ghouta and beyond, and we can avert a situation that is
beyond words in its desperation.
We, Sweden and Kuwait, furthermore urge the
parties to the de-escalation agreement in eastern Ghouta
to comply and implement it. We call upon the Astana
6/19

22/02/2018

guarantors — Russia, Iran and Turkey — to spare no
effort and bring all their influence to bear on the parties
to that end to avert the human disaster unfolding before
our eyes.
In response to our Russian colleague on our draft
resolution, the United Nations convoys and evacuation
teams are ready to go, subject to standard security
procedures. The draft resolution that we are putting
forward is not a comprehensive peace deal. Its aim is a
much-needed humanitarian pause for an initial period
of 30 days. There are already ceasefire agreements in
force for the areas where fighting has escalated the
most recently. They must be complied with. There are
existing monitoring mechanisms that can be utilized.
The role of the Council, I believe, is to push the parties
to the conflict to comply with the proposed cessation
of hostilities. Compliance is on the shoulders of the
parties. I think that we can make a difference, and I
think that we are tested today — not just as Ambassadors
representing our countries, but as human beings. That
is a massive responsibility.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
his briefing today. The remarks in Mr. Lowcock’s
statements are in line with the Secretary-General’s
remarks yesterday morning (see S/PV.8185) — that
eastern Ghouta can wait no longer. There is tremendous
suffering there, with 400,000 people who are living hell
on Earth.
We support all what the Permanent Representative
of Sweden, Mr. Skoog, said in his statement on
behalf of Kuwait and Sweden as co-penholders of the
humanitarian dossier in Syria. It is unfortunate that
the number of people killed since the beginning of this
month in eastern Ghouta has reached 1,200 civilians.
The international community is silent; it stands still.
The question here is: How long we are going to remain
silent? How many more civilians, women, children and
elderly must die or be displaced until the international
community starts taking action and speaking in one
voice and saying enough — enough carnage and
grave violations of human rights law and international
human law? In that regard, I would like to make the
following points.
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

First, Kuwait and Sweden, in response to the clearcut demands of the United Nations on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, have jointly submitted a simple
and clear draft resolution that demands a cessation of
hostilities across Syria for a 30-day period in order
for the United Nations and its partners to be able to
deliver humanitarian aid and services and provide
critical medical evacuation to the sick and wounded,
in accordance with the provisions of international law,
and end the blockade on residential areas.
Secondly, action on the part of the the State of
Kuwait is based on our religious and national duty
to our brothers in Syria. We have a legal, human and
ethical responsibility to end their suffering. In that
connection, we call on all Member States to support the
draft resolution and vote in its favour. We should rise
above our political differences to protect civilians.
Thirdly, a failure to ende the systematic and
horrendous carnage and bloodshed that has continued
for seven years with various weapons would only serve
to encourage the perpetuation of such crimes without
accountability, as those who commit them are heartened
by impunity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
briefing, particularly his noting of the systematic
targeting of civilians in eastern Ghouta and the toll that
it is taking on the people there.
Yesterday, Russia’s Permanent Representative
requested this meeting in order to “make sure that
all parties can present their views”. The view that
Mr. Lowcock presented today is, as the SecretaryGeneral said and others have repeated, one of hell
on Earth for the people of eastern Ghouta. I would
also like to share the vision of some of the people of
eastern Ghouta.
Bilal is 22 years old, with a wife who is five months
pregnant. He says, “We are waiting our turn to die; this
is the only thing I can say”. Abdullah is a construction
worker, with a wife and six children. He says,
“Bombs were falling everywhere near our
house. We have been spending the last week
digging into the rubble of nearby areas with our
bare hands.”

S/PV. 8186

Malik is a doctor treating the wounded. He says,
“The hospitals have been overflowing with
blood. We are doing what we can to help, but the
situation is becoming unbearable.”
Those are just a few of the overwhelming number of
horrific stories coming out of eastern Ghouta everyday.
The pictures and videos are everywhere — screaming
parents digging through rubble to find their children;
doctors working frantically with no medicine and no
equipment in underground hospitals to save whoever
they can. Those are not terrorists showing up in these
makeshift emergency rooms — they are civilians.
They are ordinary people, under attack by a barbaric
Al-Assad regime that is bent on levelling eastern
Ghouta to the ground, with no regard for the 400,000
men, women and children who live there.
No one needs to use their imagination to know what
the Al-Assad regime is planning. It is exactly what we
saw in Aleppo in 2016, and in Hama and Homs before
that. The Al-Assad regime wants to bomb or starve
of all of its opponents into submission. That is why,
except for two small deliveries of aid, the regime has
not allowed any medical convoys or deliveries of food
into eastern Ghouta since November, and the bombing
attacks have been relentless. The regime wants to keep
bombing and gassing these 400,000 people, and the
Al-Assad regime is counting on Russia to make sure
the Council is unable to stop their suffering.
Yesterday the Russian representative asked for the
parties to present their views, and has put forward a
deeply cynical one today. Those present have now also
heard from the United Nations humanitarian leader
and from people, like Bilal, Abdullah and Malik. The
assault from the regime is relentless, and the suffering is
overwhelming. The Russian Permanent Representative
also asked that we “come up with ways of getting out
of the situation.” Yet it appears to be intent on blocking
any meaningful effort to do so.
None of us on the Council need to look very far for the
way out. Thanks to the tireless efforts of our colleagues
from Kuwait and Sweden, the way is sitting in front
of us. We have a draft resolution establishing a 30-day
ceasefire to help shield the people of eastern Ghouta
and allow for deliveries of food and medicine to arrive.
All 15 of us have spent the past three weeks negotiating
that text, patiently attempting to work with each other,
including the Russian delegation. We believed we had
an agreed text. There are no surprises here. The United

18-048157/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

States is ready to vote on the draft resolution — right
here and right now. All of us should be ready. Sweden
and Kuwait have consulted everyone on that text.
They have done their part. There is no reason to delay.
Literally, the minute this meeting ends, the Council
can take the clearest possible step to help — vote for a
ceasefire and vote for humanitarian access.
What the people of Eastern Ghouta need is not
complicated, and do not just take our word for it. The
International Committee of the Red Cross head of
delegation in Syria summed it up, “This is madness and
it has to stop”. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Prince Zeid, asked,
“How much cruelty will it take before the
international community can speak with one voice
to say enough dead children, enough wrecked
families, enough violence, and take resolute
concerted action to bring this monstrous campaign
of annihilation to an end?”
UNICEF can hardly put words on a page. All UNICEF
said in a haunting statement was, “No words will do
justice to the children killed, their mothers, their fathers
and their loved ones”. The Secretary-General made his
point clearly yesterday. He supports the cessation of
hostilities because eastern Ghouta cannot wait.
Yesterday Russia’s Permanent Representative
asked what we should do about eastern Ghouta. The
people of eastern Ghouta, United Nations officials,
humanitarian and human rights leaders and, indeed,
pretty much the entirety of the Council have answered:
stop the bombing of eastern Ghouta and allow medical
assistance in. The rest of the Council is ready to act.
We urge the Council to move forward with the ceasefire
and humanitarian draft resolution immediately.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Russia for its initiative in convening
this meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for his briefing.
Recently, the security situation in parts of Syria,
including its capital, Damascus, and the eastern Ghouta
region, has escalated, causing significant civilian
casualties, which is drawing broad attention from the
international community. China would like to express
its profound sympathy to the Syrian people for their
suffering. We condemn all acts of violence that target
civilians and civilian facilities and harm innocent lives.
China has always believed that there is no military
8/19

22/02/2018

solution to the Syrian issue; it would only aggravate the
suffering of the Syrian people. A political settlement is
the only way out.
The present situation is now such that the
international community needs to support the Syrian
parties in the resumption of dialogue and negotiations
under the United Nations mediation as soon as possible
and in seeking a solution that is accepted by all parties
through a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political
process. That is the only way to fundamentally ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria and rid the Syrian
people of their suffering at an early date.
Terrorist organizations are still launching attacks
in Syria, which have caused significant civilian
casualties and impeded humanitarian relief efforts
by the United Nations. The international community
should strengthen its cooperation on counter-terrorism,
adopt unified standards and resolutely combat all
terrorist organizations designated as such by the
Security Council.
As part of the Syrian issue, the humanitarian
aspect in the country is closely linked to Syria’s overall
situation, in addition to its political process. Actions
taken by the Security Council on Syria’s humanitarian
issue should not only help ease the overall humanitarian
situation in the country, but also help consolidate the
momentum for a ceasefire in Syria and be conducive
to the bigger picture of a political settlement to the
issue. China calls upon the Security Council to remain
united on the issue of Syria, speak with one voice and
create favourable conditions for substantive progress in
Syria’s political process at an early date.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his enlightening
briefing of the situation of the inhabitants of eastern
Ghouta. Mr. Lowcock has said it all — the torrent of
fire that is indiscriminately falling eastern Ghouta is
relentlessly pushing the limits of horror and human
suffering. There are no words to describe what is taking
place in eastern Ghouta as we speak.
The regime is not merely bombing its own
people. It is methodically targeting hospitals and vital
infrastructure for the population with the macabre aim
of ensuring that the injured who have not perished
during the shelling do not survive the wounds inflicted
upon them. We must insist that the attacks against
hospitals and health-care personnel constitute war
crimes, and the perpetrators must be held accountable.
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The reports we have received from non-governmental
organizations and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights are unbearable.
Twenty eight attacks struck 20 hospitals in eastern
Ghouta since January. More than 700 individuals are in
need of urgent medical evacuation. Those evacuations
are systematically blocked by the Damascus regime,
which has been the case for months. More than 400,000
people, including 130,000 children, have been besieged
for months by the regime as part of a siege that is
reminiscent of the Middle Ages.
We should make no mistake: the Syrian regime
and its allies are brandishing the fight against jihadist
fighters, the need for which no one is disputing, as
justification of an offensive aimed at entirely different
goals. Its real intentions are indeed to annihilate any
and all opposition and break the morale of civilians
by indiscriminately massacring them. The offensive
against eastern Ghouta, which has seen an unbridled
acceleration in recent years — the worst of which is
undoubtedly yet to come — has added to both the
methods and consequences of the new Aleppo. Let us
recall that in that city the intensification of bombing
preceded a reconquest operation and unknown levels of
violence that never sought to shield civilians or rule out
the use of chemical weapons. We shall be particularly
vigilant on the latter.
Yesterday, through President Macron, France
emphatically condemned the indiscriminate shelling of
residential areas and civilian infrastructure. We called
for the immediate establishment of a ceasefire to enable
medical evacuations and humanitarian access to the
people. The Secretary-General also spoke resolutely
along the same lines. As was recalled this morning by
the French Foreign Minister, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
any lack of action is an indication of guilt. We must act
swiftly, for the Council has the means at its disposal, if
the willingness is put forth.
Sweden and Kuwait, the commitment of which
France commends, have proposed a draft resolution
demanding an immediate cessation of hostilities to
enable humanitarians to evacuate the wounded and
gain access to the people. The draft resolution before
us does not seem to me to be a political judgement.
It conveys the humanitarian imperative that, as such,
must bring us together. Accordingly, we have noted
Russia’s intention to propose changes to the draft
resolution. We will consider them, but it is crucial that
we quickly adopt the draft resolution so that a cessation

S/PV. 8186

of hostilities takes place immediately, as addressing the
situation on the ground is of the utmost urgency.
A cessation of hostilities is not a concession. It is
the minimal form of response to the repeated requests
of the United Nations and humanitarian actors, which
have been communicated by members of the Council.
Subsequently, it is up to the regime’s supporters to
ensure full respect and to respond to all calls for access to
humanitarian assistance and medical evacuations under
international humanitarian law. It is inconceivable to us
that a Council member could be opposed to that.
At the same time, we must — and France stands
ready to — redouble our efforts to establish a neutral
environment that will allow for a credible political
process and the holding of elections in Syria. Since the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, France has consistently
advocated for the priority of achieving a negotiated
solution to the military situation and of finding a
political solution that satisfies the aspirations of
the Syrian people, ensures lasting peace and stops
terrorism in its tracks. France will not deviate from
the road map adopted by the international community.
We have already said, and will say once again, that
only a political, inclusive solution, established under
the auspices of the United Nations through enabling
a political transition within the framework of the
Geneva process and resolution 2254 (2015), will end
the suffering of the Syrian people in a credible and
lasting manner.
I should like to conclude with both a warning and
an appeal. Not only has the situation in Syria reverted
to the tragic darkest hours of the crisis, but, if we fail
to react robustly and immediately — let us make no
mistake — the worst is yet to come. The worst is the
endless escalation of the humanitarian crisis that is
crushing the people, any semblance of humanity and
the very values underpinning the United Nations. A
widespread ground campaign directed against eastern
Ghouta might well be the next deadly stage. The worst
is also the expansion of the conflict. The combination
of circumstances before us today might lead to a
potentially major regional or even international
confrontation. That risk must be taken very seriously.
In the name of our shared values and interests, I
call on every member of the Council to join and act
together. We owe that to the civilians who are dying
by the hundreds in the hell in eastern Ghouta. We owe
it to the security of the region and of the world, which

18-048159/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

we have the collective responsibility to protect. We owe
it to upholding the credibility of the United Nations,
which is our shared heritage. Let us beware that the
Syrian tragedy does not also become the grave of the
United Nations.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing today on the tragic
situation facing the more than 400,000 people living in
eastern Ghouta and in other cities.
We heard with dismay that, in that area, the basic
principles of international humanitarian law and
human rights continue to be disregarded. That has been
evidenced by the incessant and merciless bombardments
resulting in hundreds of civilian casualties — many of
whom are women and children — on a daily basis. Far
from decreasing, the bombardments have intensified
over the past several days and weeks, as has been the
case with regard to the number of people with urgent
medical issues who are dying because they cannot be
evacuated. We deeply regret that humanitarian convoys
are unable to reach besieged and difficult-to-access
areas, such as eastern Ghouta, among others, despite
repeated appeals from the United Nations and various
countries, including Peru, to facilitate immediate, safe
and unrestricted access in eastern Ghouta, as well as
other areas of Syria.
All those facts, which are ultimately allowing for
and fuelling a hell on Earth, as the Under-SecretaryGeneral just pointed out to us, warrant our strongest
condemnation. We must remind all parties, including
the Syrian authorities, of the responsibility to protect
the civilian population. The United Nations has
determined various actions that can be taken to
alleviate the suffering of civilians in eastern Ghouta
and other affected areas. We stress the importance of
the immediate implementation of a 30-day cessation
of hostilities to allow for providing aid and setting
out and implementing the humanitarian assistance
response plan and the five priorities that Mr. Lowcock
mentioned. Those are all indispensable and urgently
needed measures that Peru fully supports.
Implementing them will require a genuine political
will to reverse direction and turn them into a reality.
Accordingly, we thank Sweden and Kuwait for their
generous efforts to reach a consensus on a draft
resolution on a cessation of hostilities, which we hope
10/19

22/02/2018

can be adopted as soon as possible. It is of the utmost
importance that Council members, in particular those
who are able to exercise their influence on the ground,
show the world their unity, sense of duty and willingness
to compromise, and that we send a clear signal that
prioritizes human beings over other interests.
The Council must be able to rise to the occasion and
fulfil its sensitive and important responsibilities. All
can count on my delegation’s commitment to carrying
out actions that will alleviate the human suffering in
eastern Ghouta and throughout Syria.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank the
presidency for convening this meeting, and I thank Mark
Lowcock for his sobering briefing. I will address the
following three points: first, the escalation of violence
in eastern Ghouta, secondly, international humanitarian
law, and, thirdly, action by the Security Council.
First, with regard to the escalation of violence in
eastern Ghouta, we are meeting at a moment of grave
distress for the people in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere
in Syria. We have seen the extreme escalation of
violence in Idlib and eastern Ghouta, which was
initiated a few weeks ago by the Syrian regime and its
allies. That has severely intensified over the past several
days and continues without pause, as Mark Lowcock
clearly described. We condemn all indiscriminate
attacks directed against civilians. Communities in
eastern Ghouta have experienced the most intense
bombardments since the beginning of the siege in 2012.
Mortars are also being fired into Damascus. Families
do not have a safe place to hide. Women and children
are dying. Last Monday, the United Nations reported,
over a period of just 13 hours, at least, 92 civilian deaths
in eastern Ghouta, and the total death toll since Monday
appears to stand now at approximately 300.
We continue to receive reports of attacks on
hospitals and of the renewed use of chemical weapons,
thereby leading to the inhumane suffering of civilians
and those who try to help them. We pay tribute to the
humanitarian efforts of the White Helmets. We condemn
targeted attacks against them. While the indiscriminate
bombardment of civilian-populated areas continues,
desperately needed humanitarian aid, including
medical aid, for the people of eastern Ghouta cannot
be delivered. We condemn the incessant violence and
the barbaric tactics of besiegement. We have seen those
tactics before. If we think back to Aleppo in December
2016, the same scenario took place. The regime turned
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that city into an unlivable hell where civilians were
imprisoned, constantly targeted from the air and cut off
from any form of aid. The Council should not stand by
and watch a repetition of such events in eastern Ghouta.
Secondly, concerning the erosion of international
humanitarian law, in witnessing the sheer disregard for
human life, we must ask ourselves: What has become
of the hard-won gains in the area of international
humanitarian law? The lack of compliance with the
Geneva Conventions by parties to the Syrian conflict
erodes the very norms enshrined therein. It also erodes
the rules-based international order. We cannot let that
happen. The carnage in Syria must stop. The Council
must take effective, credible and decisive action today.
The world is watching. We call upon all parties to the
Syrian conflict, in particular the Syrian regime and
its allies, to stop the targeting of civilians, stop the
attacks on hospitals and facilitate immediate access for
humanitarian organizations to deliver much needed aid.
That brings me to my third point, which is action
by the Council on the cessation of hostilities. We thank
penholders Kuwait and Sweden for negotiating a draft
resolution during the past two weeks that addresses the
dire situation in Syria. We pay tribute to the prudent,
inclusive manner in which Sweden and Kuwait have
organized negotiations on the draft resolution. We
wholeheartedly support the Swedish-Kuwaiti appeal to
support their text.
The draft resolution includes clear and implementable
measures. We fully support an immediate cessation of
hostilities in Syria to enable aid convoys to deliver food
and medicines to all those in need, and the safe medical
evacuation of the critically ill and wounded. That
must happen as soon as possible. Parties to the Syrian
conflict and those with influence on them have a heavy
responsibility to assure the safety of humanitarian
operations and to ensure that no forced evacuations of
civilians take place.
In conclusion, some Council members say that the
draft resolution cannot be implemented because it is not
realistic. But with sufficient political will on the part of
the parties involved in Syria, the cessation of hostilities
can become a most urgently needed reality. The Council
showed forceful action when it adopted resolution 2393
(2017) in December 2017 to alleviate the suffering in
Syria by allowing for vital cross-border humanitarian
aid. Let us again show forceful action. Let us prove to

S/PV. 8186

the world that we can agree to put the safety of civilians
first, throughout Syria.
The human suffering in Syria, in particular in
Ghouta, must end. We need a cessation of hostilities
now. We call on the Russian Federation in particular to
use its influence, do its utmost to achieve that objective
and allow the Council to act effectively. Let us adopt
the realistic, clear and balanced draft resolution
as it stands, end the violence and allow access for
humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We appreciate
his efforts and understand the challenges he faces.
We are deeply concerned about the military
escalation in eastern Ghouta and its devastating
impact on civilians. We are also equally concerned
about escalating conflict in other parts of Syria. The
continued reports of attacks against medical facilities,
resulting in a number of civilian deaths and injuries,
is indeed extremely worrying. We stress that it is
absolutely imperative to protect civilians in eastern
Ghouta and other affected areas.
Nonetheless, we should never overlook the fact
that the capital, Damascus, is being shelled from
eastern Ghouta — one of its suburbs. All the same, it
is impossible to deny the fact that life-saving aid must
reach all Syrians in need of urgent assistance. In that
regard, while we welcome the fact that the United
Nations inter-agency convoy delivered life-saving
assistance to more than 7,000 persons on 14 February,
we acknowledge that, given the severity of the
humanitarian situation, it is obviously not enough.
To address humanitarian needs, the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners should be allowed safe,
improved and unhindered humanitarian access. As
the Secretary-General recalled in his statement on
20 February and through his strong appeal yesterday in
the Chamber (see S/PV.8185), a cessation of hostilities
is desirable to enable humanitarian aid deliveries and
medical evacuation. We see no problem with reaching
a consensus on the matter. In that connection, members
of the Council have been engaged in constructive
discussions on how to ensure the implementation of a
cessation of hostilities.
As the situation on the ground becomes increasingly
complex, we understand that implementing a
humanitarian pause will not be easy. We understand

18-0481511/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

the concerns of some in that regard. We do not ignore
the possibility that terrorist elements might exploit that
tool to advance their goals. It will require the political
will and tangible cooperation, in good faith, of all
Syrian actors, as well as of all States with influence
over the parties. Let us not forget that the situation in
Syria is becoming extremely complicated and that the
humanitarian situation has not remained unaffected.
We are extremely worried about the current trajectory.
As a human tragedy unfolds before our very eyes,
it is expected that the Council will take meaningful,
collective action that could help save lives on the ground.
That is why we have reiterated that the Council should
extend its unified support for the humanitarian work of
the United Nations and its partners. Only by working
together will the Council convey a strong and unified
message that could help facilitate the much-needed
humanitarian work of the United Nations and alleviate
the continued suffering of the Syrians. In that regard,
the humanitarian draft resolution will perhaps provide
us with a good opportunity to demonstrate our resolve
for concrete action. It may not be a perfect text but we
believe it paves the way for all parties to coordinate
their existing efforts to halt hostilities for the sake of
civilians who are in an extremely difficult situation.
Let me take this opportunity to thank the two
penholders Kuwait and Sweden, which have been
working tirelessly to achieve a consensus outcome. We
hope they will continue their much-appreciated efforts
until the last minute to address the concerns — real,
legitimate concerns — of all delegations.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the escalating
violence in eastern Ghouta and other parts of Syria
should reinforce the importance and urgency of finding
a comprehensive political solution, without which the
suffering of Syrians will continue unabated.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jacek
Czaputowicz, stated yesterday with regard to eastern
Ghouta, there is no justification for the indiscriminate
attacks on innocent civilians, including children, or on
civilian infrastructure, such as health facilities. They
must stop immediately and all parties to the conflict
must strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We would like to stress
that all actors should use their influence to bring about
immediate and improved conditions on the ground.
12/19

22/02/2018

Once again, we urgently call for the cessation
of hostilities in the whole of Syria. Attacks against
civilian targets, including medical facilities, must stop
now in order to relieve the enormous and unreasonable
suffering of the Syrian people. We therefore call
upon all parties to alleviate the suffering of civilians,
including children, by granting them urgent, free and
safe access to humanitarian assistance.
With regard to the de-escalation zones, which
include eastern Ghouta, I should recall that they
were aimed at ensuring a ceasefire and humanitarian
access in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian law. In the light of
this fact, I call on all parties engaged to respect
their ceasefire-related commitments. I also call on
States members of the Security Council to use their
leverage on the parties in order to implement relevant
previous commitments and to create conditions for a
permanent ceasefire.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of humanitarian access. We should find a mutually
acceptable way to express a clear position of the
Security Council in this regard. Accordingly, Poland
would like to reiterate its support for the work of Sweden
and Kuwait as penholders of the draft humanitarian
resolution for Syria. Now more than ever do we need to
make every possible effort to adopt the draft resolution
as soon as possible. It is the Council’s responsibility not
to fail to stop the ongoing humanitarian tragedy in the
eastern Ghouta.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his very detailed and
clear briefing today. It was very powerful to hear
through him the voices of the people of eastern Ghouta.
Russia called this meeting today to allow us to
present our understanding of the situation on the
ground and come up with ways of getting out of the
situation. We have heard very clearly from UnderSecretary-General Lowcock today and from the
Secretary-General yesterday about the situation on the
ground (see S/PV.8185). This is hell on Earth; the scale
of the human suffering and destruction is unbearable.
The suffering of the Syrian people, while primarily the
responsibility of the Syrian regime, brings shame on all
of us in the Security Council.
Let us be very clear about the main cause of this
hell on Earth. It is the direct result of an escalation by
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8186

the Syrian regime of its aerial bombardment of civilian
areas, using cluster bombs and chemical weapons and
systematically killing hundreds of its own civilians.
As others in this Chamber have said today, these are
breaches of international humanitarian law and are war
crimes. The United Kingdom will be unrelenting in its
campaign to ensure accountability and justice for these
crimes using all mechanisms at our disposal.

Ghouta. If everyone in this Chamber were to commit
unequivocally to this today, it could have an impact
on the ground. It could save the lives of thousands of
innocent men, women and children who are being killed
as we speak here in this Chamber today. We therefore
welcome the draft resolution put forward into blue by
you, Mr. President, and by the delegation of Sweden,
and we look forward to a vote later today.

We owe it to the people of eastern Ghouta to
highlight the utter devastation facing them and then
to take measures to stop it. According to the Syrian
American Medical Society, in the first 48 hours of this
week, 250 civilians were killed and 460 injured. Those
who survived these attacks have been further targeted
by the regime while trying to get help for their injuries.
There have been 22 separate attacks on 20 different
hospitals in the three days since Monday. We applaud
the incredible work of the brave doctors on the ground
who risk their own lives to save others. And like the
Netherlands, we salute the heroes of the White Helmets
who have demonstrated incredible bravery, courage
and resilience to save the lives of thousands of Syrians
on all sides of this conflict.

In conclusion, yesterday we discussed the principles
of the United Nations Charter, which our predecessors
drafted in the name of the peoples of the world to help
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
(see S/PV.8185). It is clear that we have fallen woefully
short of this aim. We have failed the people of eastern
Ghouta. But let us reverse this trend today. Let us
adopt the draft resolution and take the concrete actions
needed to ease the suffering in this zone of death
and destruction.

From the start of the conflict, the Al-Assad
regime has peddled the myth that all of those opposing
Al-Assad are terrorists. This is manifestly not the case.
The people of eastern Ghouta are not terrorists. Jabhat
Al-Nusra has only a small presence in eastern Ghouta;
its fighters number less than a quarter of 1 per cent
of the population of that area. Nothing can justify the
barbaric bombardment we have seen in recent days or
the blocking of humanitarian aid or the denial of medical
evacuations. We also condemn the mortar shelling
from eastern Ghouta of civilian areas of Damascus and
attacks against the Russian embassy in that city.
The Security Council has failed to uphold its
responsibilities in Syria. We all know why this is
the case, but we have all agreed that there can be no
military solution to the conflict — only a political one.
The actions of the Al-Assad regime in recent weeks and
the military escalation in an area guaranteed by Russia
and Iran as a de-escalation zone show cynical disregard
by the regime for every member of the Security Council
and for our resolutions. It is therefore vital that we all
send a clear and unified message in response.
The solution to the situation is not difficult. We need
to see an immediate cessation of hostilities, including
an immediate end to the aerial bombing of eastern

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea thanks the Russian
Federation for convening this meeting of the Security
Council and hopes to contribute to the adoption of a
decision aimed at alleviating the enormous suffering
and regrettable loss of human life in eastern Ghouta
and other parts of Syria. We thank the representative
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his
informative briefing.
For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the
changing humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta
requires urgent action to alleviate the critical state of
affairs of the most vulnerable members of the civilian
population. In recent days, the number of victims
and amount of material damage to infrastructure
have increased considerably, and the international
community is obliged to take some urgent action so
as to halt the ongoing loss of lives, mostly of children
and women.
We reiterate the appeal made by the delegation of
Equatorial Guinea on 14 February for the parties to the
conflict to allow humanitarian aid to reach those most
in need (see S/PV. 8181). The cessation of hostilities
is imperative in order to ensure safe access for relief
teams, the distribution of humanitarian aid and the
evacuation of the wounded and sick. Equatorial Guinea
calls on all parties to the conflict to take the necessary
steps to cease hostilities.

18-0481513/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

Frank, direct and inclusive dialogue is the only
viable way out of the Syrian crisis. The Council must
redouble its efforts and persuade the opponents to return
to the negotiating table. In that sense, resolution 2254
(2015) remains a valid instrument. The recent history of
this conflict has taught us the devastating implications
that it can have for the entire region. A definitive and
sustainable solution to the conflict is in the interests of
all the countries of the world.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urgently calls on
all parties to the conflict, be they directly or indirectly
involved, to declare a ceasefire with immediate effect
that will be respected and guaranteed by all parties so as
to allow for the evacuation of civilians and the delivery
of medical care, drinking water and food that will save
hundreds of human lives. Even as we debate this issue
here in the Chamber, the people of eastern Ghouta
and elsewhere in Syria are on the verge of perishing.
We must consider any proposal to be submitted from
the humanitarian perspective, taking into account the
suffering of the population of eastern Ghouta and Syria.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
delegation of Russia for having asked the presidency to
convene this meeting, for I think it very important to
exchange views about what is happening in Syria. We
also grateful for the briefing by Mr. Mark Locock.
Bolivia reiterates its regret that the crisis in Syria
has to date led to so many lives being lost and so much
destruction. According to Mr. Lowcock’s office, more
than 500,000 people have died since the beginning of
the conflict, 13.1 million people require humanitarian
assistance, of whom 2.9 million are trapped in besieged
or hard-to-reach, and 6.9 million persons have been
displaced internally. We regret that recent events have
led to more people dying or needing humanitarian
assistance. We call for the earliest possible beginning
of demining operations and for the provision of
humanitarian assistance — such as to the city of
Raqqa — in order to facilitate the safe and dignified
return of the families that were displaced as a result of
the conflict.
We also regret that the latest events in Syria
have once again served to underscore the urgent
need to revitalize the Geneva political process, while
strengthening the tangible results achieved in Astana
and Sochi, in consultation, of course, with all the parties
concerned. We reiterate what several of our colleagues
14/19

22/02/2018

have said during this meeting: there is no military
solution to the situation in Syria, only a political one.
We also again reiterate our great gratitude for
the work being done by the staff of the humanitarian
assistance agencies and groups on the ground. We
demand that the parties involved comply with their
obligations under international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
We reiterate to the parties involved that they must
respect the agreements and the de-escalation zones,
as well as avoid attacks on civilian facilities — such
residential areas, schools and hospitals — in line
with international humanitarian law, so as to ensure
the protection of civilians and unrestricted access
for humanitarian agencies to provide muchneeded assistance.
I understand that we all agree with those principles,
as they are basic, fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law. Each and every one of us has spoken
repeatedly about the obligations of the Security Council
under the Charter of the United Nations, including its
highest responsibility in terms of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Nevertheless, my
delegation cannot agree with double standards being
applied on any issue, and much less on humanitarian
ones. We must not drag down the Security Council by
using it as an instrument for a different agenda. Nor,
as we have also said several times, should we allow
the Council to become an echo chamber where we
repeatedly recite well-known areas of war.
In referring to double standards, I will desist from
referring to the humanitarian situation in other places
around the world. I will limit myself just to Syria. My
delegation is surprised, and does not understand, at how
the Security Council has not even been able to express
itself on the terrorist attacks on the Russian Embassy
in Damascus, a member the Council. We have counted
six such attacks in the past two weeks, followed by
silence on the part of the Council. That should draw our
attention as to double standards.
I repeat that we totally reject the politicization of
any humanitarian issue. We know that the situation in
Syria is urgent. We need to think very carefully about
how we can address each of these situations, given that
each has its particular characteristics.
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

With regard to the draft resolution that has been
circulated for the Council’s consideration, first of
all, my delegation would like to sincerely express its
gratitude for the efforts of the delegations of Sweden
and Kuwait. We have seen them work with great
dedication, consulting with the various delegations as
part of what of course is a complicated process. That is
the nature of negotiations. We hope that the various calls
for the Council to do something will come to fruition.
. However, I think we have to recognize that putting to
a vote a draft resolution, as several delegations have
called for today, in the knowledge that it will not be
adopted by the Council shows that the goal is not of a
humanitarian nature, the aim is political. Putting to a
vote a draft resolution while knowing that it will not
be adopted means that the goal is not to alleviate the
humanitarian situation but to garner a few headlines
in the media. That is why we say that we should avoid
making the Council an instrument for political ends.
We very much welcome the fact that the Russian
delegation has put forward language to enable us to
continue the negotiations, which is essential. I agree
with what my colleague the Ambassador of Sweden
said, that is, the Council is being tested in alleviating
the humanitarian situation in Syria. The Council is
indeed being tested, and that test is to achieve unity
in the Council. If we do not, then the meeting at which
the draft resolution is put to the vote will go down in
history as just a few headlines. But it will come to
nothing and will in no way alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
I therefore issue a fraternal call on my colleagues
the members of the Security Council — especially
my beloved brothers the Ambassadors of Sweden and
Kuwait — that we do everything we can to send out a
signal for there to be a change in direction with regard
to what the Council has been doing repeatedly over the
past months, and show that by being united we will in
some way be able to meet the expectations of the rest of
the membership and meet the responsibilities assigned
to us by the Charter.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I wish to thank the Russian
Federation for having called for this meeting.
I also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for his helpful
briefing on the latest developments in the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which has reached a critical threshold.

S/PV. 8186

Côte d’Ivoire remains deeply concerned by the
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
largely due to the resurgence of fighting on the ground,
particularly in eastern Ghouta where since Monday, I
regret to say, 40 civilians have been killed and more
than 150 wounded, and many hospitals and schools
have been destroyed. In the face of this extreme
escalation of hostilities, my delegation would like,
following the call issued yesterday in this Chamber by
Secretary-General António Guterres (see S/PV.8185),
to appeal to the sense of responsibility of the parties
involved to end the tragedy of eastern Ghouta. It urges
them to exercise restraint with a view to an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to enable the resumption
of the delivery of humanitarian aid, including
medical evacuations, to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian population.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its conviction and principled
position that the response to the crisis in Syria cannot be
military. On the contrary, it should be pursued through
an inclusive dialogue and political process, as provided
for in the road map set out by resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, in the light of the tragic humanitarian
situation in eastern Ghouta — which Mr. Lowcock so
somberly described earlier — Côte d’Ivoire supports the
draft resolution proposed by the delegations of Kuwait
and Sweden, calling for a cessation of hostilities for a
period of 30 days with a view to allowing immediate
humanitarian access to the besieged populations of
the region. The Council must set aside all political
calculations and other distractions and undertake the
commendable task of rescuing the inhabitants of eastern
Ghouta and other regions of Syria, who also happen to
be Syrians, from the hell in which they are living.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank the delegation
of the Russian Federation for initiating this open
briefing on the very critical humanitarian issue in
Syria, and thank Mark Lowcock for his update.
Like others, we express our serious concern about
the continued severity of the devastating humanitarian
situation in Syria, including in eastern Ghouta, Idlib
and northern Hama governorates, Rukban and Raqqa.
Kazakhstan urges all parties within and outside
the country to prevent further violence and enable
humanitarian organizations to access and assist
people in need. Since early February, with the military
offensive against eastern Ghouta, there have been more
than 1,200 civilian casualties.

18-0481515/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

We truly need a cessation of hostilities and all
military operations throughout Syria to enable the
delivery of humanitarian aid and services and the
medical evacuation of the critically sick and wounded,
in accordance with international law. Kazakhstan
considers it critical for the Security Council to adopt
a workable and effective resolution on a cessation
of hostilities in Syria, a draft of which is now being
considered by Council members. Kazakhstan calls on
all parties to find consensus and unite in their efforts to
undertake an immediate suspension of all war activities
in eastern Ghouta and other parts of Syria, allowing
humanitarian aid to reach all those in need, as well as
the evacuation of all patients requiring urgent treatment
that cannot be provided there.
My delegation supports the five requests identified
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator on 11 January
during his mission to Syria, and calls upon all parties
to facilitate the implementation of these five requests
and others, as specified in relevant Security Council
resolutions, so as to ensure principled, sustained and
improved humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2018. In
this context, we look forward to a meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the guarantor countries of the Astana
process — namely, the Russian Federation, Turkey
and Iran — who intend to gather in Astana in March
to discuss all issues related to recent developments on
the ground. The timing and the specific agenda are
currently being specified. In this regard, the next round
of the Astana process itself is scheduled to be held after
the aforementioned meeting of the Foreign Ministers.
Lastly, in May 2017 Kazakhstan welcomed the
adoption of the memorandum on the creation of
de-escalation areas in the Syrian Arab Republic.
They have lessened hostilities between the conflicting
parties. However, the ceasefire agreements in these
zones are currently being violated. We attach the utmost
importance to compliance by all conflicting parties
with ceasefire agreements and their enforcement by
the guarantor States. Likewise, each of the agreements
reached in Astana should not remain on paper, but must
be strictly complied with.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic and urge
him to limit his statement to five minutes in accordance
with Security Council note S/2017/507.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of my country was not aware of
16/19

22/02/2018

your decision, Sir, to limit my statement to five minutes.
I oppose that decision and therefore reserve the right
to express the views of my country in this important
meeting devoted to the situation in my country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We fail to understand, Sir, why you have
proposed limiting the statement of the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic on the important issue under
discussion. His country is directly involved and where
everything being discussed is taking place. We must
afford an opportunity for the representative of Syria to
speak for the full amount of time required to deliver his
statement. I do not believe we need any artificial limits
on his statement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I did not make
a decision. I simply encouraged the representative of
Syria to adhere to the provisions of note S/2017/507.
I again give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Once again, I reiterate that we were not aware
of note S/2017/507. I believe that this act is unjust and
raises many issues to which I already intended to refer
in my statement. I hope that everyone will be patient
enough to listen to the statement I shall make on behalf
of the Government of my country. I shall not deliver
a personal statement. All speakers have spoken on
behalf of their Governments, and I shall do the same.
I encourage all members to listen carefully to what I
have to say.
As I talk here at this moment, hundreds of rockets
and mortars are targeting the capital, Damascus.
To date, they have injured 37 people, including six
children, and led to a number of martyrs, including two
children. That comes as no surprise. As the Council is
aware, every time a Security Council meeting is held
to discuss the Syrian situation, there is a massacre
here and a suicide bombing there, as well as the killing
of civilians in some Syrian cities. We have seen not
dozens, but rather hundreds of massacres over the past
seven years. Mr. Lowcock did not get this information
the way he gets messages from what he calls
humanitarian workers in eastern Ghouta who know
about international humanitarian law. Mr. Lowcock
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

did not solicit the views of the Syrian Government,
which we have expressed in hundreds of letters sent to
him and to the Council. All those who in this meeting
have used the word “regime” to refer to my country
are neither objective nor impartial. They reveal their
countries’ involvement in the ongoing terrorist crisis in
my country.
We thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for convening this meeting to give us the opportunity to
once again present the reality of the suffering of civilians
as a result of the practices of armed terrorist groups or,
as some call them, moderate armed opposition groups.
Over the past seven years, they have been sowing
death and destruction wherever they have operated.
They have used civilians as human shields. They
have targeted hospitals and schools, turning them into
military centres. They have hurled missiles and rockets
indiscriminately at residential and populated areas.
Of course, as the Permanent Representative of
France said before leaving this meeting, all of this
is a form of resistance. He referred to the terrorists
who bombard Damascus as the “resistance” that the
Syrian regime is trying to suppress. This meeting is
particularly important, as some actors — especially
the United States of America and the so-called
international coalition — have moved from the stage
of aggression by proxy through their support for
terrorism to the stage of direct aggression. Those actors
have recruited terrorists from all four corners of the
world. They call them jihadists and send them to Syria.
Whenever terrorists have failed, those actors have been
there — militarily, politically, through the media and
the United Nations — to intervene in order to achieve
what their terrorist proxies failed to achieve.
Let us be clear. Some Council members — and I
specifically mean the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and France — would like to deprive
the Syrian Government of its constitutional and
sovereign right to defending its territories and people,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations back
when we had wise founding fathers and international
law and as guaranteed by all United Nations resolutions
on counter-terrorism.
Today, I have heard references to the draft resolution
contained in document S/2018/146, on humanitarian
issues. The penholders, Kuwait and Sweden, have been
working on it for several weeks. I thank them for their
efforts. However, those efforts are deeply flawed. The

S/PV. 8186

penholders did not coordinate with the Syrian delegation
at all. They did not even ask to hear my country’s view
on the draft resolution that concerns it.
Let us imagine for a moment that hundreds of
terrorists had used the Bois de Boulogne as a centre to
target civilians in Paris, launching dozens of missiles
every day. Would we have seen a draft resolution
calling for a humanitarian truce to give the moderate
armed French opposition the opportunity to regain its
power and launch missiles targeting Paris?
Let us imagine for a moment that hundreds of
terrorists had used Central Park here in New York
as a centre to target civilians in Manhattan, and had
launched dozens of missiles every day. Would we have
seen a draft resolution calling for the medical evacuation
of the moderate armed American opposition?
Let us imagine for a moment that hundreds of
terrorists had used Hyde Park as a centre to target
civilians in London, launching dozens of missiles daily.
Would we have seen a draft resolution calling for the
delivery of humanitarian aid to the moderate armed
British opposition? Would we have seen statements by
high-level Secretariat officials, such as Mr. Lowcock,
calling for stopping the fight against armed groups that
they describe as non-State armed opposition groups?
Unfortunately, that is how United Nations documents
refer to terrorists nowadays — non-State armed
opposition groups.
Of course, those are all hypothetical scenarios that
might seem far-fetched. However, that is the reality
in Syria. It is the tragedy that we are seeing in Syrian
cities every day, including the city of Damascus and
its inhabitants. It is a bitter reality that the Syrian
Government is facing as a result of the erroneous
approaches adopted by the United Nations and the
positions of some of its Member States. Damascus
is the oldest populated city in history. It is seeing
destruction, death and sorrow every day as a result
of missiles, mortars and rockets launched by armed
terrorist groups operating in eastern Ghouta. These
terrorist groups — the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated groups — are
designated as terrorist groups in the Security Council.
Today, 8 million people live in Damascus, among them
hundreds of thousands who fled armed groups that
attacked their villages and their homes in many parts of
Syria, including eastern Ghouta.

18-0481517/19

S/PV.8186

The situation in the Middle East

The United Nations today is going through a
professional and moral crisis that is unfathomable.
High-level Secretariat officials see no harm in adopting
the positions of Governments that sponsor terrorism in
my country. They are directly involved in distorting
facts, manipulating figures, using insidious phrases and
terminology, and depending on unreliable sources in
their statements and reports. Of course, I cannot list all
of those scandals today. I will only remind the Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission report (S/2017/567),
issued in June 2017. The report states that among the
open sources on which it relied was the testimony of
British doctor Shajul Islam. For those who do not know
who Mr. Islam is, he is a foreign terrorist fighting
for the Al-Nusra Front in Idlib. He was convicted in
the United Kingdom and was not allowed to practice
medicine there as he was involved in crimes related to
terrorism, such as kidnapping British journalist John
Cantlie. That is but one example of some misleading
reports issued by the Secretariat.
We are convinced that those abhorrent practices
will not stop and that some United Nations officials will
ignore the serious information that we have conveyed
to them about armed terrorist groups fabricating the
story that the Syrian Government used toxic chemical
substances against civilians in eastern Ghouta. Those
groups are training some of their members to pretend
that they have been exposed to toxic substances. Of
course, those scenes are broadcast by well-known
networks and correspondents of Mr. Lowcock, and the
Syrian Arab Army is blamed for it. Although we have
sent hundreds of letters to the Secretary-General, the
President of the Security Council and specialized United
Nations agencies specialized in counter-terrorism and
the prohibition of chemical weapons, we are sure that
some at the United Nations will not hesitate to believe
that story and blame the Syrian Government. That is
simply because certain agendas in the Organization
compel some to join in the extortion of the Syrian Arab
Republic and its allies that are fighting terrorism on
behalf of all those present.
For over two months now, the Syrian Government
has been sending letters almost daily to the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Security Council
documenting the number of missiles used, which have
amounted in the past few weeks to almost 1,200. We
have been also documenting the human and material
losses of civilians in the city of Damascus as a result of
18/19

22/02/2018

being targeted by terrorists groups in eastern Ghouta.
However, in its statements and appeals the Secretariat
has no problem ignoring the suffering of 8 million
people in Damascus. It has not hesitated to participate
in the misleading campaign launched by some States
to protect a few thousand members of armed terrorists
groups in eastern Ghouta. They are sacrificing 8 million
civilians in Damascus to protect a few thousand
terrorists in eastern Ghouta. This is scene in short.
Both international and United Nations sources
are spreading news of a stifling siege on eastern
Ghouta. That is not consistent with the indisputable
reality on the ground. We are talking here about a
vital area that is the main source of food for the city
of Damascus. Commercial trucks constantly move
back and forth to Ghouta. The Syrian Government has
facilitated the delivery of humanitarian aid to people
in eastern Ghouta, when conditions on the ground have
allowed. We have also approved medical evacuations
to Government hospitals in Damascus. The truth that
we all know, and even high-level Secretariat officials
know, is that armed terrorist groups are controlling
the humanitarian aid that enters eastern Ghouta. They
distribute it among its members and deprive civilians
of any of it.
There is another truth that the Secretariat is
ignoring. Residents of eastern Ghouta have taken to the
street in protest against the practices of terrorists who
point their guns at innocent people. Of course, those
besieged innocents are also sending messages, but
Mr. Lowcock’s radar is not receiving them. I would like
to ask the Secretariat the following. How does it justify
ignoring the reports and information that the Syrian
Government has presented on thousands of hostages
and kidnapped people being detained by armed terrorist
groups in eastern Ghouta in the so-called Attawba
prison? They require immediate medical evacuation.
The United Nations is ignoring video footage posted
by armed groups showing women and children, among
the hostages, being pushed into metal cages and left
on the street. It is a painful scene reminiscent of the
times of slavery. It is true insanity that the SecretaryGeneral spoke of yesterday and has been echoed by
some colleagues today. Yes, there is terrorist insanity
in eastern Ghouta and we must put a stop to it.
What is even worse is that some in the Secretariat
are trying to use the agreement on de-escalation zones
to distort the facts and ignore repeated violations
perpetrated by these armed terrorist groups. They are
18-04815

22/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

being instructed from the outside by actors that some of
them are present in this Chamber. They are instructed
to target Syrian military sites and launch attacks
using rockets, missiles and car bombs on residential
neighbourhoods in Damascus.
These groups operating in eastern Ghouta that
kill civilians in Damascus daily are armed terrorists
groups, regardless of any change to their names,
affiliations or alliances. Today they are Jaysh al-Islam,
the Al-Rahman Corps, the Dawn of Islam and Ahrar
al-Sham. Yesterday they were the Islamic Front, Hay’at
Tahrir al-Sham and the Al-Nusra Front. I invite all
members of the Council to take a look at the websites
of those groups and the satellite television channels
that Western satellites are helping broadcast. It will
become apparent that they all share the same Wahhabi
terrorist ideology, and that they all call for takfiri ideas
and the annihilation of others. Any attempt to change
their names and description by calling them moderate
opposition or non-state armed groups will not change
their terrorist reality. It will not prevent us, as the
Government, from defending our citizens with the
support of our allies, and fighting terrorism pursuant to
the Council’s resolutions on counter-terrorism.
Some among us today are exploiting the suffering
of the Syrian people and trading in their blood. They
are demanding accountability while being direct
partners in supporting and defending terrorism. They
are involved in direct military aggression against my
people, as was the case in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq,
Libya, Africa and Latin America. The dilemma that we
are facing today is that the mechanism of work inside
the United Nations is being held hostage to political
and financial polarization. As a result, this mechanism
of work completely disregard the crimes of the socalled international coalition led by the United States
of America.
As mentioned by my colleague the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation, the international coalition
completely destroyed Raqqa, killing hundreds of
civilians and destroying shelters, infrastructure and
bridges over the Euphrates river and everywhere in
Syria, under the pretext of fighting the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It used internationally
prohibited weapons against civilians in Syria, including
American Napalm, just as it did in Viet Nam. The
international coalition targeted Syrian armed forces and
allied forces more than once in order to break the siege

S/PV. 8186

on ISIL. The coalition and its militias made a deal with
ISIL so that ISIL fighters, their families and their heavy
weapons could leave Raqqa and other places in order to
fight the Syrian forces and their allies elsewhere.
The United Nations is completely disregarding the
repeated aggressions of Israeli occupation forces on
our territories as part of its support to armed terrorist
groups. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
clueless as to what is going on in the Golan. The United
Nations itself is completely disregarding Turkish
aggressions and violations against Syrian sovereignty,
and the direct military aggression initiated now by
Turkey on Afrin. Nobody has addressed this issue in
their statements.
In conclusion, responding to those who fear that
eastern Ghouta might become a second Aleppo, I invite
them to go to Aleppo today and see with their own
eyes how millions, not thousands, have resumed their
normal lives after Aleppo was liberated from terrorism.
Indeed, eastern Ghouta will become a second Aleppo,
as will Idlib and all areas that have suffered under the
terrorism of armed groups in Syria.
We will not succumb no longer to the extortion of
those who have supported terrorism in Syria. We will
not be complacent to the plans of the Governments of
the five States that met in Washington, D.C., last month
to divide Syria and ensure the failure of both the Sochi
conference and the political process as a whole. That
news was reported today in the United Kingdom.
We will not sit idly by while those who use terrorism,
take unjust economic measures and wage direct military
aggression against the Syrian people seek to achieve
their cheap political agendas. Rest assured that history
will soon admit that we and our allies have fought a war
on behalf of the entire world against terrorism, which is
being supported by Governments that soon will be held
accountable by their people and world public opinion.
Those Governments have invested all they can in
terrorism until it reached their cities, their own citizens
and all safe places throughout the world.
When I look at some of the faces in the Chamber and
see the political hypocrisy therein, I recall the famous
adage by the Great Russian writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky,
who said: “Rest assured, hell is big enough for everyone.
There is no need for people to compete so fiercely to be
the worst.”
The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

18-0481519/19
