260

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,

l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa; 4

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to American
Samoa;

4. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the rights, interests and wishes
of the people of American Samoa as expressed freely in
conditions leading to real self-determination, to expedite
the process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Declaration, and reaffirms the
importance of fostering an awareness among the people of
American Samoa of the possibilities open to them in the
exercise of their right to self-determination and independence;

5. Takes note of the elections held on 6 November
1984 and of the fact that the newly elected Governor has
stated his intention to recommend legislation establishing
clearly the powers and duties of the various government
departments in order to avoid conflicts of authority and to
ensure sufficient budgetary control; 5
6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, to promote the economic and
social development of American Samoa, and calls upon
the administering Power to intensify its efforts to
strengthen and diversify the economy of the Territory and
to make it more viable in order to reduce its heavy economic and financial dependence on the United States and to
create employment opportunities for the people of the Territory;
7. Expresses the hope that the development planning
process initiated by the first five-year development plan
will be continued, and urges the administering Power, in
co-operation with the territorial Government, to
strengthen and extend the responsibilities of the Development Planning Office;
8. Urges the administering Power to continue to facilitate close relations and co-operation between the peoples
of the Territory and the neighbouring island communities
and between the territorial Government and the regional
institutions in order to enhance further the economic and
social welfare of the people of American Samoa;
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of American Samoa to the enjoyment of
their natural resources by taking effective measures to
ensure their right to own and dispose of those resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future development with a view to creating conditions for a balanced
and viable economy;
4 Ibid., Fortieth Se.won, Supp/emenr No 23 (A:40123), chap. XVI.
5 Ibid., para. 9.

I 0. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to American Samoa should be kept under
review;
11. Requests the Special Committee tu continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
American Samoa, in consultation with the administering
Power, taking into account, in particular, the wishes of the
people of the Territory, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 Decembrr /985

40/42. Question of Guam
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 6
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Guam, including in particular its resolution 39/32 of 5
December 1984,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power relating to Guam, 7
Noting with appreciation the continued active participation of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to Guam, thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the
situation in the Territory with a view to accelerating the
process of decolonization towards the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling that a Guam Commission on Self-Determination was appointed in February 1984 to deal with the status question in a manner acceptable to the people of the
Territory,
Taking note of the statement by the representative of the
administering Power that the Department of Defense had
authorized the release of some 2,000 hectares of land previously under its control,
Noting the great potential offered for diversifying and
developing the economy of the Territory, for example,
commercial fishing and agriculture,
Taking note of the steps taken by the territorial Government, with the support of the administering Power, to
develop and promote the language and culture of the
Chamorro people, who are the indigenous people of the
Territory,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Guam, and bearing
in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening
further its economy as a matter of priority in order to promote economic stability,
Recalling the dispatch in 1979 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
6 Tbid., Supplement No 23 (A/40123), chaps. 11, I\, VI and XVII.
1 Ibid., Fortieth Se.won,

fourth Commiltee, 17th meetmg, paras 55 .. 57

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 8
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reaffirms its conviction that such factors as territorial size, geographical location, size of population and
limited natural resources should in no way delay the
implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to
Guam;
4. Reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness
among the people of Guam of the possibilities open to
them with regard to their right to self-determination, and
calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to expedite the process of
decolonization strictly in accordance with the expressed
wishes of the people of the Territory;
5. Takes note of the statement by the representative of
the administering Power that the Guam Commission on
Self-Determination, which was appointed in February
1984 to deal with the status question in a manner acceptable to the people of the Territory for submission to the
Congress of the United States of America for approval,
hopes to hold a local referendum before the end of 1985;9
6. Takes note of the statement of the representative of
the United States affirming that his Government respects
the wish of the Guamanians to control their own destiny
both politically and economically;9
7. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration and that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Territory from exercising its right to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
8. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference against any other States and
to comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of the General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
9. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, for the economic and social
development of Guam, and, in this connection, calls upon
the administering Power to take all necessary steps to
strengthen and diversify the economy of the Territory,
with a view to reducing the Territory's economic dependence on the administering Power;
I 0. Reiterates the view that one obstacle to economic
development, particularly in the agricultural sector, stems
from the fact that large tracts of land are held by the federal authorities, and calls upon the administering Power,
in co-operation with the local authorities, to continue the
transfer of land to the people of the Territory;
11. Notes that a settlement was reached in 1984
between representatives of former Guamanian landowners
and the administering Power under which the former will
receive $39.5 million in compensation for land taken over
8 Ibid., Fortieth Session, Sr,pplement No
9 Ibid., para. 9.

n (Al40!23), chap. XVI!.

261

by the United States Government from 1944 to 1963, it
being the right of individual claimants not to participate in
this settlement and continue to press their own claims;
12. Reiterates its call upon the administering Power to
support measures by the territorial Government aimed at
removing constraints to growth in the areas of agriculture
and commercial fishing and to ensure their development
to the fullest extent;
13. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the
people of Guam to their natural resources and to establish
and maintain control over their future development, and
requests the administering Power to take all necessary
steps to protect the property rights of the people of the
Territory;
14. Reaffirms the importance of further efforts by the
territorial Government, with the support of the administering Power, to develop and promote the language and
culture of the Chamorro people, who are the indigenous
people of the Territory;
15. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Guam at an appropriate time should be
kept under review;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Guam
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/43. Question of Bermuda
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Bermuda, including in particular its resolution 39/33 of 5
December 1984,
Noting the stated position of the administering Power
that it will fully respect the wishes of the people of Bermuda in determining the future constitutional status of the
Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Welcoming the continued co-operation of the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee in
regard to Bermuda, which contributes to informed consideration of conditions in the Territory with a view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the purpose of the
full implementation of the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Bermuda, and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening
further its economy as a matter of priority in order to promote economic stability.
IO //,Id .. Supp/e,r,ent No !3 (i\ 40 21)-. ch'IJ)s.-11, IV-VI and XIX.
