UNITED

NATIONS

S

COUNCIL

TY

OF

CIAL

TWENTY-EIGHTH

17

RECORDS
YEAR

th
MEETING: 15 JUNE 1973

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1727) . , . . . . . . . , . . , . , . , . . . , . , . . . . . , .
Adoption

of the agenda

&y

. . . , , , , . . . . , . , . , , . , , . . . . . , . , , , ..**.t..

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/10940 and Cod)
.. .., .
.*..*.........*.+.I.

*

.,...

.

..,I

S/PV.1727

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composedof-cap@ letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 15 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

members find the draft resolution generally acceptable.
Accordingly, I intend to put it to the vote now and then to
call on those representatives whosenames appear on the list
of speakers, in accordance with the procedure which the
Council has more than once followed on similar occasions.

Besent:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Australia, Austria, France, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 727)
1, Adoption

of the agenda.

Against: None.

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l0940 and Corr.1).

Abstaining: China.
The draft resolution
with 1 abstention. 1

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption

was adopted by 14 votes to none

3, The PRESIDENT (translation j?om Russian): The
Security Council will now hear statements from those
representatives who wish to speak on the item after the
vote.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. The first on the list of speakers is the representative of
Cyprus on whom I now call.

Letter
dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/ 10940 and Con: 1)

5, Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to thank the Security
Council for allowing me to participate in this debate.
6. First of all, Mr. President, may I offer you our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council. Your diplomatic skill,
your objectivity and your long experience in guiding the
deliberations of the Council have been well known and
appreciated in the United Nations over many years, More
recently-in the course of the past week-we have had the
opportunity of seeing those qualities at work. It is
fortunate that a man of your outstanding calibre should be
presiding over the Council at a time when so many issuesof
great importance are being dealt with by this body.

1, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): In letters
addressed
to the President of the Security Council, the
representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece have asked to
be allowed to participate in the discussion of the item
which has just been included in the Council’s agenda, In
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and with
established practice, I propose, if there are no objections, to
invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece to
take seats at the Council table and to participate, without
the right to vote, in the Council’s discussion of the item.
At
the invitation
of the President, Mr. Z. Rossidcs
[C~~prusj, Mr. 0. O/cay (Turkey) and Mr. C. P. Panayotacos
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

7, We have before us the report of the Secretary-General,a
comprehensive and balanced document reflecting the situation and the development of the United Nations operations
in Cyprus under Security Council resolution of 4 March
1964 f 186 (1964)].

2. The PRESIDENT
(translation porn Russian): Before
today’s meeting was convened, I contacted the members of
the Council as well as the representatives of the interested
parties, with a view to reaching agreement on the draft
resolution
distributed as document S/10946. Since there
were no objections to the draft, I take it that Council

8. It may be pertinent at this juncture to recall that this
resolution provided for a two-pronged United Nations
1 se0 resolutioll 334 (1973).

1

effort, namely, first, that of peace-keeping, including
miljtary deconfrontation and normalization and, secondly,
that of peace-making in the search for a peaceful solution,
orighldiy through a mediator-whose constructive report
still remains a valuable document endorsed by the Secretary.General’s good offices. At the present stage, those local
talks are being conducted in a reactivated and expanded
form with the participation of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-Tafzll, and the presence
in an advisory capacity of two constitutional experts on
Greece and Turkey, Mr. Dekleris and Mr. Aldikaqti, as well
as the two interlocuters, Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktaa.
9. I take this opportunity to say that the participation in
the talks of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has made a most positive and constructive contribution and that the presence of the two constitutional
experts has proved equally helpful.
10. These talks, which are being held on the agreed basis
of an independent, sovereign and unitary State, are generally recognized as offering the best way for a peaceful and
lasting solution of the problem, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and the relevant United Nations
resolutions on Cyprus. The talks have now reached an
advanced stage and, according to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, have been “conducted in a constructive manner” offering the possibility of a substantial
measure of agreement, although it is stated that “much
patient work will be needed to bring the negotiations to a
satisfactory end” /S/10940 and Corr.1, para. 791.

11. The positive trend in the conduct of the talks thus far
is an encouraging indication and we look forward to a
continuing spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation. My Government will go all the way within its
means towardspromoting and enhancing that spirit and will
continue the negotiations with the utmost goodwill. It is,
therefore, earnestly to be urged that concepts reflecting
extreme views one way or the other or of such a nature as
might be disruptive to the State would, in the exercise of
reason and moderation, be carefully avoided. The talks may
thus offer the expectation of agreement on a balanced and
viable constitutional structure, in accordance with the
established norms for a unitary State. A just and enduring
solution can thus be achieved.

condition for a federal State is the existence of a pattern of
territorial separation between the separate units to be
federated, That pattern does not exist in Cyprus where in
all of its six districts the Greek and Turkish population live
intermingled. Nor can the concept of federation be applied
or function without its being related to distinct territorial
entities. Such a notion or function is not known in public
law and has no place in any existing constitution in the
world, nor has it been applied anywhere. On these matters,
and in particular reference to Cyprus, an eminent British
jurist and constitutional expert, Lord Radcliffe, who was
mandated in 1956 by the British Government to deal
specifically with this question, declared that Cyprus could
not be organized as a federation because
“There is no pattern of territorial separation between
the two communities and, apart from other objections,
federation of communities which does not involve also
federation of territories seems to be a very difficult
constitutional form.“2
Furthermore, the United Nations Mediator, Mr. Galo PIala,
found on the very same grounds that a federal system of
government in Cyprus was wholly inapplicable, pointing
out that any such attempt would be destructive to the State
and would inevitably lead to its partition /see S/6253 of
26 March 196.5/. Constitutional abnormalities, whether
conceived in a policy of excessive separatism or otherwise,
could never be workable or, for that matter, acceptable.
13, What is of paramount importance in the relevant
negotiations is that the resulting constitutional structure be
practically workable, To that end it should not violate
universally.established norms in a manner rendering its
performance so cumbersome as to lead to its breakdown.
Constitutional norms reflecting the accumulated wisdom of
experience over the ages cannot, for whatever reason, be
ignored or transgressed with impunity as to the resulting
product. We feel confident that, in the expanded local
talks, no such straying from constitutional norms would be
allowed-particularly in view of the presence of the two
constitutional experts-to endanger the genuineness of the
present effort towards a stable solution in a sense of mutual
respect and a truly co-operative spirit.
14. Regarding deconfrontation and normalization,
the
Secretary-General’s report expresses concern over the continued lack of progress in this field. My Government,
consistent in its policy of co-operating with the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, has all along and on
all occasions declared its willingness to accept general and
island-wide military deconfrontation. It has also accepted
partial deconfrontation, as now proposed by UNFICYP,
which is ready to negotiate agreements, as well as provide a
United Nations military presence, by way of a further
assurancethat no risk whatever is invoIved to either side
by the deconfrontation. Such an initial step during the
coming months would help generate greater confidence
between the two sides and the report points out that this
might well lead to a more general measure of military

12. The precise form of constitutional structure for
Cyprus is still the subject of negotiation in the local talks
and therefore cannot at present be fully discussed in the
Council. The negotiations, however, are conducted upon a
basis, as I have already stated, the constitutional part of
which provides for a unitary State. The term “unitary
State”, which has been partly discussed, has a clearly
defined legal meaning and content. Its essential char&teristic, to distinguish it from a federal State, is that
institutions of local government function under the control
of the State. Within that constitutional framework of a
lmitarY
State, variations as to the particular form to be
applied in Cyprus are being discussed in the local talks,
They cannot, however, stray into the field of federation
which lies entirely outside the agreed basis and which, in
m~ case,by the very nature of territorial realities in Cyprus
is wholly inapplicable. Of course, the characteristic pre.

2 See Comtitutional

Proposals for Qprus,

Report submitted

the Secretnryof State for the Colonies, December
(London, Her Majesty’s Stationcry Office), p, 13.

2

1956,

Cmnd.

to
42

deconfrontation throughout the island. Among the benefits
from &ch deconfrontation, the report stresses,would be a
reduction in tension and also the creation of a situation in
which a significant reduction of the United Nations force
would become possible, thereby reducing the over-all cost
of UNFICYP. Both aspects are important, particularly with
a view to reducing the force, and the relevant proposal
should be met with a positive response+

18. The willingness for conciliation and co-operation is
always alive among the majority of the Greek and Turkish
people of Cyprus and spontaneously comes to the surface
whenever the opportunity presents itself, regrettably rarely
as that may happen. The most recent opportunity has been
this year’s drought and the effective work accomplished by
the intercommunal agricultural survey, the successof which
is attributed, in the Secretary-General’s report, “to the
excellent co-operation shown by both communities”

15. In regard to normalization, the restoration of full
freedom of movement is the fundamental premise from
which other aspects of normalization would flow. The
report points out, in paragraph 72, that “restriction on the
freedom of movement of civilians still remains one of the
most serious problems in the island” and refers to previous
reports showing the developments since the Government
took the hlitiative of the unilateral elimination, in 1968, of
all restrictions on freedom of movement in the expectation
of response from the other side.

[S/l 0940 and Corr. 1, para. 7OJ.

19. The common desire of the people for increased
co-operation in economic matters has also been noted in a
number of the Secretary-General’s reports, all of which
stress the need for an integrated economy. Yet there has
been no effective advance in that direction, Again, asnoted
in several reports, this is one of the regrettable outcomes of
a policy of excessive separatism which runs counter to the
vital interests of the country and more particularly to the
interests of the Turkish Cypriots, resulting in an imbalance
in the economic well-being between the two communities
with respect to which the Government has offered to
supply funds and assistance towards the raising of the
standard of living of the Turkish Cypriot community,
which is a result of separatism.

16. In this respect, a previous report of the SecretaryGeneral remarks that, whereas Turkish Cypriots may move
freely throughout the island, Greek Cypriots continue to be
denied access to Turkish Cypriot enclaves and to a number
of public roads among which are main communication
roads such as the Nicosia-Kyrenia road and so forth
{S/9233 of 3 June 1969, para. 551. This situation in a sense
affects also the freedom of movement of the Turkish
Cypriots who, as another previous report points out, are
still required to observe certain formalities of control when
passing through Turkish-Cypriot barriers and checkpoints
/S/8622 of IX June 1968, para. 6.51. As this unwarranted
situation continues, it would seem that at least a phased
restoration of freedom of movement in those areas and
main pubiic rpads particularly might be started in the same
way as the proposal by UNFICYP in respect of deconfrontation.
17. For indeed, aside from the relief from hardship,
perhaps the most important aspect of the restoration of
freedom of movement is its relevance to the psychological
climate in the relations between the two communities. In a
previous report, the Secretary-General pertinently remarked:

20. Normalizing the relations between the Greek and
Turkish Cypriots through conciliation would present no
problem whatsoever so long asno artificial obstacles and rigid
prohibitions were placed in the way. Let us allow the warmth
of feeling of the Cypriot people-Greek and Turkish alike-to
find its natural outlet in acts of goodwill and genuine
co-operation and also in effective co-operation with the
United Nations Forces in- Cyprus in its efforts towards the
military disengagement and normalization that have been so
long delayed. This is the best way to enhance the common
endeavour in the talks, by bringing a new spirit into them
aimed towards overcoming differences and difficulties in a
more positive, more accommodating and more co.operative
approach and in keeping with the moral demands of our
present-day interdependent world. A just and enduring
solution can in this way be achieved to the benefit of the
people of Cyprus-Greeks and Turks alike-and in the wider
interests of peace in that troubled area of the Mediterranean and in the world at large.

“The
relaxation of restrictions has unmistakably
demonstrated
that Greek and Turkish Cypriot people
desire to live in peace and harmony and seem already
prepared to accept and support reasonable compromises.”
/S/8446 of 9 March 1968, para. 153.1

21, Before concluding, I should like to say a few wordsto
express my Government’s gratitude to our SecretaryGeneral for his genuine and consistent efforts regarding the
problem of Cyprus and its solution on a just, workable and
lasting basis. I also wish to express our deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative in Cyprus,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, for his untiring efforts in the conduct of
the local talks and otherwise in carrying out his functions in
Cyprus to which he has brought his many talents and great
experience, wisdom and diplomatic skill. Likewise we
thank the Secretary-General’s collaborators in the Secretariat, more particularly the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guyer
and the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Urquhart, for their valuable services in this regard, as
well as the Commander of the United Nations Force,
Major-General Prem Chand, for the very useful work he has
been carrying out in the island in close co-operation with

and atso that
“it had been gratifying to observe , , , the easewith which
ordinary people of both communities were beginning to
resume
their former amicable relations”. [Ibid.,
pm.149.j

In a subsequent report, the Secretary-General, referring to
the happy way in which the Greek and Turkish Cypriots
resumed their contact after the lifting of all restrictions,
enlarked
that it was “an eloquent demonstration of the
fact that the people of Cyprus desire to live in peace and
harmony
again and are able to do so” /S/8914 of
4 December

1968, para. 371.
3

my Government, Finally, once again, I wish to put on
record how grateful we are to the countries whose generous
contributions in military personnel and financial assistance
have made possible the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus.
22. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of Turkey, on
whom I now call.
23. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assuming the
presidency of the Council. Your high personal qualities and
your vast experience, so amply proved during the past
fortnight when this body had to deal with such a complex
and chronic problem as the Middle East, are a guarantee of
success for the tasks which stiII remain to be dealt with
during the current month. Inspired by the harmonious good
neighbourly relations happily existing between our two
countries and their ever-increasing economic co-operation
further enhanced by exchanges of high level visits in recent
years, I assure you of my delegation’s full co-operation and
trust in the course of the debate on Cyprus.

groups”, The following paragraphs give an outline of the
magnitude of these incidents. Though the violence has been
limited to the Greek Cypriot community, what concerns us
at this stage is the possible negative consequences of these
incidents-as written in the report-either by accident or by
design, on the security of the Turkish community, On the
other hand, one inevitably is concerned by the negative
effects of these incidents on the peaceful efforts and on the
difficult process of confidence building in the island.
Indeed, in paragraph 92, the Secretary-General says “it is
evident that these developments have had an adverse effect
on the intercommunal talks”.
29. In this connexion I must also draw attention to the
continuation of statements from many Greek Cypriot
quarters, including the highest ones, professing for the
future of the island an ultimate political objective other
than its permanent independence. Such statements, particularly when they are made by persons who now occupy most
of the responsible positions, are bound to have negative
effects on intercommunal trust and thus on the enlarged
intercommunal talks, the purpose of which is to explore the
constitutional possibilities with a view to re-establishing
permanently the independent State on the basis of the
partnership of its two constituent communities.

24. May I also be permitted to express my delegation’s
appreciation to the members of the Council for enabling us
to participate in the debate on the present agenda item.

30, In paragraph 94 of his report, the Secretary-General
says:
“Progress in achieving a return to normal conditions has
been noticeably slow. The public services rendered to
members of the Turkish Cypriot community remain
inadequate in some respects.”

25. There are permanent members of the Council, there
are non-permanent members of the Council and there are
some countries like my own which seem to be the
permanent clients of the Council. Therefore, from time to
time I also have to salute the presence of newcomers in the
Council, because we do come here very often, and in that
respect I would extend the particular feelings of sympathy
and friendship of my country to the representatives of
Austria, Australia, Peru, Kenya and Indonesia whom I have
the honour of seeing for the first time during the debate on
Cyprus.
26. The periodic report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations operation in Cyprus once again forms the
frame of the deliberations of the Security Council on the
matter. Keeping in mind the virtue of brevity, particularly
after the trying times the Council has just had on a major
and challenging question and out of deference to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs who, I understand, will address
the Council after the discussion of the present item, I shall
try to limit my statement strictly to essentials.

Chapter III gives a detailed account on this subject. One
notes with regret that, after almost a decade, the Turkish
Cypriot community, which, as I have had the sad duty of
reminding this Council on more than one occasion, is the
major, if not the exclusive, sufferer from the present
stagnation in relation to returning to normal conditions,
still continues to live under conditions of severe deprivation
and discrimination, even in such public service areas as
electricity, water and mail. Furthermore, the Turkish
community is denied. its fair share of the benefits of the
present economic development in the island as well as of
the international assistance extended to it.
31, In this connection, I would emphasize that, in the
extensive assistance that Cyprus continues to receive from
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
share of the Turkish community and its participation in the
projects are, in the words of the Secretary-General, “still
disappointingly low” /S/10940 and Con.1, para. 611. It is
all the more distressing if one keeps in mind the fact that
the Turkish community has always enthusiastically wished
to participate in UNDP-assisted projects. Pending a lasting
settlement of the Cyprus question, I believe that much
more can and should be done on the practical level, in the
preparatory and implementary stagesof the UNDP projects,
to ensure adequate participation of both communities, for
the betterment of the island’s economy as a whole. Here is
one area where progress again depends upon the willingness
of the Greek Cypriot side to co-operate with WNDP,
UNFICYP and the Turkish Cypriot community. Such a
co-operative attitude would be a positive step towards the
creation of mutual confidence and as a by-product would

27. In paragraph 34 of the report, the Secretary-General
notes that “the intercommunal military situation has
remained quiet during the period under review”, and that
“there have been few incidents between Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots”. My delegation notes with satisfaction
this general assessment of the situation. We are happy that
intercommunal relations have remained calm, since we
believe that the prevalence of such an atmosphere is an
essential-although not the only-requisite for the process
of confidence building in the island, which in turn is a
condition for the successof the ongoing talks,
28. In paragraph 35, the Secretary-General observes that
“most of the incidents reported during February, March
and April were not intercommunal in nature but were the
result of activities of anti-Government Greek Cypriot
4

enhance the prospects for success in the enlarged intercommunal talks.
32. Reluctant to look only at the gloomy side of the
Cyprus picture, I find, as I hope members of the Council
might also find, relief in chapter IV, where the SecretaryGeneral expresses a note of optimism with regard to the
successof the broadened intercommunal talks, the fifth and
sixth rounds of which were devoted to the important issue
of local autonomy. We concur with his statement that these
talks are “a positive, constructive and valuable step towards
the settlement of the constitutional issues paving the way
to the solution of the long-outstanding Cyprus problem”
[ibid., para. 831, and accordingly the Turkish Government
has extended its earnest and full support to the broadened
intercommunal talks since they started.

words I used in the past, that we shall continue to work for
changing Cyprus from an island of intercommunal strife
into a model of a bicommunal State, where, as originally
conceived and created, both communities will live as
masters of their homeland, neither one dominating the
other, and as equal partners in the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of their island.
36. The Secretary-General recommended the extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP for a further period of six
months. The ‘Turkish Government agreed to that recommendation, which was accepted a short while ago by this
body, and I should like to express our appreciation to the
members of the Council, as well as to the countries
contributing to UNFICYP, for making possible the continuation of the Force’s servicesin the island. Recognizing
the difficulties, financial and otherwise, that they have to
confront in order to make that contribution, I am once
more pleased to express my delegation’s concurrence with
the view of the Secretary-General, who considers that the
presence of the Force is required for the maintenance of
the relative security essential to the parties in their peaceful
efforts.

33. The time consumed since the inception of the br&dened talks and the limited results achieved so far might
seem disappointing. However, as the report suggests, the
complexity and the vital importance of the problem should
be borne In mind and “not only the substance of those
problems but the words used to define them and their
interpretation may become matters of lengthy and difficult
debate” [ibid., para. 801. As a good example, in the
following paragraph the Secretary-General tries to illustrate
the controversial nature of one such term and the positions
Of the two
communities thereon, thus indicating the
di.ffIculties inherent in subscribing to controversial, undefined terminology. Indeed the Secretary-General, in his
wisdom, omitted on purpose such undefined terminology in
his aide-mdmohe of 18 May I972 [see S/10664, para. 152],
which s&s the terms and the basis for the present
broadened intercommunal
talks. Obviously the nature of
the agreed final settlement is for the parties themselves to
decide as recognized once more in the Secretary-General’s
report,

37. Before concluding-and I hope that, for a change, I
shall not have to speak again in the debate-I should like to
express my Government’s sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr, Waldheim, and to his assistants both
here and in Cyprus, the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guyer, the Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
whose presence I welcome in our deliberations, the Cornmander of the Force, Major-General Prem Chand, and all
their staff, as well as the members of the Force, for their
dedicated and constructive work.
38. The PRESIDENT (translation fLom Russian): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Greece on
whom I now call.

34. We have already heard this morning, in the course of a
Iearned lecture on constitutional law, the views of one of
the parties on an issue which, in the very words of the
representative of that party, would better be left to those
discussing the various possibilities for a workable constitution in the island at this time. Looking around this table, I
can hardly understand the fears expressed with regard to
some kind of federative system, which seems, after all, to
have been the choice of so many of the Members of the
Organization. That does not mean in any way that Turkey
or, as far as I know, the Turkish Cypriot side is committed
to one form or another in the discussions of the future
constitutional
framework that will be adopted for the
State, to preserve its independence and territorial integrity.
I think that at this stage it is sufficient for me to say that
the problem is, after all, the responsibility of others and I
hope that they fulfi it in Cyprus to the best of their ability.

39. Mr. PANAYOTACOS (Greece): First of all, Mr. President, may I be permitted to associate myself with the
congratulations and best wishes which have been extended
to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council? My delegation acknowledges with appreciation the skill with which you have prepared the ground
for this debate devoted to the question of Cyprus and we
wish you every success for the remainder of your term in
office. I should also like to thank you for giving the Greek
delegation the opportunity to participate in today’s meeting and present a few observations on the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which has given us once again an
up-to-date, realistic and comprehensive assessment of the
situation in Cyprus, as well as of the role of the IJnited
Nations presence there during the last six months.
40. The general conclusion that stems from the report in
question is undoubtedly that this strife-torn island has to
take more steps along the road to a normal state of affairs
before any substantial reduction of the United Nations
commitment @ Cyprus can safely be envisaged. In this
respect, we share the Secretary-General’s concern over the
fact that no substantial progress has been made towards the
return to normal conditions and a military deconfrontation.
It is encouraging, however, to note that, in spite of
circumstantial differences and other difficulties arising from

35. In keeping with one of its basic tenets of foreign
policy, the Turkish Government, which is one of the
directly interested parties entrusted with moral and contractual obligations, is determined to promote and contribute to a just and permanent peaceful solution of the
question of Cyprus, one that will fully safeguard the
legit.trnate rights and interests of the Turkish and Greek
commmjties
and the other parties concerned. We have
repeatedly stated, and I shall repeat once again in the very
5

time to time, there appears to be consensus among all
patties directly concerned that the reactivated inter~~mmml
talks
are the best-indeed the only-avaiIable
way of promoting a peaceful solution of the problem
confronting Cyprus. As the Secretary-General very aptly
points
out, these talks constitute:’

pondingly more difficult. On the other hand, it is hardly
necessary to emphasize further to the parties concerned the
disastrous consequences of a breakdown in the talks.
45. In the light of all those considerations, we fully
endorse the Secretary-General’s proposal on the extension
of the UNFICYP mandate for another six months. Actual.
ly, the Force’s outstanding services to peace have by far
exceeded the frame of the island alone and given, in our
opinion, vibrant proof of the value of the United Nations
peace-keeping operations. 1 cannot, however, in this respect
help expressing our disappointment that so few members of
the Security Council have been contributing to financing
the United Nations operations in Cyprus-all the more SD
since UNFICYP has by no means outlived its usefulness, It
is therefore to be hoped that in order to keep these
operations workable as long as needed, more members of
the Council, as well as Members of the United Nations, will
volunteer their material support. For its part, Greece will
continue paying its substantial share in order to help check
the fmancial deficit that causes-and for very good reasonour Secretary-General’s concern.

“a positive, constructive and valuable step towards the
settlement of the constitutional issues paving the way to
the solutions of the long outstanding Cyprus problem.”
pJlO940 and Corr.1, para. 83.1
41. Needless to say, talks should be only a means for
acting and an agreed settlement still appears to be remote.
On the other hand, one should not lose sight of the fact
that the Cyprus problem, unique in its complexity, cannot
be solved overnight. Patience, good faith and good senseare
the threefold prerequisite to any viable solution. And to
those
among us who show signs of understandable restless.
nest or restiveness, I say this: As long as one .cannot act, to
talk is already something. Furthermore, it is self&dent
that any settlement has to be in conformity with the
Charter and the Security Council’s resolutions of 1964 and
1967 and also take into consideration the well-being of the
people of Cyprus as a whole, within the framework of
international peace and security. May I stress once more
that the constant objectives of the Greek Government’s
policy are based on the two resolutions in question and that
the records of the CounciI testify to the consistency of this
policy.

46. I furthermore believe that this is also an appropriate
moment to remind ourselves once more that, in a wider
scope, we cannot have something for nothing; we cannot
fulfil the mandate of our Charter and make the United
Nations an effective instrument of world peace without
providing the necessary tools. As regards more specifically
Cyprus, the degree of success of the reactivated talks
depends largely on the preservation of peaceful conditions,
d6tente and deconfrontation. The mere presence of Blue
Berets in the island constitutes the strongest deterrent
against a possible recurrence of intercommunal violence,
May I also point out in this respect that neither resolution
186 (19@), by which the function of the United Nations
PeacewkeepingForce was defined, nor tzsolution 244 (1967)
by any means linked the duration of the stationing of the
Force in Cyprus to the length or even the existence of
intercommunal talks?

42. In the same context, the Greek delegation voices its
gratification at the fact that the intercommunal talks have
been conducted in a constructive manner, according to the
report’s assessment. We find it also particularly heartening
that, in Mr. Osorio-Tafall’s view, there appears to be a good
possibility that a substantial measure of agreement may be
reached on questions of principle.
43. in his report, the Secretary-General has however
cautioned us that much patient work will be needed to
bring the negotiations to a satisfactory end. On the other
hand, it is encouraging that the situation in the island has
remained almost calm during the last six months and no
major incidents of au intercommunal character have occurred, in spite of the unfortunate intestine antagonisms
still besetting the Greek community, We do believe and
fervently hope that calm and good sense wilI ultimately
prevail and spread in all directions, for the benefit of all.

47. Peace-keeping and, genuine efforts at peace-making are
two different facets of the whole operation, through which
the role of the United Nations is being asserted. Although I
agree in principle with the views formulated last year in this
forum by some colleagues-in particular, the representatives
of the United Kingdom and Italy-that
peace-keeping
cannot be a substitute for peace-making, I consider it
equally true that peace-making, at least through direct
intercommunal talks, becomes ilhrsory without the reassuring prese_ncein the island of the peace-keeping forces. It
would consequently be more appropriate to assert that
under the peculiar circumstances prevailing in Cyprus, there
is no substitute for peace-keeping as a means-the only
means-to successin peace-making.

44. The Greek Government has repeatedly. deplored all
acts of violence and reiterated its belief that &negotiated
constitutional settlement is the only solution. We were the
t%st fully to endorse, in October 1971, the Secretary.
General’s aide-mdmoire (see S/10401, pm, 791 on the
reactivated intercommunal talks. We shall deftitely be the
last ones to give up endeavouring to ensure their successful
consummation, firmly convinced that the procedure now
followed is the most likely to lead to an arrangement
satisfactory to all concerned. It is consequently in everybody’s interest to refrain from any individual or collective
action or any hasty initiative that could stir up passions and
embitter the atmosphere, thus rendering a solution corres-

48. Bearing this in mind, my Government expresses once
more the hope of seeing UNFICYP continue extending its
helping hand in the search for a just and lasting solution, as
long as needed. After all, to use Rudyard Kipling’s words,
no question is ever settled until it is settled right. We shall
not deviate an inch from this line of reasoning and conduct,
as we consider the peace-keeping operation in Cyprus to be
6

one of the most important expressions of the Security
Council’s discharge of its ultimate task in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We do not see really
who could assume the heavy responsibility for its premature interruption or drastic reduction.

judged to be a breach of the cease-fire. This is in dramatic
contrast to the experience during earlier periods.
55. We are gratified that the intercommunal meetings
between Turkish and Greek Cypriot leaders have continued
in a relatively restrained and constructive atmosphere. We
strongly urge all sides to take fullest advantage of this
promising atmosphere and of the opportunity now at hand.
We persist in our hope that in the end al1 elements of the
Cypriot nation will reside peacefully with one another in a
sovereign, independent and united Cyprus.

49. In concluding my remarks, I should like to reiterate
how deeply we are appreciative of and grateful for the
Secretary-General’s constant interest in the question of
Cyprus, Since he took up his office, he has spared no effort
for the ultimate success of the reactivated intercommunal
talks under their enlarged new formula. For our part, we
shal] never cease to back up his endeavours aimed at
bringing about an agreed solution of the problem, based on
the concept of an independent, sovereign and unitary State
of Cyprus. On this occasion I should also like to thank his
able assistants, namely the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr, Roberto Guyer and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-Genera] in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall. We are
indebted to both of them for their painstaking efforts in
order to prevent, as far as they could, a deterioration of the
situation and to bridge the differences still dividing the
parties. Lastly, our thanks are extended to the Commander
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus, Major-General Prem
Chand and to the officers and men under his command, for
the constructive efforts they have deployed on the spot
with inexhaustible patience, commendable impartiality and
Hnlimited good will.

56. The situation within Cyprus contains elements of
accomplishment and hope, as well as unifinished business.
It is also apparent that constructive changes in the external
considerations in the Cyprus situation have markedly
improved the atmosphere since the United Nations peacekeeping operation wasfirst established,
57. Ten years ago-even three years ago--the threat of
involvement by States outside Cyprus was calculated as a
real possibility. Now, in our judgement, the Cyprus
situation is characterized by a much closer identity of views
among the neighbouring Powers. This development has had
a beneficial effect on international peace and security in the
area and has helped to restore more normal conditions in
Cyprus. These are key objectives of the United Nations
Force and the constructive attitudes of Greece, Turkey and
Cyprus deserve our full, unqualified support.

50. Mr, SCALI (United States of America): First, I Ilope
that I may be permitted a personal observation. As a
relative newcomer to the ranks of the Security Council, ]
wish to express my great personal pleasure in participating
in a discussion which has been marked by expressions of
harmony, hope and promise for the future, particularly in
the important area of peace-keeping,

58. The Secretary-General has again conveyed to us the
melancholy news of continued financial deficits in the
operation of the United Nations Force. He has repeatedly
appealed for additional, contributions. None the less,
effective support of this United Nations peace-keeping
operation has been left by United Nations Members to a
smal1 number of States which continue to contribute more
generously than their own interests or responsibilities
would dictate, The Secretary%eneral estimates that this
deficit may soon reach $18.9 million. My Government has
sought in the past few years, in consultation with the
Secretary-General and other contributors, to encourage
reduction or, better, elimination of this deficit. We had
hoped that our formula of matching contributions and our
special payment of $8 million last year would stimulate
financial contributions to this United Nations peacekeeping force by other Members. We have been disappointed in the results. None the less, we continue to urge
the Members of the United Nations, above all members of
this Council and those who benefit most directly from the
presence of UNFICYP, to co-operate in efforts to put
UNFICYP on a sound and current financial basis.

51, The United States delegation supports the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Force in C+us for
another six months. The Force continues to contribute to
the maintenance of law and order in Cyprus and thus to the
maintenance of peace and security in the eastern Mediterranean,
52. I should like to express our appreciation for the highly
professional work of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and I should like also to pay
our respects to the officers and men of the eight countries
contributing
forces to UNFICYP, which, under the leader.
ship of Major-General Prem Chand, serveson the front lines
of international
peace-keeping.
53. 111the light of events in Cyprus since the Council’s Iast
meeting in December, the United States continues to be
cautiously
optimistic.
The possibilities for substantive
progress may be brighter than ever before in the long course
of this frustratingly complex problem.

59. In the absence of a positive response to appeals by the
Secretary-General, we do not see how the present size and
operations of UNFICYP can continue to be maintained
much longer. Fortunately, however, we believe the Cyprus
situation has progressed to a point where we can considet
seriously reducing manpower in the United Nations Force
as well as streatnlining and reorganizing its operations,

54. We find grounds for encouragement in the SecretaryGeneral’s careful and informative report. The military
situation in Cyprus has remained calm. There have been few
incidents between Greek and Turkish Cypriots, and only
one shooting incident in the past six months has been

60. In this connexion, the United States strongly suppurts
the intention of the Secretary-General, noted in paragraphs
7

in the internal military situation, in investigating matters
involving the two communities in Cyprus and in using its
good offices to help avoid confrontations. This is clearly
brought out in the Secretary-General’s report. It is for this
reason that my Government has again willingly supported
the extension of the UNFICYP mandate and pledges to
maintain our troop contingent and the existing level of our
logistic support. I might perhaps mention at this juncture
that the British financial contribution to the operation is
now running at an annual rate of some E4.5 million-a not
inconsiderable amount. This figure includes both the basic
costs of our troops and the extra costs, which we are
absorbing as part of our contribution, and also our logistic
support to other contingents. These latter figures, our extra
costs and the cost of logistic support, have risen steeply,
Nevertheless, in view of the serious financial position of the
Cyprus operation, my Government has been willing, for the
period of the renewed mandate, to absorb the increase.

89 and 99 of his report, to make a thorough study of ways
and means to reduce the United Nations commitment in
terms of finances and manpower. The United States will
fully support such further economies in the UNFICYP
operation as the Secretary-General can achieve without
jeopardizing its effectiveness. In our view, the study
undertaken by the Secretary-General should, at the very
least, constitute an analysis of precisely what kind of
adjustments in forces or operating procedures could be
made to eliminate the annual deficit and how the Secrc
tary-General would implement those adjustments.
61. We also hope that concurrently the Secretary-General
and his staff will examine the creation of alternative force
models. We have in mind a thorough review, for example,
of madels based on hypothetical reductions in ihe neighbourhood of 25, 50 and 75 per cent of the current strength
of UNFICYP. The study might address alternative restructurings of the Force, to make it more mobile, redefine its
operating procedures and assure adequate logistic support
of each of these hypothetical levels within the terms of its
current mandate.

66. The Secretary-General’s report is indeed gloomy on
the financial situation; far gloomier on this aspect than on
any other. The financial situation has clearly worsened and
the mounting deficit must be a matter of concern to us all.
I should like to say one or two things about this. First of
all, we hope that all contributors will adopt the same course
that my Government and some other Governments have
taken of absorbing the increased costs which have arisen; in
other words, increasing their total financial contribution.
This, however, is not in itself enough and my second point
is that my Government hopes that a more generous
contribution will be made by all Member States in response
to the Secretary-General’s appeal. This is an operation
which is of importance for us all. Finally, my delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention to achieve
economies without jeopardizing the effectiveness of
UNFICYP. We well understand that the implementation of
any recommendations for reductions in the Force would
have to depend upon political and military conditions
prevailing at the time, as well as LIPOII the financial
considerations, We hope none the less that significant
economies will prove possible.

62. Needless to say, we make these suggestions with no
intention of committing the Secretary-General, present
contributors to the Force, or the Security Council to any
specific force level or structure. Clearly, these changes can
only be determined in the light of many factors, after a
careful review of the situation in and around Cyprus and
with the full agreement of all concerned. But we do believe
it is time for a fundamental and detailed re.study of the
structure, operations and financing of the Force. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to address these
problems prior to our next consideration of this subject in
December.
63. Mr. WEIR (United Kingdom): Once again we have
voted in a spirit of guarded optimism to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for a
further six months. The main reason for such guarded
optimism is the opinion of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative in Cyprus, recorded in the report on the last
six months’ operation, that there appears to be a good
possibility that a substantial measure of agreement may be
reached in the intercommunal talks on the questions of
principle. It is on those talks that our main hopes are
pinned and it is my Government’s firm view that they
represent the best way of achieving progress towards a
settlement.

67. One point which disturbs my delegation as much as it
clearly disturbs the Secretary-General is the fact that he has
had to report that “progress in achieving a return to normal
conditions has been noticeably slow” /S/10940 and Curr. I,
paru. 94/, We have been particularly interested in the
proposals made by the Secretary-General for reducing
tension and generating confidence between the two communities. We realize that progress on this front must
depend on the generation of confidence through progress in
the intercommunal talks. Nevertheless, the atmosphere of
confrontation benefits no one and it constitutes a heavy
commitment on UNFICYP resources. As the report notes,
there is a link between this problem and the military
problem. UNFICYP, however, is ready to help with the
negotiation of appropriate limited agreements as an initial
step and to assist in their implementation. My Government
strongly supports the proposals of the Secretary-General
and his representatives in those fields. If this opportunity is
exploited and the hoped for progress attained in the
intercommunal talks, the situation could be transformed by
next December. It is our earnest hope that it will be.

Cd. In this context, 1 take the opportunity to welcome the
presence of Sefior Osorio-Tafall at this meeting. We all owe
:I great debt of gratitude to him for the skill and
perseverance he has shown in Cyprus over the years and my
Government is deeply appreciative of the continuing efforts
made by him and his colleagues, both military and civilian,
towards achieving a settlement of the dispute. We are
$&wise much indebted to the Secretary-General himself,
%hose observations in his admirably clear and constructive
report we endorse and support.
L15, There is no doubt, in the view of my delegation, that
ilie :ole of the United Nations Force continues to be of the
greatest value in maintaining a close watch on developments
8

to establish a constitutional
keeping questions.

68. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria) (interpretation from
The Security Council has just extended for the
twenty-fourth time the mandate for the stationing of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus. My delegation’s support
for this decision should be interpreted as an affirmation of
the confidence of my country-which is speaking on this
question for the first time in the Council-in the peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations in Cyprus.
French):

69. In his clear and precise report, the Secretary.General
has drawn our attention to the fact that talks between the
two communities were conducted in a constructive way and
that, in the opinion of his Special Representative in Cyprus,
it seems that there is some possibility that in the near
future the efforts under way will lead to a basis for
agreement between the parties. My delegation is convinced
that talks are the most promising way to reach a solution to
the problems on the island. It is highly desirable for those
talks to lead to solutions satisfactory to both communities.
For that reason we very much welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General
and his Special Representative,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, which led to the resumption of talks a
year ago.

72. As regards the United Nations Force in Cyprus,. we
appreciate the determina’tion of the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to achieve a solution to the financing
problem. We are pleased to learn that studies are under way
to find ways and means of reducing the United Nations
financial commitment to the Force.
73. There is no doubt that the United Nations Force is
continuing to do an excellent job in Cyprus and I should in
particular like to say that we very much admire the effort?
of Majo&eneral Prem Chand.
74, Certainly, the extension of the United Nations efforts
in Cyprus for the twenty-fourth time, without any final
or satisfactory results, seems at first sight very discouraging,
but when we realize that one of the possible alternatives is
armed confrontation, we cannot hesitate to give our firm
support
to this United Nations operation. However, we also
share the frequently expressed and growing concern that
the United Nations presence on the island seems to be
established and taking on more and more the character of a
standing obligation of the United Nations and the contributing countries. We join with other delegations, then, in
expressing our most sincere hope that a lasting and
unequivocal peace will soon be established in Cyprus.

70. However, in spite of the resumption of talks and the
rather encouraging pace at which they arc being conducted,
the Secretary-General has once again drawn our attention
to the fact that the situation remains quite unstable and
that the calm which has generally been maintained has been
interrupted by moments of tension and sporadic acts of
violence. I regret to have to add that it is unlikely that the
situation will change before the fundamental problems are
solved, In the circumstances, we believe that the obser.
vations of the Secretary-General are quite justified and we
support his proposal to extend the mandate of the Force
for a period of six months.

75. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): This is the third time,
during our current term in the Council, that the Yugoslav
delegation has participated in the six-monthly review of the
United Nations operation in Cyprus, which started as early
as March 1964, almost ,a full decade ago, with Security
Council resolution J86 (I 964). An almost full decade of
consolidated though always precarious peace is much better
than one of hostilities of any kind. Still, this decade must
not pass without a major positive change in the situation,
without a final breakthrough, .

71. As I said at the beginning of this statement, ,my
Government is particularly interested in the situation in
Cyprus for, over the past nine years, we have been
associated with the United Nations peace-keeping efforts. A
month after the adoption of resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, my Government responded positively to the
Secretary-General’s
request that there bk placed at his
disposal a military and police contingent and, at the present
time, Austria maintains not only a considerable military
contingent but also a field hospital and the most sizable
civil police force within the United Nations Force. Furthcrmore, over the years we have made voluntary contributions
to the financing of this peace-keeping mission, However,
the financial deficit, which regrettably continues to grow? is
a source of major concern to my Government and other
contributing
Governments. I cannot fail to express our
disappointment
over the fact that the many appeals the
Secretary-General
has addressed to Member States to
contribute more generously to the financing of the Force
have been heeded only inadequately. On a number of
occasions my delegation has expressed the view in the
General Assembly that the present method of financing
peace-keeping operations, which is based only on the
contributions
of a limited number of countries, is neither
adequate nor justified. We hope that these questions will
receive well-deserved attention within the context of efforts

76, Once again we have the benefit of having before us at1
exhaustive, balanced and vigorous report by the Secretary.
General. While it concerns itself, as it should, with the
immediate aspects of the UNFICYP operation in Cyprus, it
is ob‘vious that we all have to be mindful of the larger
elements of time and space which are relevant when
considering the situation in and around the Republic of
Cyprus. The current Security Council debate on the whole
Middle Eastern question highlights the precarious state of
or absence of full-scale war or hostilities, in an area
plagued by constant crisis. The interdependence of peace
and progress in the Middle East, in the Mediterranean and
in Europe and the dangers of any tmtoward developments
spilling over from one part to another of these interconnected regions have been stressed by many speakers.
That is especially true of my delegation, Yugoslavia being a
European and Mediterranean country.
]XilCC,

77. It is also in that context-the context of the danger of
the Middle Eastern crisis being additionally complicated by
new factors of tension and rivalries in the wider areas of the
Persian Gulf and elsewhere-that all the partics directly
concerned with the matter before us must realize once
9

I

framework for a11 peace.

._

again how imperative and how urgent it is-and it is
becoming more so with every passing moment-to make
final progress and reach such agreement in Cyprus as will
solve the crisis that we have been considering semi-annually
for so long.
78. We have stated before and are now repeating the same
position in the same words: that a firm and constant
commitment
to the independent, sovereign, free and
non-aligned Republic of Cyprus, an equal Member of the
United Nations, and to its unity and territorial integrity has
been and remains the sirw qrca /20/z of any progress in and
around Cyprus. That would permit a sotution of the crisis
and change the situation by transforming that area of
tension into an island of co-operation, peace and harmony
and a factor of security and stability in the Mediterranean
and beyond.
79. Equally, we have stated before and are now repeating
the same basic positipn: that the Republic of Cyprus, under
the Charter, the relevant United Nations resolutions and
basic principles of international law is, as a sovereign State,
entitled not only to full respect of its territorial integrity
but also to full observance of its inherent right to
non-interference in its internal affairs and to not having
force or the threat of force used against it in any
circumstances From any side whatsoever. The only possible
basis for the solution of their problems has been and
remains the mutual tmderstanding and agreement of all the
people of Cyprus and of its two communities, and the
desire of the Greek and Turkish Cypriot people to live in
justly shared unity, united and unified in peace and
harmony, reaching and consummating reasonable comprolnises without pressure from outside.

talks to tempo&e, expecting that developments, Iike the
ones alluded to above, could benefit one side and weaken
the other. The successof these talks, which are concerned
with the joint fate of the people of one island, of one State,
can be achieved only in a comInon spirit of confidence and
not in a competitive spirit of taking advantage over the
other side.
82. One can only regret that the Secretary-General has had
to report again that, while this tiIne there are signs of
increasing economic progress within each community of the
island, even if not evenly distributed /see S/lU$VU a/Id
Corr.1, puru. 621, little progress has been achieved in the
field of military deconfrontation and that a return to
norInal conditions has been slow /ibid,, paras. 93 and 94/,
We would, on the whole, support the approach of partial
deconfrontation, a 1iInited measure of military disengagement, as leading to a Inore general one, and we would
commend UNFICYP’s readiness to negotiate appropriate
IiInited agreements to this end and to provide a military
presence to ensure that there should be no increased risk to
the security of either community as a result. We only urge
that both .sides, not only one, as heretofore, adopt an
approach that will facilitate the creation of a better
atmosphere for flIrther negotiations and final results,
83. This aspect of the situation leads me to the subject of
UNFICYP itself, its performance, its role and the financial
aspects. This is a point on which 1 should like, as before, to
express our profound appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, to the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Roberto Guyer, and to Mr. Osorio-Tafall for
all they have done and are doing in the political field, in
activating and sustaining the onward movement and 1110.
mentuni in the intercommunal stalks, for their care about
UNFICYP and other matters, We continue to have a very
high opinion of and a feeling of gratitude to the Force, its
Commanding Officer, Major-General Prem Chand, and all
its officers and men for their work, dedication and
contribution.

80. Those are the reasons why we are heartened by the
reference in the Secretary-General’s report to the steady
continuation of, and some further progress achieved in,
intercommunal talks. Those are the reasons why we share
his appraisal and hope stated in paragraph 83 of the report.
Those are also the reasons why we agree with the indication
that more time--but a defined length of time-&ould
be
allotted to those discussions, as stated in paragraph 79
which declares that “in any case at least another four
months of discussions will be needed”. Indeed, in such
complex and sensitive matters patience is always well
advised and all the time that is genuinely needed should be
utilized. But we all know that nothing can last indefinitely
and that the other half of the art of diplomacy-that
is,
problem-solving and compromise-should also be employed.

84. We feel that the presence of UNFICYI’ and its
essential role in successfully maintaining peace in the island
provide a positive example of what the United Nations can
do under the most trying circumstances. Let this example
and experience and the renewed prestige of the peace.
keeping capabilities of the United Nations be borne in mind
as we are addressing ourselves to finding ways and means of
settling other international disputes and crises, some of
which are not too far removed in time and space,
85. It was because of such a positive view of the role,
performance and legacy of UNFICYP, and because we were
mindful of appeals made by the Secretary-General concerning the difficult financial position of UNFlCYP, that the
Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has decided to make a voluntary contribution to the
financing of UNIFCYP in the amount of $Z!O,OOO,under
the terms of Security Council resolution 186 (1964). A
note to that effect washanded to the Secretary-General the
day before yesterday, 13 June.

81, The last six months have, fortunately, passed again
without the outbreak of any major hostilities. At the same
time, however, many known dangerous and damaging
incidents have taken place, often shattering relative norInalcy, if one may use this term. Also some crisis-laden
political manoeuvres around Cyprus were attempted. It is
to the credit of the Government of Cyprus, of UNFICYP
and all the factors that have withstood and contained those
incidents, that those manoeuvres did not shatter essential
peace and stability and that the intercommunal talks could
and have been permitted to continue, marking some
progress. It would not be wise for anyone engaged in the

86, At the same time, while noting the renewed recom.
mendation of the Secretary-General, with the concurrence
10

of the Governments

of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, for the
mandate of UNFICYP to be extended for yet another
Ijmited period, we trust that the Secretary-General will be
able, as he intends, to make meaningful recommendations
for the reduction of the United Nations commitment in
terms of both finance and manpower.

87. We fervently hope that the time will come soon when
of life and relations in the Republic of
Cyprus will not require the presence of UNFICYP, which
cannot last indefinitely anyway. It is true that sometimes,
as in the past decade, the presence in a country of such a
force of the world Organization is beneficial and even
indispensable, But it is equally true that, ultimately, no
country should rely on that too much; nothing is healthier
than the ability
to sort out one’s own affairs and to
maintain one’s own stability by one’s own means. Therefore, no outside factors should make it more difficult for
the people of Cyprus, their two communities, their Govern.
ments, to find a solution for their own, and nobody else’s,
problems, rendering the presence of UNFICYP unnecessary,
the normalization

88. Therefore, we sincerely hope that a definitive and
positive turning-point will be reached soon in the negotiations between the two communities in Cyprus in the
forthcoming period and that the two communities will be
in a position to reach a final agreement. it is indeed high
time that this agreement was reached and peace and mutual
trust established with a view to ensuring the development
and full progress of Cyprus. We hope that we shall be able
to note, in December this year, that a long and strenuous
mission of the United Nations has been completed success.
fully. However, if such a development-so much desired by
all of us-should not materialize, then we shall no doubt be
obIiged, next December, to cease to express this desire in a
routine-like way and examine, in a comprehensive manner,
the problems and obstacles still standing in the way of the
positive
campletion of this peace-keeping mission of the
United Nations.
89. I should like to conclude this statement by reiterating
my Government’s
appreciation of our long established and
good relations

with the neighbouring and friendly countries
Our relations with the Republic of
Cyprus are, of course, excellent; our two heads of State in
their close personal relations have contributed to this to a
great extent. They will continue their close partnership in
flIrther contacts and consultations among the non-aligned
countries, particularly at the coming summit conference of
nonmaligned countries, to be held next September in Algiers.
of Greece and Turkey.

90, Mr, DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (itttcrpretutiun fhtn
Frerrch~: The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus that we have just decided upon once again
calls for sornc comments from my delegation, as from other
members of the Council, marked by mingled resignation
and hope. Nevertheless the emphasis was clearly on hope
last December when we welcomed the resumption of talks
between the two communities and expressed the hope that,
despite the obvious difficulties of the undertaking, the
spirit of compromise might prevail over suspicion and
intransigence,
91, The role played by the Secretary-General in framing
and securlfl$ the acceptance by the two parties of the new

formula, the influence exercised by his Special Representative and the assitance of the constitutional experts
constituted in our eyes and continue today to constitute
guarantees for these talks; they thus justify the hopefulness
that continues to prevail here. The fact remains, however
that in the final analysis it is up to the parties involved td
come ta an agreement and fix its terms, the objective being
to equip the Cypriot State with institutions guaranteeing its
independence and sovereignty and offering to its popula.
tion as a whole, as well as to each community, security and
effective participation in public affairs.
92. In this regard, we note with satisfaction that despite
certain difficulties which led one of the negotiating parties
to question the usefulness of its continued participationdifficulties now happily surmounted, thanks inter ah to
the intervention of the Secretary-General-43 meetings have
been held since the resumption of the talks. The Special
Representative does not rule out the possibility that a
satisfactory conclusion may be reached within a period of
four months. He couches this estimate in very cautious
terms, however, since he at the same time underscores the
complexity of the problems at issue, which explains even
the fundamental differences concerning the choice of terms
used to define the object of the talks. No matter what our
legitimate concern to assist the parties in their difficult
task, it goes without saying that it is not for us to settle the
debate: the final solution to the constitutional problems of
Cyprus must emerge from the actual talks between the two
communities.
93. Nevertheless, the successof the talks being very largely
dependent on the mutual confidence of the parties, some
externnt conditions need to be met, including, of course,
cahn on the island and the absence of confrontation
between the communities. III this respect, incidents have
been infrequent over the recent period: nevertheless, the
report does note acts of violence in one of the communities, The purpose of the presence of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus for the past nine years has been
precisely to restore and then to maintain order in the
island. But this concern has never in our eyes constituted an
end in itself. The point was to give the two communities an
opportunity to settle their problems in such a way as to
eliminate the causesthat justified the dispatch OFthe Force,
so that the latter might withdraw and give place to the
normal means available to a sovereign State to ensure public
order.
94, The very success of the Force in carrying out its
mission may have contributed over the years to make less
hmnediately obvious the need to arrive at such a settlement
as soon as possible. A de facto coexistence between the two
communities, while undoubtedly fraught with presssures
and threats, has little by little grown up. while the rjsksof
confrontation have tended temporarily to decline. Nevertheless, everyone remains well aware of the precariousness
of this state of affairs, which owes its fragile equilibrium,
among other things, to the presence of the Force,
9s. Today, however, the talks are well under Way.The
quest for stable institutions to meet the wishesand needsof
the two communities is in progress. hi the circumstances,

99. The Secretary-General’s report, unhappily, reveals
significant evidence of continuing instability within Cyprus,
T~JIS,while the intercommunal military situation appears
to have remained quiet in the past six months, with few
incidents between Greek and Turkish Cypriots, militant
activities conducted by groups of anti-Government Greek
Cypriots have led to reprisals by other Greek Cypriots and
have had disturbing effects among the Turkish Cypriot
community.

wltie agreeing to the, renewal of the Force’smandate for a
period of six months, we fully share the concerns of the
Secretary-General which have impelIed him to study ways
and means of reducing the United Nations commitment in
Cyprus and we look forward with interest to the recommendations that he intends to put before us in his next
report in December.
96, For such reductions to be effected it is unquestionably
necessary, as he has written, that progress be made in the
talks between the two communities. But the time has
perhaps come for the parties, in their efforts to reach
desirable compromises, to take into consideration the
prospect of a progressive withdrawal of the Force, which is
inevitable, The objective of the Council when it set up the
Force more than nine years ago remains our essential
concern, namely, the establishment of a situation ensuring
the harmonious coexistence of the two communities and
public order, without recourse to emergency or artificial
measures. It is to this difficult but already long-standing
task that the representatives of the communities have
committed themselves in the resumed talks. Therefore we
hope that conditions that will make it possible to bring the
United Nations operation in Cyprus to an end will soon be
met and that real and lasting peace will be established in the
island.

100. It is a matter for disappointment also that there
seems to have been little progress in the field of military
deconfrontation, which, if it could be achieved even to a
limited extent, would by all accounts help to reduce
tensions and thus perhaps make possible some reduction of
the United Nations Force. It is to be hoped that some
progress in this direction can be made as a result of the
consultations foreshadowed in paragraph 93 of the report.
101, We note also that, while there has been a significant
increase in economic activity within each of the two
communities, there remains a marked disparity in the
respective degrees of progress attained by the Greek and
Turkish Cypriots and that economic and social contacts
between the two communities remain limited. In the light
of the continuing lack of confidence between the parties,
the best hope for progress towards a settlement of the
problems of Cyprus clearly lies in the intercommunal talks
that continue to take place, with the participation of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr, OsorioTafall, and the constitutional experts made available by the
Governments of Greece and Turkey,

97. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Let me begin by
saying that the frank and very comprehensive report
provided by the Secretary-General on the present state of
the United Nations operation in Cyprus has served to
persuade my delegation completely that, in the circumstances as described in that document, there is a continuing
need for the presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus and we have, accordingly, voted in support
of the draft resolution in document S/10946. We have in no
sensegiven our support uncritically, as what has sometimes
been called a matter of ritual, As the Secretary-General has
noted in paragraph 98 of his report, the Governments that
have been providing contingents for UNFICYP for the past
nine years, including my own Government, have been
somewhat uneasy at the growing length of the United
Nations commitment in Cyprus and at the delay in reaching
the settlement called for by the Council in March 1964. We
too would not want the continued and obviously beneficial
presence of UNFJCYP to come to be taken for granted as
indefinite as far as duration is concerned, particularly in
view of the mounting costs of the operation, as disclosed by
the Secretary-General. Accordingly, we note with satisfaction that the Secretary-General intends, in the light of
developments over the coming months, particularly in the
intercommunal talks, to make appropriate and, we hope,
comprehensive recommendations in the direction of economy in his next report to this Council. In any event, we
should certainly wish to see the total burden of costs shared
more equitably throughout the United Nations as a whole,

102. We can only urge the two parties to increase their
efforts to reach agreement, first of all on the broad
principles of a constitutional settlement that will take
account of the wishes and needs of all Cypriots, so that the
process of constitution-making on a balanced and viable
basis, in the words of the representative of Cyprus, can then
proceed, with a substantial measure of common understanding between the parties. It is gratifying that the
Special Representative has been able to report that the talks
have been taking place in a constructive manner and that
there appears to be a good possibility that a substantial
measure of agreement may be reached on questions of
principle, Since we have to accept that progress in this area
is bound to be slow and painful, we can only hope that the
Special Representative’s prediction that at least another
four months of discussions will be required does not prove
to lean too far in the direction of optimism. At any rate, we
can draw a measure of reassurance from the restrained,
responsible and generally optimistic tone of the statements
made here this morning by the representatives of Cyprus.
Turkey and Greece.
103. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to the
tireless, patient and dedicated efforts of the Special
Representative, my old friend and colleague Mr. OsorioTafall, and to the high qualities of leadership displayed by
the Commander of the United Nations Force, MajorGeneral Prem Chand.

98. In the meantime, we fully accept the SecretaryGeneral’s judgement that it is essential that the mandate of
the Force be maintained for a further limited period and
Australia, for its part, will continue for the next six months
to provide its police contingent at its existing strength and
its financial contribution to UNFICYP at its existing level.

104. Mr. ODEROJOWI

(Kenya): I have asked for the
floor to express very briefly 111~delegation’s appreciation

12

for the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
1 operation in Cyprus. The report itself gives a very comprea
hensive picture of the activities of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force for the period from 2 December 1972
to 31 May 1973. While much progress has been made in
fulfilling the mandate of the Force, in accordance with
resolution 186 (1964), “to use its best efforts to prevent a
recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to contribute to
the maintenance and restoration of law and order and a
return to normal conditions”, much still remains to be done
to bring the two communities into complete harmony once
again. Consequently, my delegation fully supports the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP for at least a further
period of six months; hence our vote in favour of draft
resolution S/10946. It is our hope that further progress in
the normalization of the situation will have been made to
,enable at least a substantial reduction, if not the withdrawal
of the Force at the expiration of the present extended term
of its duty.
105. My country enjoys the most cordial and happy
relations with Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, We are bound
together by a common aspiration to international peace and
security and by a common desire to enhance international
co-operation for mutual development through trade, technical collaboration
and cultural exchange, in order to
ensure prosperity and a good life for all our peoples.
106, In the case of Cyprus, our mutual ties are based on a
common struggle against colonialism, a struggle which
brought
their national leader and hero, President Makarios,
to the shores of our land as a prisoner and deportee of the
colonial system tt a time when our own President was also
a prisoner of the colonialists in a colonial gaol in our
country, Since the attainment of independence by both our
countries, the President of Cyprus had visited my country
more than four times to strengthen the political, cultural
and ecclesiastical ties between our two countries. We
co-operate and together strive for world peace and order in
the non-aligned movement. It is therefore my country’s
most sincere wish that peace, accord and tranquility be
vindicated in Cyprus now and at all times,

desire to see peace and prosperity fully restored to the
island.
108. My delegation believes that it is imperative that the
intercommunal talks be continued under the good offices
of the Secretary-General and his representative. To succeed,
however, there should be an atmosphere of mutual trust
and confidence on both sides and a determination to sink
their ethnic differences so as to build a common national
identity. My delegation believes that this is possible within
the framework of the concept of an independent, sovereign
and unitary State of Cyprus, within which the two
communities will play active roles for the betterment of all
the peoples of the island.
109. With mutual trust and confidence on both sides, the
fears which have been voiced by the Turkish Cypriots with
regard to the concept of a unitary State, and which are
mentioned in paragraph 81 of the report, need not arise.
My country, among many others in Africa, Asia and Latin
America, is composed of people of different races and
tribes, and yet it has been possible for all of us to live
together and form a nation which servesthe interests of all
the peoples, regardless of creed, race or ethnic origin. This
is not to diminish the real and complex problems in Cyprus,
but only to propose and to indicate that with goodwill and
the assistance of the United Nations Force, harmonious
relations can be created. Before that is possible, however,
the two communities must do al1 within their power to end
the artificial separation that now prevails in the island.
110. As a first step, complete freedom of movement for
civilians and the United Nations Force should be restored
throughout the island. That would facilitate the creation of
mutual confidence without security risks to either of the
two communities. Side by side with the restoration of
freedom of movement, the two communities should
deliberately embark on gradual island-wide military deconfrontation under the close supervision of the United
Nations Force. That would facilitate substantial reduction
of the United Nations presence, at least at the end of the
period of extension.
I I 1. I very much trust that these suggestions will be found
helpful in resolving the intercommunal conflicts in the
island of Cyprus, a nation which is so friendly to my own.

107. It would be presumptuous for Kenya, or any other
nation, to dictate to Cyprus how to go about its interual
affairs in order to achieve peace between the two communities on the island which make up the nation of Cyprus.
Whatever my delegation says here, therefore, should be
taken in the form of friendly advice motivated by our

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Se&ion. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or wrile to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dipositaires
du monde entier. Informcz-vous
auprbs de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
B : Nations
Units, Section ties ventes, New York ou GenCve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacionea
Unidas
e&An en venta en librerias
y casaa diatri.
buidoras
en todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unides. SeceiBn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-022

1 &January

19774,200
