SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 10
lOOelne et lOl~me seances
10 fevrier 1947

lOOth and lOlst meetings
10 February 1947

Lake Success

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MA1'IERES

One-hundredth meeting

Centieme seance
Pagl1

PageJ

39. Provisional agenda
173
40. Adoption of the agenda
, . . . . . .. 173
41. Cablegram from the Secretary of the
Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents . . . . . . . . .. 173

39. Ordre du jour provisoire
" 173
40. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
,. 173
41. Cablogramme envoye par le Secretaire
de la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents a la frontiere grecque
, 173

Hundred and flrst meeting

Cent-unieme seance

42. Continuation of the discussion of the
cablegram from the Secretary of the
Commission of Investigation concerning
Greek Frontier Incidents. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 185

4-2. Suite de la discussion du cablograrnme
envoye par le Secretaire de la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents a la
frontiere grecque
'" 185

Documents

Documents
Annex

The following documents relevant to the
one-hundredth and hundred and first meetings appear in Supplement No, 4, Second
Year:
Cablegram to the Secretary-General, dated
6 February 1947, from the Secretary of
the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents (document 8/266)
9
Letter from the representative of Greece to
the United Nations, addressed to the
Secretary-General, together with his
reply (document 8/271)
10

Annlfx/!J

Les documents suivants, se rapportant aux
centieme et cent unieme seances, figurent
au Supplement No 4, Deuxieme Annee:
C1\blogramme envoye au Secretaire general par le Secretaire de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents a la frontiere
grecque (document 8/266)

9

Lettre du representant de la Grece aux
Nations Unies adressee au Secretaire general et reponse de celui-ci (document
8/271)

10

185
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (transla'ted from Russian) : I also
have a proposal, but unfortunately the text is not
yet translated from Russian into English. The
translation is being made. Perhaps it would be
sutJicient to suspend the meeting for fifteen
minutes in order that the translation may be
prepared for distribution to members.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): If
there are no objections to the adjournment, we
shall meet again at 2.30 p.m.
T he meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'ai, moi
aussi, un projet de resolution a. presenter, mais,
malheureusement, le texte n'a pas encore ete
tracluit du russe en anglais. On est en train de le
traduire. Un quart d'heure suffirait sans doute
pour que la traduction puisse etre distribuee aux
membres du Conseil.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni):
Monsieur le President, je propose d'ajourner la
seance pendant l'heure du dejeuner. Il est possible que la traduction ne prenne que quinze
minutes, mais nous aurons probablement ensuite
une longue discussion.
Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'y a pas d'objections a
l'ajournement de la seance, nous la reprendrons
a 14 h. 30.
La seance est levee 13 h. 10.

HUNDRED AND FIRST MEETING

CENT-UNIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 10 February 1947, at 2.30 p.m.

Tenue aLake Success, New-York,
le lundi 10 fevrier 1947, a 14 h. 30.

Sir Alexander OADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Mr. President, I suggest we have an adjournment for lunch. It may be that the translation
will only take fifteen minutes, but presumably
we shall have a long discussion after that.

President:

Mr. M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE,
(Belgium).

a

President: M. M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants :
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, EtatsUnis d'Amerique.

42. Continuation of the discussion of the

42. Suite de la discussion sur le cablogramme envoye par le Secretaire de
la Commission d'enquete SUI" les incidents a la frontiere grecque

cabl'egram from the Secretary of the
Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents
The PRESIDENT : We resume the debate on
the cablegram from the Secretary of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents to the Secretary-General dated
6 February 1947.
You have before you the Polish amendment
and the Soviet amendment to the draft resolution submitted by the representative of the
United States.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I propose that we delete the last sentence of the text
of the United States resolution,t beginning with
the. words, "unless the Commission has reason
to believe . . ,'. and that we substitute for it
in the resolution the text which appears in the
draft just distributed by the Secretariat. I would
ask the members of the Security Council to
express their views on this amendment if they
wish to do so, and then we may put it to the
vote in due course.
The PRESIDENT: Since the French text of the
amendment submitted by the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has not
yet been distributed, I call upon an interpreter
to give us a French translation.
The USSR amendment, which had already
been distributed in English, was then read out
in French by an interpreter:
1

See page 176.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous reprenons la discussion
sur le ca.blogramme. en date du 6 fevrier 1947,
envoye au Secretaire general par le secretaire de
la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents a la
frontiere grecque.
Vous avez sous les yeux l'amendement de la
Pologne et l'amendement de I'URSS au projet
de resolution presente par le representant des
Etats-Unis.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Je propose
de supprimer le dernier membre de phrase de
la resolution des Etats-Unis1 commen<;ant par les
mots: "a mains que la Commission n'ait des
raisons de croire ..." et d'y substituer le texte
figurant dans le projet de resolution qui vient
d'etre distribue par le Secretariat. Je prierai les
membres du Conseil de bien vouloir exprimer
leur avis sur man projet d'amendement, s'ils
en ont le desir, afin qu'il puisse etre mis aux
voix ensuite.
Le PRESIDENT: Le texte fran<;ais de l'amendement du representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques n'ayant pas encore
ete distribue, je demande a un interprete de
nous en donner une traduction fran<;aise.
L'amendement de fURSS, dont le texte anglais a deja ite distribue, est lu en franfais par
un interprete:
, Voir page 176.

186

". . . and at the same time the Security
Council approves. the action of the Commission of Investigation consisting in the appeal
of the Commission to the Greek Government
with regard to the sentencing to death of a
group of political prisoners, as the question of
these persons, according to the reports received
from the Commission, is connected with its
work."

" ... le Conseil de securite approuvenean. moins la mesure prise par la Commission d'enqu~te consiStant a presenter un appel au Gauvernement grec au sujet de la condamnation a
mort d'un groupe de prisonniers politiques,
etant donne que, d'apres les rapports re~us
de la Commission, les questions relatives a ccs
personnes se rapportent a la tache de celle-ci."

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
. This amendment purports to suppress the last
paragraph of the United States resolution and
to substitute for it a new paragraph with an
entirely different sense. I cannot let the occasion
pass without expressing my disagreement.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): L'amendement propose tend
a supprimer le dernier paragraphe de la resolution presentee par les Etats-Unis et a le remplacer par un nouveau paragraphe d'un sens
tout a fait different. ] e me crois oblige, a cette
occasion, d'exprimer mon desaccord forme1.
L' amendemene present€ par la delegation de la
Pologne approuve categoriquement la demarche
deja faite par la Commission d'enqu~te et se
borne a lui conseiller la prudence dans l'avenir.
Il ne repond pas directement a la question de
savoir si son mandat l'autorisait a faire cette
demarche. En outre, je ne crois pas que le
Conseil de securite soit suffisamment renseigne
en la matiere pour exprimer une opinion sur la
question de savoir si, techniquement parIant, la
Commission a bien fait d'agir ainsi en ce qui
coneerne les personnes condamnees a mort auxquelles le Gouvemement hellenique a accorde un
sursis a la suite de cette demande officieuse.
Nous n'avons pas a nous prononcer sur le bienfonde de ces cas particuliers. A mon avis l le
Conseil ne dispose d'aucun renseignement qui
lui permette d'exprimer un jugement, bien que
le representant de l'URSS ait appele ces condamnes des heros. !lest possible qu'ils le soient,
mais, pour ma part, je n'en ai pas la preuve et
j'estime que nous devons eviter d'exprimer de
pareils jugements. 11 me serait done impossible
d'accepter cet amendement.

The amendmene proposed by the delegation
of Poland gives positive approval to the action
already taken by the Commission, and merely
exhorts it to proceed with caution in the future.
It does not answer the query directly as to
whether such action lies within its terms of reference. Furthermore, I do not think that this
Council has sufficient evidence before it to
e~press an opinion as to the technical propriety
of the Commission's actions with respect to these
particular individuals whose death sentences
were postponed by the action of the Greek
Government following this informal request. We
are not here to judge the merits of those
individual cases. In my opinion we have no
evidence on which to pronounce a judgment,
although the representative of the USSR has
qualified them as heroes. They may well be,
but I have not seen any evidence to that effect,
and I think we want to avoid passing such
judgments. I could not accept this amendment.

Mr. DE SOU ZA GOMES (Brazil) (translated
from French): I think it is somewhat contradic-

tory to keep the first sentence of the United
States resolution and use as the second sentence
the text just proposed by the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
In the United States resolution it is said
that, in the sense of the Security Council, the
Commission, acting under the resolution
adopted, is not empowered to request the appropriate Greek authorities to stay the execution
of persons condemned to death. But at the same
time we are. told: "The Security Council approves the action of the Commission." Thus in
the first sentence, there is almost a note of densure, while the second indicates approval of the
Commission's action. r do not see how the two
texts can be reconciled.
Speaking for my delegation, I may say that
we are not in a position to judge, for we have
no report at our disposal. Perhaps the representallve of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has s~en one; but I, for my part, have
no report which would enable me to form a fair
1

See page 184.

M. DE SOUZA GOMES (Bresil): festime qu'it
y a une certaine contradiction a garder la premiere phrase de la resolution des Etats-Unis
et de retenir, pour la deuxieme phrase, le texte
que vient de nous proposer le representant de
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Dans la resolution des Etats-Unis, il est dit
que le Conseil de securite est d'avis que la Commission, agissant conformement a la resolution
adoptee, n'est pas habilitee a demander aux autorites competentes de la Grece de surseoir a
l'execution de toute personne condamnee a. mort.
Ensuite on nousdit: "Le Conseil de securit€
approuve la mesure prise par la Commission
d'enquete." Ainsi, dans la premiere phrase, il
y a presque un bl~me et, dans la deuxieme
phrase, on approuve la conduite de la Commission. J e ne sais pas comment on peut coneilier les deux textes.
D'autre part-je parle pour ma deIegationnous ne sommes pas a meme de juger, car nous
ne sommes en possession d'aucun rapport. Peut~tre le representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques en possede-t-il un, mais,
pour ma part, je n'ai aucun rapport qui me per1

Voir page 184.

187

judgment of the Commission's action. It would
therefore be difficult for me to approve this
amendIl1ent.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): It is
true that the resolution adopted by the Security
Council does not empower the Commission to
make such a request to the Governments of
Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Yugoslavia as has in
this case been addressed to the Government of
Greece. Nor does the resolution of the Security
Council say that the Commission, when faced
with a specific situation in the course of its work,
cannot take certain measures which that situation calls for. The Commission did encounter
such a situation, however, and was obliged to
take certain measures on which the Security
Council is called to give its advice. This opinion
is particularly sought as the Commission was
appointed by the Security Council.

mette de juger exactement la conduite de la Commission. 11 me sera done difficile d'approuver
cet amendement.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Il est exact
que la resolution votee par le Conseil de securite
ne donne pas a la Commission le droit d' adresser
aux Gouvernements albanais, bulgare, grec et
yougoslave des requetes semblables a ceIle
qu'elle vient de presenter au Gouvernement grec.
Toutefois, la resolution du Conseil de sccurite
n'interdit pas non plus a la Commission, si
ceIle-d, an cours de ses travaux, se trouve en
presence d'une situation bien definie, de prendre
certaines mesures imposees par cette situation.
Or, c'est a une situation de cette nature que la
Commission a dO faire face; elIe a dO. prendre
certaines mesures sur lesquelles le Conseil de
securite est appele a donner son avis; ille doit
d'autant plus que son avis est sollicite par la
Commission qu'il a creee..
C'est pourquoi il n'y a pas de contradiction
de fond entre la premiere partie de la resolution
des Etats-Unis et I'amendement que j'ai propose.
Mon amendement dit simplement que, dans le
cas concret qui s'est presente, etant donne la
situation existant en Grece, la Commission a eu
raison d'adresser une requete au Gouvemement
grec en faveur d'un groupe de detenus politiques
condamnes a mort. J'estime done que mon
amendement ameliorerait beaucoup le texte de
la resolution primitive; s'il est adopte, je voterai
pour la resolution.
Mon amendement n'a pas encore ete Iu et .ie
comptais que le President en donnerait lecture.
M. Gromyko donne alors lecture du texte de
l'amendement del'URSS. 1
M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France): Si je comprends bien, la resolution des Etats-Unis comporte un double avertissement, l'un aI'adresse de
la Commission d'enquete, l'autre a l'adresse du
Gouvernement heIlenique.

Therefore, there is no contradiction in substance between the first part of the United States
resolution and the amendment which I have
proposed, because my amendment states that,
in this specific case, present circumstances being
what they are in Greece, the Commission acted
tightly in making its request to the Greek Government with regard to a group of political
prisoners under sentence of death. Therefore I
consider that my amendment would greatly improve the resolution, and, should it be adopted,
the resolution would receive my support.
I had hoped that the President would read my
amendment, but this has not been done.
Mr. Gromyko then read out the text of the
USSR amendment. 1
Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from French): If I understand it correctly, the
United States resolution contains a double warning: to the Commission
Investigation on the
one hand, and to the Greek Government on the
other.
A la Commission d'enquete, la resolution rapThis resolution reminds the Commission of
Investigation that it has no right to interfere in pelle qu'elle n'a aucune qualite pour s'immiscer
the internal affairs of Greece. It reminds the dans les affaires intetieures de la Grece. Au
Greek Government that the Commission of In- Gouvernement he1Ienique, cette resolution rapvestigation has been empowered to interrogate pelle que la Commission d'enquete a re<;;u des
all persons whose testimonies are necessary for pouvoirs forme1s lui permettant d'interroger
the accomplishment of its mission. It is quite toutes les personnes dont les temoignages sont
obvious that the testimony of political prisoners necessaires pour l'execution de sa mission. Il est
may be of extrerp.e importance for the Commis- . bien evident que le temoignage de d6tenus polision of Investigation by revealing to it informa- tiques peut etre extremement important pour la
tion on the motives of individuals who have been Commission d'enquete et peut lui donner des
arrested, on the men who lead them and on their informations sur les mobiles des individus arretes,
place of origin. It is therefore desirable to point sur les gens qui les commandent, sur les lieux d'ou.
out to the Greek Government that the Commis- ils viennent. 11 est par consequent desirable \de
sion {)f Investigation has the authority to inter- faire remarquer au Gouvernement hellenique que
rogate these persons, and that it ought also to la Commission d'enquete a le pouvoir d'interroger
provide the Commission with every facility for ces personnes, et qu'il doit atissi lui donner tontes
doing so.
facilites pour le faire.

of

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We can now proceed to vote. I first of all put
to the vote the amendment proposed by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
I

See page 186.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous pouvons a present
passeI' au vote. Je mets tout d'abord aux· voix
I'amendement du representant de 1'Union des
RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques, qui est celui
I

Voir page 186.

IBB
Republics, which is the amen~I:?-ent farthest
removed in substance from the ongmal proposal.
A vote was then taken by show of hands, and
the Union at Soviet Socialist Republics amendment was rejected by nine votes to one, with one
abstention.

qui s'ecarte le plus, quant au fond, de la proposition originale.
On procede au vote main levee. L'amendement de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques est rejete par neu! voix eontre une,
avee une abstention.

a

Votes tor:
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

V otent pour:
Union -des Republiques socialistes sovietiques

Votes against:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
China
Colombia
France
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America

Votent contre:
Australie
Be1gique
Bresil
Chine
Colombie
France
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

Abstention:
Poland

S'abstient:
Pologne

Le PRESIDENT: Nous passons au vote sur
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote on the amendment proposed 1'amendement presente par le representant de la
Pologne.
by the representative of Poland.
On procede au vote il main levee. L'amendeA vote was then taken by show of hands, and
the Polish amendment was rejected by seven votes ment de la Pologne est rejete par sept voix
contre deux, avec deux abstentions.
to two, with two abstentions.
Votes tor:
France
Poland

Votent pour:
France
Pologne

Votes against:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Colombia
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America

Votent eontre:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Colombie
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d' Amerique

Abstentions:
China
Un,ion of Soviet Socialist Republics

S' abstiennent:
Chine
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (transldted from Russian): I wish
to explain that I abstained from voting on the
Polish amendment because, although it makes
a slight improvement in the text of the resolution,
it does not improve it sufficiently to enable me to
consider it acceptable.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je desire
preciser la raison de mon abstention dans le vote
sur l'amendement polonais. Bien que celui-ci
ameliore dans une certaine mesure le texte de
la resolution, il ne l' am€liore pas suffisamment
pour que je puisse lui accorder mon vote.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
take note of the statement made by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
I· put to the vote the whole of the proposal
submitted by the United States delegation.

Le PRESIDENT: Je prends acte de la declaration du representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.
Je mets aux voix l'ensemble de la proposition
presentee par la delegation des Etats-Unis.

A vote Was then taken by show of hands, and
the United States resolution was adopted by nine
votes to nil, with two abstentions.

On f)Tocede au vote
main levee. La resolution des Etats-Unis est adoptee par neuf voix,
avee deux abstentions.

a

189
Votes tor:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
China
Colombia
France
Syria
United Kingdom
United States of America

Votent pour:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Chine
Colombie
France
Syrie
Royaume-Uni
Etats-Unis d'Amerique

V otes against:

V otent contre:
Neant

Nil
Abstentions:
Poland
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
propose that the Commission be informed by
cable of the result of the vote, and that the
verbatim record of the present meeting be communicated to it for its information.
The proposal was adopted.
The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.

S'abstiennent:
Pologne
Union des Republiqucs socialistes sovietiques

Le PRESIDENT: Je propose que le resultat du
vote soit parte teIegraphiquement a la connaissance de la Commission et que le proces-verbal
de la presente seance soit transmis .a celle-ci pour
information.
La proposition est adoptee.
La seance est levee

a15 h. 10.
