Y

UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2294”’

MEETING:

30 JULY

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2294) . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

,,...,..,,.,...~,,,.,,,.,..,,,,,..........,,....

1

Letter dated 1 September 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Malta
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14140) . ..I........,..,...,......,,.,.....,,.*..*.,......I.....*

1

SIPV.2294 and Corr. 1 and 2

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rppk~orrs of the Ojpcitrl R~wmls ctf rltr Scctrrirp Cormd.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rrsolrrfiom
mtd
Dwisicm
cd the Smtrity
Corrkl. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2294th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 30 July 1981, at 12.35 pm.
representative
of Malta; S/14176,containinga letter
dated 16 Septemberfrom the representativeof the
Prwwt:
The representatives of the following States: Libyan Arab Jamahiriya;S/14181andS/14217,conChina, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland, tainingletters dated 19 Septemberand 13 October
of Malta; S/14228,
containinga
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain, fromtherepresentative
to
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Repub- letter dated17Octoberfrom the Secretary-General
the Presidentof the Security Council;S/14229,conlics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
taininga letter dated22 Octoberfrom the President
Ireland, United States of America.
of the Security Council to the Secretary-General:
Provislonal
agenda (S/Agenda/2294)
S/14256,
containinga reportby the Secretary-General
of 13Novemberon the missionof hisSpecialRepresentativeto Malta andthe Libyan Arab Jamahiriya;
1. Adoptionof the agenda
S/14331,
containing
a letterdated14January1981from
2. Letterdated1September
1980
fromthePermanent the representativeof the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya;
Representative
of Malta to the United Nations S/14332andS/14343,containinglettersdated15Janof Malta;
addressed
to thePresident
of theSecurityCouncil uliry and23January,fromthe representative
S/14344,containinga letter dated21Januaryfromthe
(S/14140)
representative
of theLibyanArabJamahiriya;S/14348,
S/14357,
S/14375
andS/14498,
containinglettersdated
27January,2 February,17Februaryand3 Junefrom
Adoptionof theagenda
the representativeof Malta; S/14519,containinga
letter dated II Junefrom the representativeof the
The agenda was adopted.
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya:and S/14558,containinga
letter dated18Junefrom therepresentative
of Malta.
Letter dated 1 September
1980 fkom the Permanent
4. I nowcall on the Secretary-General.
Representative
of Malta to the United Nations adPresident:

dressed
W14140)

to the

Mr. Id6 OUMAROU (Niger).

President

of the Security

Council

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:After the submissionlast Novemberof my report to the Security
Councilon the missionof my SpecialRepresentative
1. The PRESIDENT(intcrprctation
from Frerrchj:
to Maltaandto the LibyanArabJamahiriya[S//4256],
In accordance
with decisionstaken at the 2246th I receiveda letter dated14Januaryof this year from
meeting,on 4 September1980,whenthe Security the representative
of Libya [S//433/] informingme
Councilbeganits consideration
of the presentagenda that the BasicPeople’sCongresses
had decidedto
item, I invite the representatives
of Malta and the ratify the specialagreement
signedby the two parties
LibyanArab Jamahiriya to takeplacesat the Security
in 1976and to submitthe delimitationcaseto the
Counciltable.
InternationalCourtof Justice,providedthat nodrilling
in the disputedareawasalloweduntil the Court had
reachedits decision.
2. The PRESIDENT~htwpwtct/iorl

from

6. Sincethat time, my representativeand 1 have
maintained
closecontactwith bothpartieswith a view

Frolch):

to assisting them in finalizing the exchange of instru-

Members of the Council bave before them a letter

mentsof ratificationand thejoint notificationto the
Court, asprovidedfor in thespecialagreement.

dated21 July 1981from the representative
of Malta
addr,:ssed to the President of the Security Council
[s/Mm].

7. In late March, following my representative’s
suggestions,
a delegationfrom Libya visited Malta
for the purposeof concluding those formalities. Dis-

3. I should like to draw members’ attention also to the
following documents distributed since the Council’s
cussions between the parties were held, but they were
last meeting on this item [2246r/1 mcctirrg]:
S/14170, inconclusive, and subsequent efforts to conclutie the
containing a letter dated 11 September 1980 from the
pendingformalitieshavenot sofar bornefruit.

1

8. Malta has taken the position that the oreserlce
in the instrument of ratification presented by-Libya of
what it considers to be imolicit conditions reeardine
the question of drilling is’ unacceptable. LiLya fey
its part has stated that its instrument of ratification,
while referring to the People’s Congresses as the
highest authority which is competent to ratify international agreements, does not contain any additions or
amendments to the special agreement.
9. A number of communications addressed by the
two parties in this connection to the President of the
Security Council or to mvself have been circulated as
documents of the Cou&l. In a letter addressed to
me on 2 July. the Chara d’affaires of Malta reiterated
his Government’s po&ion that the instruments of
ratification could not contain any conditions and
requested me to ascertain whether Libya would be
prepared to give an assurance to that effect. On that
&&ion, however, Malta also stated that the question
of whether either side would drill in the disputed
areas while the case was pending before the court
was a separate legal issue on which the two parties
were entitled to have and even express different
views.
10. I immediately conveyed this information to the
Libyan side and also urged the parties to try again to
overcome the obstacles and to conclude the formalities.
My representative suggested to the parties that, on the
basis of Malta’s statement on the question of drilling,
procedural ways and means could be found to overcome the difficulties that had arisen.
Il. In a letter addressed to my representative on
IS July, Libya reiterated its position on the pending
questions, expressed the view that the existing obstacles were essentially procedural and further expressed
its readiness to send a special envoy to Malta with a
view to eliminating those obstacles and facilitating
existing efforts. That message was immediately
conveyed to Malta. The Govt%nment of Malta aicepted the visit of a special envoy in a letter dated
I7 July 1981.
12. I was informed that, following those exchanges,
a special envoy of Libya was scheduled to visit Malta
on 19 July. Certain misunderstandings apparently
ensued concerning the actual intentions behind the
meeting. Malta then requested the convening of a
meeting of the Security Council [S//45Y5].
13. In the meantime, I renewed my appeal to the
parties to give the consultations a chance, and a delegation from Libya arrived in Malta on 23 July. I was
informed that the special envoy of Libya and the
Foreign Secretary of Malta held meetings on 27 and
28 July. On 28 July, the ChargC d’affaires of Malta
informed my representative that the meetinghad been
inconclusive and that the Libyan special envoy had
returned to Tripoli. The Libyan ChargC d’affaires said
that at the meeting the parties had considered various

alternatives for resolving the pendingissues. He added
that the special envoy had returned to Tripoli for the
purpose of holding consultations and that he intended
to return to Malta for further discussions.
14. I shall continue to follow the situation carefully
and shall remain in contact with the parties. I trust
that the two sides will make renewed efforts in order
to overcome the existing difficulties.
15. The PRESIDENT (itttrrpwtrrtiott
frottt French):
The first speaker is the representative of Malta. on
whom I now call.
16. Mr. FARRUGIA (Malta): Mr. President, I should
like first of all to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council andto express
my gratitude for the assistance and sympathetic
consideration you have invariably extended to my
delegation.
17. I take this opportunity also to express my thanks
and appreciation to Mr. MuAoz Ledo of Mexico, who
presided over the deliberations of the Council last
month and who is now acting as the co-ordinator of the
non-aligned members of the Council.
18. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Diego Cordovez, for
the interest they have invariably shown in the resolution of the problem between Libya and my country.
19. It is not my purpose today to repeat the factual
information which I have previously given. All the
relevant details and documentation concerning
Malta’s continuing dispute with Libya, together with
my Government’s comments thereon, are already
formally before the Council, in particular as condensed
in my letter to the Council dated 13 October 1980
[S/142/7].
20. Rather, it is my intention on this occasion to
endeavour to project a clear perspective on the situation as it has since evolved and to draw the minimum
conclusions which I feel confident all members of the
Council would subscribe to.
21. In August 1980,Malta felt duty bound to bring to
the attention of the Council a grave and threatening
situation. The nature of the incident needs to be recalled starkly, because it clearly required immediate
attention from the Council.
22. The Government of Libya, without any advance
notification to the Government of Malta, was blatantly
and unexpectedlv using the threat of force against
Malta by sending naval units armed with missiles
against an unarmed oil rig. That action was designed
to prevent Malta from carrying out its inherent right to
exploit the natural resources lying in an off-shore area.
Those resources were situated well within Malta’s
own side of the median!ine between the two countries,

and the exploration was therefore in clear compliance
with international law and practice. Despite Libyan
denials of the incident, I would recall that it was
witnessed and that the threatening warships were
photographed and identified by nationals of other
countries working on the rig. That evidence was submitted to, and remains before, the Security Council.
23. The armed threat was and still is the essential
justification for Malta’s recourse to the Council, and
it is a point that the Council cannot ignore. At that
time, force was actually concentrated in one area to
impose Libya’s illegal position. Resort to the same
threat, should future occasions arise, is still implied.
That is the underlying theme that I wish to stress, since
it has constantly pervaded the recent Libyan attitude
in its relations with Malta on this question.

29. Thirdly, therewasthe clearimplicationthat the
samemethodswouldbeappliedby Libya asoftenas
necessary
shouldfutureoccasionarise.
30. Fourthly, it wasevidentnot only that Libya had
no legallyfoundedrightsover the areain whichMalta
had carriedout its explorationactivities but that it
did not evenhaveany moralrightto claimthe areaas
beingin dispute.Libya hadnot only lostthat claimby
failingfor over five yearsto ratify a bilaterallynegotiatedagreement
to refer the caseto the International
Court, presumably
because
it reaiizedit did not have
a legalleg to standon, but had not even informed
Malta’scontractorsthat the areain which they were
drillingwasin dispute,TheareaLibya indicatedto the
contractorswaswell to the southof the drilling iocation.

24. In my statement to the Council of 4 September
1980(2246th sessiort] we outlined the history of the
dispute between the two countries over the continental
shelf and the series of painstaking efforts, spread over
nearly a decade, undertaken by Malta to resolve the
matter in a peacefulway, first through bilateral negotiations, and subsequently, when that failed to produce
positive results, through friendly good ofices. Among
the efforts contemplated was the drawing up and
ratification of an agreementto bring the dispute to the
International Court of Justice for adiudication. In
conformity with its constitutional pro&sions, Malta
immediatelyratified the agreement in 1976.UP to the
timeof thearmedconfront%ion
Libyahadnotdoneso.
To thisvery day, on onepretextor another,Libya is
continuingandwill continueto find oneexcuseafter
anothernot to do so.

31. And.tlnaiiv.therewasthefact thatLibya notonly
hadimmense
wealthproducedfromoil wellsonitsland
but alsohaddrilledunhindered
some30wellsoffshore
in the seaseparating
the two States.As in the caseof
Libya, dozensof other countriessimilarlyoperate
hundredsof offshore rigs throughoutthe world.
But, in remarkable
contrast,unarmedandtiny Malta,
whichis completelydependent
on importedoil for its
economiclivelihood, was forcibly preventedfrom
carryingouttheoneandonly activity it hadlegitimately
authorized.It is manifestthat Libya doesnot want
Malta to drill, andit isequallymanifest
that it wantsto
imposeits will by fair meansor foul.

26. In the first instance,Libya wasactingin violationof Article 2 of the Charterof the UnitedNations,
in particularwherethat Article emoinsMembersto
refrainfrom the threat or useof force in their internationalrelations.It had, moreover,createda situation whichconstituteda threatto peacein the Mediterranean.

33. Conversely,Malta’sexerciseof self-restraintin
having recourseto good offices and tinally to the
Security Councilwasin line with my Government’s
firm commitment
to internationalandregionalpeace
andsecurity,to respectfor the sovereigne&ality of
all States,andto the principlesof the Charter.

32. Thosefactors combinedcould leadto no conclusionotherthanthat Libya’sfundamental
objective
infrustratingMalta’soil-exploration
effortswasto seek
to maintaina positionof economicdominanceover
25. The facts, which were clearly evident at the its smallneighbour
in a mannerthatis, to saythe least,
time of the armedthreat to peaceand security and unworthy of a goodneighbour,an allegedfriend, a
thereforerelevantto the SecurityCouncil’sdeiiber- Memberof the UnitedNationsanda memberof other
ationsin Augustof last year, wereasfollows.
regionalor internationalorganizations.

34. On 1 September1980and on numeroussub27. Secondly,it wasevidentfromthefactssubmitted sequentoccasions,my Governmentpatiently but
thatLibya’sdirectobjectivewasatail coststo prevent persistentlypointedout to the Counc11
the continuing
Malta from exercisingits right to exploit its natural threat to peacearisingout of Libya’s illegalactions.
resources.When delaying tactics, hidden behind Urgentlyandunequivocally,the unarmedandneaceemptyprotestations
of friendship,provedineffective, loving Republicof Malta requestedail the proiection
Libya did not hesitateopenlyto threatenthe useof at thedisposal
of the SecurityCouncilin the confident
forcein orderto accomplish
its objective.
expectationthat, at leastby-rulingthat Libya should
desistfrom makingfurther provocativethreatsand
28, in this connectionit shouldbe stressed
that at from takingany menacing
actions,the Councilwould
that time every indicationwas given that, had the defusethe situationandallow normalpeacefulactivthreatandarmedconcentration
of forcenot succeeded itiesto proceedwithoutillegalharassment.
in its immediate
objectiveof stoppingMalta’speaceful
activities, actual force would have been usedby 35. Our unhesitantand immediaterecourseto the
Libya. On that occasionthe threatprevailed.
Council, togetherwith the clear legitimacyof out

40. Later in his report, the Secretary-General also
expressed his confidence that the submission of the
delimitation case to the International Court of Justice
would bring about an improvement of relations between the two countries. That comment was made in
the light of Malta’s position, as explained in paragraph 6 of the report, to the effect that

case, gab: the international community a rare and
valuable opportunity to forestall a potentially grave
situation at its inception and to safeguard fundamental
principles embodied in the Charte,: and cherished by
all peace-loving nations.
36. That opportunity was not seized by the Council
at the time. It decidedonly to grant Libya time to study
Malta’s complaint, as if Malta’s complaint was f&r
Libya something new and unheard-of, when in fact the
armed threat was Libya’s final, belligerent answer to
eight years of patient negotiations.

“Malta wished to enter into negotiations with the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya whereby drilling operations in the disputed area, pending the decision of
the Court, would be discussed. It wished such
discussions to be conducted, not in the legalcontext
of delimitationissues but within the framework ofthe
traditional co-operation and understanding between
the two countries.”

37. The unfortunate hesitation of the Security Council
to take early action on Malta’s complaint in the face
of clear and indisputable evidence of the Libyan threat
to use force was-not one of the Council’s most imag
inative acts. I say that without animosity but with
regret, because 1. felt that what the cir&mstances
required at that time, and what was vital for the preservation of peace, and what Malta was anxiously
seeking, was for the Council, as the supreme organ of
the United Nations, in its collective wisdom and with
its au’horitative voice, to request a solemn assurance
from Libya that it would not harass or threaten with
force peaceful and unarmed activities being carried
out in accordance with international law and practice.

41. I have quoted from the report not only because it
was addressed to the Security Council but also because
it gives an objective and independently arrived at
perception of the situation. To be quite precise, the
Secretary-General’s representative, in drafting his
report, was not in a position to check the facts as given
to him by Libya to the same extent and in the same way
that he &as able to check those given to him by Malta,
since his itinerary included Libya as the final ston. MY
Governmentsought,for the &cord, to rectify-somk
inadvertentinaccuracies
whichhad inevitablyarisen
in the report, throughprivate correspondence
with
the Secretary-General,and we have received an
official reply.

38. Yet, despite our disappointm:nt at the hesitancy
of the Council and notwithstanding our uneasy perception that Libya’s unswerving -objective was to
grasp at any pretext further to delay fulfilment of
Malta’s economically vital and completely legitimate
aspirations, the Government of Malta, in further
manifestation of its commitment to a peaceful solution, immediately expressed its gratitude for the
initiative of the Secretary-General and agreed to his
proposal to send a Special Representative to the two
cotintries to assist in the search for a mutually acceptable solution. At :he same time, Malta did not hide its
concern that, in spite of protestations to the contrary,
Libya would attempt to utilize the Secretary-General’s
proposal for the purpose of further delaying a solutica. Our misgivings have been proved right.

42. Regrettably,it now emergesthat the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriyahas derived encouragement
from,
andis trying to take advantageof, the delayby the
Council,for it hasraisedits demands
to anevenhigher
level of absurdity.
43. Libya evenhasthe audacityto masquorade
as
theaggrievedparty. It is sending
blandandconflicting
messages
to the Councilwhileactingwith an ironfist
inits relationswith Malta. It is evenattemptingto cast
doubtsand to exerciserestrictionson the necessary
roleof the SecurityCouncilin helpingto resolvethe
disputein accordance
with theCouncil’sresponsibility
asthe guarantorof peaceandsecurity.

39. The commendably brief but comorehensive
report of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative appeared on 13 November 1980 lS1142561.
With parti&lar reference to the question oi hringiig
the delimitation dispute before the International
Court of Ju?-tice,the report states, in its paragraph 5,
that:
“the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has undertaken unconditionally to submit the original text ofthe agreement
to the Popular Congresses for ratification during
their current session, which is scheduled to conclude
on 22 November, with a view to exchanging the
instruments of ratification and for.mulatingthe joint
notification to the Registrar of the International
Court of Justice.”

44. Libya is continuingits delayingtacticsevenon
proceduralmatters,questioning,for instance,the
obviousadvantage
of settlingin onemeetingboththe
questionof theexchange
of instruments
of r&cation
andthatof theletterof transmittalto the International
Courtof Justice,in accordance
with the undertakings
whichLibya hasgivento the SecurityCouncil.These
undertakingsare being constantly and incomprehensibly contradictedby the Libyan authorities.
It hasalsocarriedoutotherformsofharassment
against
Malta,includinganunexplained
banonMalta’sexports
to Libya, whichwassubsequently
lifted on 31March
1981.
45. The latest Libyan responses
containedin the
lettersdated I4 and 21 January 1981[3//433/ N&

A

S//4344], and subsequent ones received bilaterally,
not only came well after the indicated deadline but,
unfortunately, also justified Malta’s concern and
apprehensions, founded on bitter experience, regarding
the sincerity of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

condition and the current tactics pre-empt the Prospects of improvement which the Secretary-General
himself, as well as Libya and the Security Council,
understood as being related to Malta’s wish to enter
into negotiations whereby drilling operations would
amicably and equitably be discussed pendinga decision
by the Court and subject to any such decision.

46. The Security Council is now in a position to
recognize that, whereas the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
had undertaken unconditionally to submit the original
text of the agreementto the People’s Congresses for
ratification, a new and unilaterally imposed condition has been dictated by Libya, namely, “that no
drilling in the disputed area will be allowed until the
Court has concluded its consideration of the matter”
[S/1433/]. That constitutes a serious and objectionable
unilateral departure from the commitment given to
the Security Council; it also constitutes an unacceptable amendment to the original agreement, which
Malta had laboriously negotiated in all honesty five
long years before in the legitimate expectation that
unconditional ratification would immediately follow.

51. On this last question my Government has made
a public declaration before this Council which is
eminently just, but it seems once more to have fallen
on ears which deliberately do not wish to hear.
52. At this stage it is hardly conceivable that Libya
can be allowed further to camouflage its unfriendly
intentions towards Malta by resorting to additional
delaying tactics. The Security Council cannot but
draw the inevitable conclusions regarding Libya’s
neighbourly and regional aspirations. These, evidently,
are not difficult to perceive.
53. In spite of the fact that Libya knew all along that
a conditioned instrument of ratification would be
unacceptable to Malta, a delegationof the Jamahiriya
visited Malta in March of this year purportedly to
exchange the instruments of ratification. The purpose
of the visit was obviously to gain time and to provide
the necessary excuses to delay a pronouncement by
the SecuritgrCouncil.

47. Again I recall here that Malta immediately
ratified the 1976agreementand Libya failed to do so.
As is known, my Government had ail alongstrenuously
opposed persistent attempts by Libya for over four
y&s to amend the agreement.-Even-then, Libya had
not specified that a condition of this nature should be
spelldd out.
48. For one of the parties to the agreement uniiateraliy to enunciatethis new condition at this late stage
-over five years after the original signing of the
agreement-is completely unacceptable to Malta.
Despite a flurry of energetic activity by Malta, in full
co-operation with the Secretary-General’s representative, this essential point is not resolved. For
instance, we asked for the good offices of the Secretary-General’s representative in obtaining agreement
in advance to the texts of the necessary documents.
We sent advancedrafts to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
prepared with the expert assistance of the Secretariat.
To none of these initiatives have we even had an
acknowiedgemeut, let alone a positive response. This
intentional prevarication, viewed against the background of a decade of delaying tactics deployed by
Libya and the threat of force demonstrated and still
constantly implied, admits of no other explanation
but that of sheer and deliberate bad faith.

54. The latest in the series of Libyan tactics aimed
at stopping Malta from exploiting its continental shelf
unfolded during the course of this month. Malta proposed that the Libyan instruments of ratification should
not contain any reference to conditions on drilling and
that the question of drilling was a separate legal issue
on which both sides had the right to have and to express
different opinions-a proposal which led Assistant
Secretary-General Diego Cordovez to reply: “In my
view, procedural ways and means could on that basis
be worked out in order to find a solution to the existing
problem.”
55. In deference to Mr. Cordovez’s opinion that the
Libyan su estion of sending a high-level special
envoy to d50scuss all matters related to the obstacles
that stilI exist for submission of the delimitation case
to the Court would enhance the possibilities of a
definite solution, the Malta Government agreed to
enter into discussions with the Libyan special envoy.

49. Libya’s bad faith is now therefore manifested
not only in respect of Malta but also in respect of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General.

56. Instead of a high-level special envoy, Libya sent
to Malta a delegationheadedby a university professor.
They arrived in Malta on 23 July and had discussions
on 27 and 28 July. That delegation had only one purpose in mind: namely, to state that Libya would not
remove the condition on drilling.

SO. What is even worse is the consideration that the
new unilateral condition introduced by Libya, and its
continuing obstructive tactics, destroy the confidence
instilled in the Security Council as a result of the
Secretary-General’s report to the effect that unconditional submission to the international Court of
Justice would bring about an improvement of relations
between the two countries; on the contrary, the new

57. It is evident that Libya does not want a legal
solution. Libya is fully aware that Malta madea declaration to the Secretary-General on 2 January 1981,in
conformity with the provisions of Article 36 of the
5

Statute of the International Court of Justice, accepting
as compulsory “ipso fircto”, without special convention, without the condition of reciprocity and
without reservation, the jurisdiction of the Court on
any dispute relating to the delimitation of its contihental shelf. Libya is, however, refusing to challenge
Malta’s contention in court. It prefers to leave the legal
issue undefined and send destroyers to stop Malta
from drilling.

first time in history that a peace-loving State has had
recourse to the supreme body of the Organization
against oppressive tactics adopted by elements in the
international community which, knowingly or unknowingly, ignore the growth of tension and the potential
for conflict arising from their aggressive action.

58. Libya’s intention is crystal clear. By fair means
and foul, it has stopped Malta from drilling for five
whole years. It is now seeking to impose a further
three-year delay in Maltese drilling until the Court
awards a judgement. Even in the unlikely event that
oil is struck on the morrow, commencement of production would take a further five to six years. This is
Libya’s aim-namely,
to delay Malta’s economic
development by at least 14 years.

64. Malta has tenaciously striven to maintain its
freedom from the corrosive influences of such elements. Our sharp awareness of the dangers involved
is heightened perhaps by our historical experience,
since for centuries our little island was utilized as a
tool of aggression by powerful nations. Our hard-won
complete independence is of recent origin, but we are
irrevocably committed to its maintenance. We will
undertake all necessary measures in fulfilment of this
objective, and we continue to rely on the protection and
support of the international community in our openly
honest endeavours.

59. That this is the aim of Libya can be deduced
from the fact that, if Malta starts drilling on the day
that the instruments are exchanged, by the time the
Court pronounces itself it would be physically impossible for Malta to have started production. Whatever
might be the award, whoever would have the legal
ownership of the area would be the only one to benefit
from the work done.

65. As a further token of our good faith, my Government once again declares that it remains willing to
have any claim which the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya may
put forward examined and decided on by the International Court of Justice. Malta’s declaration of 23 January, to which I have made reference, amply illustrates
that Malta is prepared to abide by the jurisdiction of
the Court.

60. In August last year, the members of the Security
Council may not have been aware of Libya’s uncompromising attitude on the continental shelf dispute with
Malta. Today they can judge for themselves, not only
on the merits of Malta’s complaint but also on the
unsatisfactory way Libya has responded to the initiative of the Secretary-General and the Council. On
this occasion, in its attitude both towards Malta and
now towards the Security Council, Libya has turned
the method of procrastination into a fine art, thereby
gaining time for its manifest determination to hold
Malta’s future in jeopardy.

66. To sum up, Libya has no justifiable claim over
the area which it refuses to define but conveniently
claims as being disputed: Libya is acting against international law and practice: Libya has used force and
continues to threaten to do so; Libya is violating the
principles of the Charter and of international law and
is now prevaricating before the Council so as to continue to deny Malta its inherent rights.
67. Conversely, Malta acts in accordance with international law and practice and in conformity with its
obligations as a peace-loving Member of the United
Nations. Over a frustrating period of almost 10 years,
it has expended tremendous resources in efforts to
reach an equitable solution with Libya which will
safeguard Malta’s economic and political interests.
Our plans for economic development have been
severely dented by Libya’s attitude.

61. For its part, Malta will now have to consider very
seriously and with a minimum of self-imposed delay the
options open to us to safeguard our legitimate interests
and our sovereignty, as well as t; e interests of regional
peace and stability, in the face of the irresponsible and
threatening attitude adopted by Libya,

68. But still, in the face of delay and provocation,
Malta has honourably exercised maximum selfrestraint. In the midst of a turbulent region it confidently relies on the protection of the Security Council,
while safeguarding its inherent right to utilize other
legitimate options open to it, should the Council fail
to respond. Certainly, Malta does not expect to be
faced with perpetual inaction. Let no one underestimate the seriousness with which we look on this
question and our determination to uphold our sovereign
rights.

62. But Malta still seeks the protection of the Security Council as the preferred way to enable it to pursue
its legitimate rights. We remain convinced that a pronouncement by the Council safeguarding Malta’s rights
to exploit its offshore resources and enjoining Libya
to desist from provocative threats and menacing
actions constitutes the basic, just and incontrovertible
element essential for a peaceful solution to the problem.
63. Despite other options open to us, my Government
continues to exercise self-restraint. I remain before the
Council, even today, seeking on behalf of my Government a peaceful resolution ofthe dispute. This is not the

69. Once again, Malta respectfully but anxiously
calls on the members of the Council to exercise the
6

powers given to them by the Organization-that
is, on
the evidence
before them-to
condemn
Libya.
first,
for its show of force in August 1980. which could have
led to international
hostiliiies
in atl.already
explosive
Mediterranean:
and, secondly,
for going back on its
undertaking
to the Secretary-General
Irc~ S//4256) to
go to the International
Court of Justice as per the 1976
agreement
signed by the two Governments,
and to urge
Libya not to perpetrate
further acts of molestation
and
not to take the law into its own hands.
70. Just as it cherishes
its obligations
to the Organization.
so does Malta hold eauallv
dear its resuonsibilities and its rights as a s&all nation and people.
We feel it is high time that the Security
Council pronounced
itself on this question
of vital concern
to
Malta, to the Mediterranean,
to the principle?. of the
United Nations and to oc’r continued
membership
of
the Organization.

lative system
practice.

and conforms

to internationa!

law and

75. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has once again sent
a delegation
to Malta, with the aim of eliminating
the
obstacles
still hampering
the conclusion
of the procedures of exchanging
the instruments
of ratification.
On 27 and 28 July, negotiations
between the two sides
were conducted
at the Ministry
of Foreign
Affairs of
Malta, where a recognition
was made of the details of
the problems
related to the exchange
of instruments
of ratification
and the Maltese
position
regarding
them. This position was expressed
in a paper presented
by Malta, which included
the following:
first, elimination of references
to the resolutions
and recommendations of the Basic People’s Congresses
in the Libyan
instrument
of ratification.
and, secondly,
freedom
by
both parties
to express
their positions
in letters
exchanged
regarding
drilling in the disputed area.

71. The PRESIDENT
tinterprerrrtim
frotu
Frcwh):
The nexl speaker is the representative
of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya,
on whom I now call.

76. This phase of the negotiations
was concluded
with
the hope that other phases would continue
after the
foregoing
two points had been studied by the concerned authorities
in Libya.

72. Mr.
QUATEEN
(Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya):
Mr, President.
I wish to express the gratitude
and
appreciation
of my country
for the efforts made by
the Secretary-General
and his special envoy, Mr. Cordovez. I also wish to thank you and the other members
of the Security Council for your fine perception
of the
Libyan position.

77. The sending
of a Libyan
delegation
to Malta
two consecutive
times within a period of five months is
further
evidence
of Libya’s
genuine desire to resolve
the dispute and to conclude
the delayed
procedures.
Regrettably,
the creation of obstacles has always been
the mark of the Government
of Malta.

73. I have the honour to reiterate,
before the Council,
what the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya
has conveyed
in
previous
letters and in a statement
before this body
[22461/r mvthg]
concerning
its genuine
wish and
commitment
to conclude the exchange
of instruments
of ratification
and submit the dispute
to the International Court of Justice.
74. In reiterating
this genuine position,
the I.ibyan
Arab Jamahiriya
has ratified
the agreement
and prepared the instruments
of ratification
and sent a Libyan
delegation
to Malta on 23 March 1981 with the aim of
exchanging
the instruments
of ratification.
However.
the afcrementioned
delegation
remained
in Malta
until 27 March 1981 without beins able to accomplish
its task because of the demand made by the Maltese
authorities
that the Libyan instrument
of ratification
be
replaced
by another
instnnnent
whose text was presented by the Ministry
of Foreign
Affairs of Malta.
That cannot be accepted by the I ibyan side because
the formula of the Libyan instrument
of ratification
is
the one applied in accordance
with the Libyan
iegis-

78. We believe that it is better to continue with the
bilateral
negotiations
between
the two countries
in
order to resolve the dispute and eliminate
obstacles,
instead
of delaying
the negotiations
through
the
creation of unnecessary
obstacles.
79. In short, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has always
been anxious
to maintain
the relations
of friendship,
co-operation
and good-neighbourliness
with
the
people and Government
of Malta. We hope that these
negbtiations
between the two sides will pit the special
agreement
into effect and consequently
lead to the submission of the dispute to the International
Court of
Justice.
80. The PRESIDENT
fi,ltc,r,/,~c.tct/ic,ri
fizwr
Frc~rwh~:
Before adjounling
the meeting, 1 wish tb appeal to the
two parties to continue to show mutual moderation
and
goodwill
and to pursue the necessary
contacts
with
one another
so as not to jeopardize
their good-ncighhourly relations.
The mocrirrg

row

~1 12.5

pm.
