UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/2000/8
15 March 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4112th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 March 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The question
concerning Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral dated 25 February 2000 (S/2000/150) submitted in accordance with
resolution 1277 (1999) of 30 November 1999.
"The Security Council commends the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH), the
International Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH) and all the previous
missions deployed in Haiti for assisting the Haitian Government in
supporting the professionalization of the Haitian National Police (HNP)
force, consolidating Haiti’s system of justice and other national
institutions, and promoting human rights. The Council expresses its thanks
to all the countries which took part in and contributed to the success of
MIPONUH, MICIVIH and all the previous missions deployed in Haiti,
particularly the troop-contributing countries.
"The Security Council recognizes that the people and the Government of
Haiti bear the ultimate responsibility for national reconciliation, the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment, the administration of
justice and the reconstruction of their country, and that the Government of
Haiti bears particular responsibility for the further strengthening and
effective functioning of the HNP and the justice system. The Council
considers that timely, free and fair elections are crucial to democracy and
all aspects of Haiti’s development, and strongly urges the Haitian
authorities to work cooperatively together in order to finalize
arrangements for holding credible elections as rapidly as possible so as to
restore, promptly and fully, the lapsed parliament and independent local
governments.
"The Security Council commends the Secretary-General for ensuring a
phased transition to the International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti
(MICAH) and recognizes that economic rehabilitation and reconstruction
constitute a major task facing the Government and people of Haiti and that
00-34449 (E)

150300

/...

S/PRST/2000/8
English
Page 2

significant international assistance is indispensable for the sustainable
development of Haiti.
"The Security Council recognizes the success of cooperative efforts in
bringing about the mandate for this new mission in Haiti and notes with
satisfaction the contributions made by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in this regard. The Security Council welcomes
the initiative of the Economic and Social Council to develop a strategic
framework and a comprehensive approach for a long-term United Nations
programme of support for Haiti and underlines the vital link between
national stability and economic and social development.
"The Security Council expects the Secretary-General to keep it
informed, as appropriate, of the situation in Haiti and, in particular, the
progress achieved in the electoral process."

-----
