United Nations

S/PV.4129

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4129th Meeting
Tuesday, 18 April 2000, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Canada)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mársico
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. Kooijmans
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The situation in Angola
Letter dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/203).

00-39541 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was called to order at 12.30 p.m.

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
consultations, which will be issued as document
S/2000/323.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Letter dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the
situation in Angola addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2000/203)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Gabon,
Mozambique, New Zealand, Portugal, Rwanda, Spain,
Togo, United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I welcome Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, Minister
for External Relations of Angola.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miranda
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Adam
(Belgium), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Sotirov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Ouédraogo (Burkina Faso), Mr.
Dangue Réwaka (Gabon), Mr. Dos Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda), Mr.
Arias (Spain), Mr. Kpotsra (Togo), Mr. Mwakawago
(United Republic of Tanzania), and Mr. Jokonya
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior

2

I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
the following other documents: S/2000/225, letter dated
15 March 2000 from Gabon; S/2000/228, letter dated 15
March 2000 from Belgium; S/2000/230, letter dated 17
March 2000 from Portugal; S/2000/240, 267 and 315,
notes verbales dated 22 and 29 March, and 13 April 2000,
respectively, from Bulgaria; S/2000/249, letter dated 24
March from Burkina Faso; S/2000/252, letter dated 24
March 2000 from Uganda; S/2000/256, letter dated 24
March from Togo; and S/2000/283, letter dated 29 March
2000 from Rwanda. Members of the Council have
received photocopies of a letter dated 17 April 2000 from
Togo, which will be issued as document S/2000/326.
I call on Mr. Robert Fowler, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola.
Mr. Fowler: Mr. President, I should like to thank
you and the members of the Council who have agreed to
this morning’s innovative procedure.
In briefly introducing the draft resolution, which will
shortly be formally issued, I would like to emphasize one
point: the Security Council’s sanctions against the rebel
movement in Angola, UNITA, are now having real
impact. The work of the Panel of Experts has contributed
significantly to this welcome development. Once again,
on behalf of the Council, I thank the Panel of Experts for
the enormous contribution that they have made to our
work. The Security Council’s adoption of this substantial
draft resolution will demonstrate its commitment to
ensuring that the sanctions continue to have impact in
curtailing UNITA’s ability to pursue its objectives
through military means.
The draft resolution would, among its many other
features, put in place a seven-month process, at the end
of which, in mid-November, the Security Council would
consider appropriate action in relation to States it believed
to be continuing to violate the sanctions against UNITA.
During these seven months, interested States, including
those mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts,
would have ample opportunity to bring relevant
information to the attention of the sanctions Committee
and to demonstrate their adherence to all the exigencies
of the sanctions regime.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The draft resolution would also request the SecretaryGeneral to establish the monitoring mechanism proposed by
the Panel of Experts. It would be composed of five
monitors whose renewable six-month mandate would be to
collect relevant information, investigate relevant leads and
verify information provided from all sources.
In deciding who had violated the sanctions and what
to do about it, the Council would thus draw on three
substantial bodies of information: first, the report of the
Panel of Experts; secondly, the additional information made
available by States; and thirdly, the reports of the
independent monitoring mechanism.
The draft resolution before us does not name names or
take action against alleged sanctions-busters. This should
not be interpreted as any kind of exoneration of any State
or States referred to in the report of the Panel of Experts.
The purpose of the draft resolution is, instead, to provide
all States with an opportunity to answer the allegations of
the Expert Panel, to end sanctions violations where they
have occurred, and to bring their actions into conformity
with the clearly articulated will of the international
community. Equally clearly, this draft resolution stipulates
that the Council will not continue to stand idly by while its
decisions are flouted.
My own hope is that the Security Council will not
need to adopt such action. That said, the draft resolution
before us makes clear the Council’s willingness to adopt
such measures if necessary.
A generation of Angolans has never known peace. The
purpose of the sanctions against UNITA is to promote a
durable political settlement of the three-decades-long
conflict in Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with its
obligations, which it freely undertook. The adoption of this
draft resolution will constitute a reaffirmation of the
Council’s commitment to peace in Angola and a
demonstration of our determination to use all of the levers
available to us to bring about that peace.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The fact
that this draft resolution is being adopted today and that this
discussion is taking place today already silently expresses
much of the United Kingdom’s message.
We all want to see an end to the decades of misery
caused by the conflict in Angola. We all believe that the
only way to achieve this is to deprive UNITA of the
practical means to continue to wage war. We have all, in

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
previous Security Council resolutions, committed
ourselves to sanctions on UNITA in order to achieve that
goal.
When a leader and his organization in civil conflict
reject peace and ignore the will of the majority of
ordinary people, then sanctions are one of the few tools
the United Nations has at its disposal to try to make them
reconsider. Having decided on a sanctions regime, we
must make it work.
I congratulate Canada and thank Ambassador Fowler
for the impetus you, Mr. President, and he have delivered
to implementation of United Nations sanctions on
UNITA. This effort, and the work of the Expert Panel,
both solidly supported in practice by the United Kingdom,
have already sent an important message: that violators of
sanctions will be pursued. UNITA now knows that, even
before the Security Council has taken its decisions,
law-breaking friends are harder to find, illegal supplies
harder to secure and stolen diamonds harder to sell.
Making this draft resolution work will be tough
going. It will require a new level of cooperation among
Member States, and between Governments and the private
sector. It will require technical expertise and political will.
The United Kingdom will play its part. While all Member
States are affected, the draft resolution places a particular
burden on States neighbouring Angola. We very much
welcome the commitment which the States of the
Southern African Development Community have already
expressed to follow up this draft resolution. That is in
their interests, because peace in Angola would make a
significant positive difference to the region. At the same
time, we recognize the burden on them. Some of the
measures needed, such as tightening up controls of
borders and airspace, will not be easy to implement. As
this draft resolution makes clear, the international
community needs to consider how it can help.
Today’s draft resolution addresses more than the
achieving of peace in Angola. The text, the process which
has led to it and, most importantly, the action which must
follow from it, also send a forceful message about the
seriousness of this Council’s business. We must live up
to it.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are happy to see you, Mr. Minister, once again sitting
in the President’s chair.
The protracted armed conflict in Angola is cause for
very serious concern, for us and for the entire international
community. As a member of the troika of observer States
for the implementation of the Angola peace process, Russia
confirms its consistent position that responsibility for the
continuation of the conflict lies entirely with the leadership
of UNITA, headed by Jonas Savimbi, who is refusing to
comply with his commitments under the Lusaka Protocol
and the demands contained in Security Council resolutions.
Given these circumstances, we must further increase
pressure on the military and political leadership of UNITA
so as to make it comply with the demands of the
international community, first and foremost to halt the
fighting and return to the track of a political settlement.
Furthermore, we sympathize with the position of the
Angolan leadership. We are pleased to welcome the
Minister for External Relations of Angola to the Council
Chamber today, and we sympathize with his position. Jonas
Savimbi has so often broken his promises and agreements
and acted in bad faith that he has now lost the right to
participate in this process and can have no political future.
Jonas Savimbi and his entourage have shown their
indifference to the fate of the Angolan people. Because of
his uncontrollable lust for power, hundreds of thousands
have paid with their lives and borne the full weight of the
humanitarian crisis in the country — a country whose
subsoil could, indeed, yield prosperity for its people.
Foreign citizens have often been victims of his
organization, including those who have gone — some under
the United Nations flag — to help the Angolan people in
their time of trial.
For more than one year, UNITA has been holding
prisoner citizens of the Russian Federation, one of whom
has died. All these facts make clear that, in UNITA, the
Security Council is faced with outright contempt for the
will of the international community. There is a conscious,
carefully premeditated policy to evade the sanctions
introduced by the Council, which were designed to deprive
the UNITA military machine of the financial, material and
technical input that it needs.
Given these circumstances, therefore, it is of
paramount importance to strengthen the effectiveness of
control over the current sanctions regime against UNITA.
The active efforts being made by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993),

4

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
and the efforts of the Chairman of that Committee,
Ambassador Fowler, have already had an important
positive impact on ensuring greater respect for the
sanctions against UNITA. We welcome the report to the
Security Council of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), and we participated
actively in drawing up the draft resolution that we will be
adopting today. Based on the recommendations of that
Panel, it will help us to achieve the goals that we have set
for ourselves.
We believe that implementation of the draft
resolution will contribute to improving the effectiveness
of control over the sanctions against UNITA, and it will
help to close off the channels used by the leadership of
that organization to preserve their ability to continue the
war — a war that UNITA has imposed on the people of
Angola.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like warmly to welcome to the Council
table the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Miranda.
The draft resolution that we will be adopting today
reaffirms the Security Council’s determination to ensure
effective implementation of the sanctions against UNITA.
Today, through this draft resolution, the Council will once
again send a clear and firm message to Mr. Savimbi and
UNITA to put an immediate end to hostilities and to
finally fulfil their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
My country fully endorses that message. Jonas Savimbi’s
overwhelming responsibility for the continuation of civil
conflict in Angola and his refusal to take account of
Council resolutions must be most seriously condemned.
We welcome the fact that, barely a month after the
report of the Panel of Experts was issued, the Council
will adopt a draft resolution taking on board more than
three quarters of the recommendations made by those
experts. The draft resolution covers a particularly wide
range of issues, including the delivery of arms, fuel,
trafficking in diamonds, financial resources and the travel
of UNITA leaders. The recommendations put forward in
this text are addressed first and foremost to Member
States. But they also call for the active cooperation of a
variety of players in a number of different arenas,
including international and regional organizations,
enterprises, professional organizations and experts. This
is especially true for the provisions relating to the
international diamond trade, the monitoring of financial
resources and air transport. The effective implementation

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of these measures is the responsibility of Member States,
but they will have to ensure, in exercising their
competency, the cooperation of all the actors concerned.
Each of us will have to support this effort. It will
require not only the will, but the means. In many instances,
the means are lacking. This is particularly the case with
regard to the implementation of certain recommendations of
the Panel of Experts, to be endorsed by the Council today,
which are addressed in particular to the Southern African
Development Community and its member States. The
efforts of the countries concerned, especially those in
Africa, will therefore have to be supported by the
international community. If we are serious in our
determination to ensure respect for sanctions, we must not
confine ourselves to highlighting violations of sanctions.
Naming and shaming is not enough. We must also provide
tangible aid wherever it is needed.
The draft resolution would provide for the
establishment of machinery for monitoring sanctions. It
would also provide for the Council to assess the situation
in six months on the basis of the work of the sanctions
Committee. We hope that the sanctions Committee will
engage in sustained dialogue with the member States in
monitoring the implementation of sanctions, exchanging
information and receiving their comments. Here again, our
goal must be greater efficacy. If the noose around Jonas
Savimbi and UNITA is truly to be tightened, we need
cooperation and information from everyone. Only a united
effort of the international community will allow us to block
UNITA’s revenue resources and supply of arms.
Since the report of the Panel of Experts was published,
several States have announced steps taken to further
investigate shortcomings and, in some cases, correct them.
The French delegation welcomes these initiatives, which
have clearly already begun to bear fruit. We hope that the
Council and the sanctions Committee will be able to
acknowledge these efforts in due course. If the embargo has
been violated in the past, it is indeed essential that these
failings no longer occur and that the sanctions Committee
be apprised in real time of any fresh sanctions busting.
We feel that this constructive, pedagogical and united
approach, built entirely around the central objective of the
full international isolation of Jonas Savimbi and UNITA,
will ultimately prove far more productive than a repressive
one. In this context, it does not appear to us that the
creation of new sanctions against countries that have
allegedly violated the old will provide a real solution. It is
not by increasing the number of pariah States that we will

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
encourage them to reform their ways, nor would the
exponential growth in the number of existing sanctions
regimes fail to create management problems at the very
moment when we are already having enough trouble
enforcing the nine embargoes currently in place. The
criteria for choosing violator countries could be subject to
numerous challenges. The authority of this Council could
well emerge reduced. The draft resolution before us today
holds out no such prospect, of which we are glad.
Finally, we hope that the sanctions Committee will,
in cooperation with the monitoring machinery, manage to
build on the work of the Panel of Experts and to clarify
certain information contained in the report submitted by
Mr. Mollander. Last March, my delegation raised the
issues that we felt needed to be actualized. It would be
equally useful for the sanctions Committee better to
appreciate the respective importance of UNITA’s various
supply networks. This, again, is in the interests of
achieving efficacy. If we wish to strengthen the
implementation of sanctions, we must do so first and
foremost by identifying the main channels through which
UNITA receives its arms and acquires its resources.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I thank
you once again, Mr. President, for coming from far-away
Canada to chair this important meeting. I am delighted to
see that you have some members of the Canadian
legislature here with you today. We have been lucky
enough to have had many members of the United States
Congress here with us in the past six months. I am
delighted whenever I see members of any national
assembly or legislature here. I think it is the essence of
the strengthening of the United Nations to do this and I
welcome your colleagues from the legislative branch.
The United States will be very pleased to vote in
favour of the important draft resolution before us today.
We commend Ambassador Fowler, his delegation and the
entire Government of Canada for their sustained
dedication to this task. Bob Fowler has proved that one
can be extremely methodical and very careful, and still
accomplish something in the United Nations. I
congratulate him for his diligence, his perseverance and
his persistence. The Canadian delegation and Ambassador
Fowler have set a standard by which other sanctions
regimes against non-state actors will be judged.
Our Government has worked closely with the
sanctions team under Ambassador Fowler. He has briefed
our Government at high levels on this issue in order to
explain to us how we might better assist the sanctions

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
regime. I can report today that his efforts with the United
States Government directly have been very fruitful.
We also welcome the Foreign Minister of Angola, Mr.
Miranda, back to the Council and we look forward to
hearing his report. I hope that he will report to President
Dos Santos that the Security Council is continuing its
vigorous efforts to honour its commitments to Angola.
In the past, UNITA’s ability to evade the three
sanctions packages allowed it to defy the will of the
majority of the Angolan people and of the international
community. UNITA’s sanctions-busting activities, aided and
abetted by the parties identified in the report of the Panel
of Experts, allowed it to pursue a military option that
brought death and destruction to a long-suffering nation.
The people of Angola have waited too long for
UNITA’s military leadership to forsake armed resistance
and enter into the peaceful democratic life of the country.
The road is littered with UNITA’s broken promises. The
fundamental expectation of the international community
remains the full demilitarization of UNITA, the full
extension of state administration to all areas of the national
territory and the full demobilization of all armed UNITA
personnel. The people of Angola waited four years for
UNITA to accomplish these tasks, only to be deceived once
again.
However, the four years of the Lusaka Protocol
produced a Government of National Unity, integrated armed
forces and a multi-party National Assembly. These gains
should be safeguarded and developed. The United States is
committed to the Lusaka Protocol and its institutions,
including the role of the troika of observer States, and to
the freedoms guaranteed under the Angolan Constitution.
This includes, importantly, the rights of a free press, which
are, unfortunately, under threat in Angola today. The issue
of a free press is of grave concern to my Government and,
despite our support of the sanctions and our efforts to work
closely with the Government of Angola, we do not believe
we can or should ignore this problem.
Our vote today in support of the draft resolution will
underscore the strong Council view that UNITA leader
Jonas Savimbi is in defiance of the will of the people he
claims to help and represent. The primary cause of the
present crisis is Savimbi’s unwillingness to comply with his
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Mr. Savimbi should
read the writing on the wall here in this meeting today. The
noose — as one of the previous speakers said — is closing.
He should take action on his own to stop the pain and

6

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
suffering he is causing to the people of Angola. If he
does not, he will lose anyway, but at much greater cost to
the people of Angola and to himself.
Since his refusal to accept the results of the 1992
election, he has waged a war against the people of
Angola. He has exercised veto rights over the political,
economic and social life of the country, not because he
possesses a superior ideological vision or an electoral
majority, but because he has fielded a military force.
Security Council sanctions are designed to erode
UNITA’s ability to export diamonds and import military
supplies, and I note the high importance we attach to the
new undertakings by the Government of Belgium in
regard to the diamond issue.
We note the Government of Angola’s call for new
elections and the wide support this proposal has received.
This shows that the Government understands that all
mandates must be periodically reviewed by the people
and that the opposition itself is eager to launch into a new
campaign. As long as the elections are carried out in an
environment of open democratic processes and with
appropriate monitoring, we will support them. If all of
Angola’s parties are given the political space to operate
freely, if the mass media and civil society movements can
speak without fear of reprisal, then Angola will be ready
for new elections, regardless of what Mr. Savimbi
believes or attempts to do.
Keeping sanctions pressure on UNITA will continue
to erode Mr. Savimbi’s military options. Of course, unless
he sees the handwriting on the wall and ends his
performance — his behaviour — it will not happen
overnight. But I think the evidence is already showing
that the dedication that your country, Mr. President, has
brought to this task has made a major contribution. The
additional efforts that have been announced recently, plus
this very important and excellently drafted Security
Council draft resolution, have all made a major
contribution. We continue to support your efforts, Sir, and
we look forward to working together with you over the
next six months, and beyond, in pursuit of the goals the
Security Council, speaking on behalf of the international
community, has articulated here today.
The President: I would like to thank the
representative of the United States for the kind words
addressed to Ambassador Fowler and the Canadian
delegation. We appreciate that.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The Security
Council has for a month now had before it the report of the
Panel of Experts established by resolution 1237 (1999) to
study violations of the sanctions imposed by the Council
against UNITA. The draft resolution before the Council
today endorses three fourths of the recommendations of the
Panel’s report and is aimed at intensifying the work of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
864 (1993) on Angola, and in particular at enhancing the
effectiveness of current sanctions covered in earlier
resolutions of the Council relating to the illegal supply of
arms, petroleum and petroleum products, the export of
diamonds, the freeze on UNITA’s financial assets and on
the closing of UNITA’s representation offices and other
offices abroad. By adopting the draft resolution, the Council
will be strengthening the United Nations sanctions regime
against UNITA and demonstrating its resolve to make a
positive and concrete contribution to the restoration of
peace and security in Angola. It is for these reasons that the
delegation of Mali will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
Mali deplores the continuation of the conflict that has
now been taking place in Angola for 25 years, for which
Jonas Savimbi and UNITA are primarily responsible. The
people of Angola have suffered too much from the war; the
time has now come for the international community to
adopt strong measures to put an end to it. The
implementation of the draft resolution we are to adopt at
the end of this meeting will help to dry up the income
UNITA gets from illegal diamond exports and will
substantially limit its acquisition of weapons and munitions,
petroleum and petroleum products.
In this connection, I would like to pay tribute to the
tireless efforts made by Ambassador Robert Fowler, in his
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Angola, to contribute to the achievement of a political
settlement of the Angolan crisis by diminishing UNITA’s
capacity to wage war.
Along the same lines, the establishment for a sixmonth period of a new monitoring mechanism for sanctions
violations will make it possible to give effective follow-up
to the results of the report of the Panel of Experts. Those
will have lasting effect only if there is control of and some
pressure on Savimbi and his entourage. This will also make
it possible for the Council to avoid a return to practices of
the past.
For these reasons, Mali, which stands in solidarity
with the people of Angola in their struggle — and I

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
welcome the presence at this meeting of Mr. Miranda,
Minister for External Relations of Angola — is convinced
that the draft resolution we will adopt today will enable
us to apply more effectively the sanctions regime against
UNITA in order to curb and put an end to sanctions
violations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mali for his kind words addressed to the
Canadian delegation.
Mr. Kooijmans (Netherlands): The representative of
Portugal will make a statement on behalf of the European
Union later in this debate. As the Netherlands associates
itself fully with that statement, my delegation will limit
itself to a few brief comments on the issue under
consideration.
The Panel of Experts, in its report on violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA, concluded that
the long-suffering people of Angola need and deserve the
support of the international community in the search to
bring peace and political reconciliation to that country.
Rendering that support is indeed in essence what the
Council is doing today by tightening the noose around
UNITA’s capacity to defy the international community
and bring further misery to the Angolan people.
The draft resolution the Council is to adopt today
entails basically two steps that should curtail future
infringements of the UNITA sanctions regime. First, it
puts in place a new monitoring mechanism that could be
an effective instrument in the hands of the Council and
the sanctions Committee to oversee the implementation of
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998), as
long as that mechanism is allowed to collect, analyse and
submit information independently. Secondly, the draft
resolution sets a deadline for the Council to consider
action vis-à-vis those States considered to be in violation
of the terms of the sanctions regime. We are very grateful
for the important contribution of the Panel of Experts, and
especially that of Ambassador Fowler, to making the
sanctions against UNITA more effective.
Even before adopting this draft resolution, we have
already seen some remedial effects of the report of the
Panel. In this connection, we wish to commend those
countries mentioned in the report for the steps taken so
far, and we call upon the others to follow suit. In our
view, Belgium in particular deserves praise for taking the
Panel’s remarks in stride and addressing its
recommendations expeditiously and in such a transparent

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
manner. Other countries have got away too easily simply by
ignoring the Panel’s request for information. We expect,
therefore, that the new monitoring mechanism will pick up
where the Panel had to stop and will build upon the
information that has been collected so far. Again, we repeat
that it is essential for the new mechanism’s future
effectiveness that it be able to operate independently. We
look forward to receiving the mechanism’s report six
months from now.
Our ultimate goal in tightening the sanctions is not so
much simply to punish UNITA, but to reduce UNITA’s
capacity to wage war and prevent a peaceful solution to
Angola’s bloody conflict. UNITA deliberately chose to
abandon the road to peace as mapped out by the Lusaka
Protocol and left the Government of Angola no option but
to seize the initiative militarily. The draft resolution before
us is meant to create a situation in which military
offensives will no longer be needed to achieve a peaceful
solution. That solution is what the Council ultimately
should offer to the Angolan people, whose suffering has
gone on for much too long.
However, the fact that we hold UNITA responsible for
the present situation of conflict and humanitarian misery
does not diminish the responsibility of the Government of
Angola to make its own substantial contribution to the wellbeing of its own people. In his report of last week on the
operations of the United Nations Office in Angola, the
Secretary-General referred to allegations of grave human
rights violations on both sides and the dire humanitarian
situation in Angola. It proves, in our view, that close
monitoring by the international community of both areas of
concern is still warranted. The Government of Angola owes
that not only to the people of Angola but also to the
international community, which today is going to take
far-reaching steps to assist the Government in its efforts to
pacify the country effectively.
Lastly, our progress in the UNITA sanctions dossier
should not obscure the need for the Council, at a later
stage, to look into the general problem of conflicts fueled
and prolonged by access to minerals.
The President: I thank the representative of
Netherlands for his kind words to me.
Mr. Mársico (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President and Foreign Minister of
Canada, for having once again honored us with your
presence here. I should also like to thank the Foreign

8

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
Minister of Angola, Mr. Miranda, for having once again
joined us here today.
A little more than a month ago we met to consider
the report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
sanctions against UNITA, introduced by Ambassador
Fowler in his capacity as Chairman of the Angola
sanctions Committee.
The submission of that report had significant impact
and we believe it will continue to have positive
repercussions. Not only has it mobilized the States
mentioned in the report, those in the diamond industry
and arms producers, along with neighboring countries and
countries in the sub-region, but it has also, as no other
single event in the past, raised the awareness of the
international community as a whole. For all these reasons,
this is an invaluable report.
More or less in parallel fashion, alongside this
discussion, a series of exchanges of opinion has taken
place on general issues bearing on sanctions which also
benefitted from the specific results emerging from the
Panel’s work. We believe that both initiatives, whereby
formal discussion on sanctions was begun, will enable the
Council to incorporate specific measures in its work to
improve across the board the use of the tool of sanctions.
Today we are here to take a second step, as
important as the first, by adopting a resolution which we
believe will strengthen the sanctions regime against
UNITA. We hope that thereby a political solution to the
conflict in Angola will be promoted.
This draft resolution, which we support in its
entirety, contains a series of innovative elements. It
recognizes the need to monitor sanctions, establishing for
this purpose monitoring machinery with an initial duration
of six months which will pursue the work started by the
Panel. It stipulates that the Council, after review of the
implementation of the measures set out in the resolutions
on sanctions against UNITA — that is to say, resolutions
864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998) — and on the
basis of the outcome thereof, will be prepared to take
steps against those States that will have violated these
sanctions. Likewise, the draft resolution that we are on
the verge of adopting contains a series of measures and
recommendations aimed at all States relating to diamonds,
petroleum, arms, financial measures and travel and
representational restrictions on UNITA abroad.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
We note with satisfaction that the resolution
incorporates a number of different Panel recommendations
on the natural resources of Angola, whose very existence
and abundance have played a significant role in prolonging
the conflict: driving the war and facilitating the buying of
arms and fuel and even of political sympathy. Under
section B, referring to the trade in arms, we consider of
particular importance the appeal to all States to be as
diligent as they possibly can in confirming the end users.
Under section D, referring to the diamond trade, we urge
the imposition of significant penal measures against the
illegal possession of diamonds in contravention of
resolution 1173 (1998). At the same time we welcome the
establishment of a new Certificate of Origin for diamonds
by the Government of Angola, which will facilitate better
monitoring.
For more than twenty years now, the international
community has been striving to achieve a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Angola. Argentina can identify
itself with these efforts, as in 1989 we despatched units
when the operations of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola got underway. Notwithstanding the
successive efforts of the international community, the
results were inadequate to put an end to the conflict and to
promote compliance with the 1991 "Accordos de Paz" or
with the Lusaka Protocol of 1994.
We acknowledge that the continuation of the conflict
in Angola is not due to any single factor. Notwithstanding
that, we hope that the measures we are adopting today will
make it possible to make greater use of the natural
resources of Angola for the progress of its people and not
for fuelling the conflict, will reaffirm the repudiation by the
international community of the violations of the sanctions
regimes established by the Security Council, and, finally,
will help to move the peace process in Angola forward,
renewing political efforts underway to put an end to the
conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you to New York, Mr.
President, to preside over this open meeting. We would also
like to welcome Foreign Minister Miranda of Angola, who
is attending today’s meeting.
The question of Angola has dragged on for quite a
long time. The twists and turns of the peace process and the
grave security and humanitarian situation have not only

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
combined to bring enormous sufferings to the Angolan
people but have also seriously affected peace and stability
in the region. As it refused to implement the peace
agreement, UNITA, headed by Jonas Malheiro Savimbi,
should bear the main responsibility for the present
situation in Angola. Since the arms and petroleum
embargo was applied against UNITA by resolution 864
(1993), the Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions in recent years to expand relevant measures to
travel, finance, the diamond trade and many other areas.
Unfortunately, these measures have not been implemented
effectively, for various reasons. To this day, UNITA has
not yet laid down its weapons to take the path of national
reconciliation.
Ambassador Robert Fowler of Canada, since his
assumption of the chairmanship of the sanctions
Committee, has made unremitting efforts to facilitate
implementation in earnest by the international community
of the sanctions against UNITA. The Security Council
Panel of Experts investigating violations of the embargoes
has done a great deal of work since its establishment and
has submitted a report in this regard, putting forward a
series of recommendations. Despite the different
responses and evaluations made by different sides, the
report undoubtedly played a positive role in enhancing
efforts by the Security Council and the international
community to strengthen the sanctions against UNITA.
Meanwhile, we should also see that much remains to
be done in strengthening sanctions against UNITA. After
the expiration of the mandate of the Expert Panel, the
international community will still need to monitor
violations of the embargoes closely. The Chinese
delegation supports the establishment by the Security
Council of a new monitoring mechanism to continue the
investigation into violations of the embargoes against
UNITA and to submit a report and proposals to the
Security Council in six months. We hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to appoint experts for this
monitoring mechanism at an early date, and we would
like to call upon all countries to give it their full support
and cooperation.
We support Security Council endorsement of some
of the recommendations in the Expert Panel’s report
through the adoption of a draft resolution, and we hope
that this will be truly implemented. We have taken note
of the fact that many of the recommendations involve the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). It
may be said that without the true involvement and
commitment of SADC, it will be impossible to implement

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
many of the proposals, and sanctions against UNITA could
possibly remain hollow talk. We commend SADC countries
for their determination and for their efforts to implement
the sanctions against UNITA. At the same time, we are
aware of the real difficulties SADC countries face, and we
are therefore of the view that the international community
should continue to provide SADC with necessary assistance
concerning the sanctions against UNITA.
The Chinese delegation strongly appeals to all
countries strictly to abide by relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, to stop supplying UNITA with weapons
or supporting it in any other way and to adopt effective
measures to prevent their own citizens from violating the
sanctions. We sincerely hope that in six months’ time,
when the Security Council next reviews the implementation
of the sanctions against UNITA, we will be able to see real
and effective results. That would be an important
contribution by the international community to the Angolan
peace process.
The President: I thank the representative of China for
the very kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation, Sir, is pleased
to see you presiding over another meeting of the Security
Council. We also welcome the presence at this important
meeting of the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Miranda.
We would like to thank the Canadian delegation, in
particular Ambassador Robert Fowler, for its outstanding
efforts to spearhead the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993). There has been a
tremendous shift in the international focus following the
commissioning of the Panel of Experts established by the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), and
the issuance of its report in document S/2000/203 of 10
March 2000.
We commend Ambassador Fowler for his strong
commitment and tireless efforts in transforming the
sanctions Committee into an active and robust body, one
which is very much at the forefront of the Organization’s
attempts to cripple the war-making capability of UNITA.
We once again welcome the report of the Panel of
Experts and take note of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in it. The report puts forward
a set of 39 bold and far-reaching recommendations for the
consideration of the Council.

10

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
Following on from our deliberations at the open
meeting of 15 March 2000, substantial work has been put
into the draft resolution before us today, which would
give effect to the large majority of the Panel’s
recommendations. The draft resolution before us is a very
important one. It has the aim of strengthening control of
the sanctions against UNITA. It targets UNITA and
others found to be in violation of the measures imposed
by the Council. In that regard, my delegation fully
supports the proposed establishment of a monitoring
mechanism composed of up to five experts for an initial
period of six months in order to collect additional relevant
information and to investigate relevant leads concerning
violations of the measures contained in resolutions 864
(1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998). We agree that the
monitoring mechanism should report periodically to the
Angola sanctions Committee, and we look forward to the
submission of a written report by 18 October 2000. It is
our hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
appoint the experts expeditiously.
With regard to the trade in arms, the draft resolution
encourages States to exercise all due diligence in order to
prevent the diversion or trans-shipment of weapons to
unauthorized end-users or unauthorized destinations, if
such diversion or trans-shipment risks resulting in the
violation of measures contained in resolution 864 (1993).
This is particularly important given that the Panel’s report
highlights UNITA’s military ability successfully to
procure weapons with the help of international arms
brokers. We agree that stringent measures with regard to
proper documentation for the export of weapons are
necessary in order to check the flow of illicit arms to
UNITA and to help bring an end to its capacity to wage
war. Further, we also view positively the invitation to
hold conferences of representatives of countries that are
manufacturers or exporters of weapons to develop
proposals to stem the illicit flow of arms into Angola.
In that regard, it is especially important that the
countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) be invited to participate in such
meetings. In addition, we believe it is important that
SADC countries be provided with both financial and
technical assistance by the international community in
implementing the relevant recommendations of the Panel
of Experts.
With regard to the trade in diamonds, we support the
call on States hosting diamond markets to impose
significant penalties for the possession of rough diamonds
in contravention of the measures contained in resolution

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
1173 (1998). My delegation wishes to state that it would
have preferred the inclusion in the draft resolution of
language regarding exploring the lawful seizure of the
rough diamonds in question as well as any collateral assets
used in the transport of such goods; such language is not
included in the draft resolution before us. We would also
express support for a call on States to make dealing in
illegal rough diamonds a criminal offense; this too is not
included in the final text of the draft resolution.
In that connection, we particularly welcome the
introduction by the Government of Angola of new control
arrangements involving redesigned and reconcilable
certificates of origin. Details of this scheme should be
provided to Member States; we look forward to a briefing
by the Government of Angola on this regime in due course.
Diamonds remain a principal source of funding for
UNITA. It is therefore imperative that UNITA’s lifeline be
severed.
While supporting the draft resolution’s aim of giving
teeth and meaning to the Council’s sanctions, my delegation
would like to reiterate its view that any further steps or
measures to be meted out to sanctions-busters should be
considered very carefully and should be weighed against the
seriousness of an alleged breach. We believe that those
named in the Panel’s report should have the right to
respond to the allegations and to clarify their own roles in
the alleged sanctions-busting activities. If those
clarifications are not plausible and are not borne out by the
facts, the international community and the Council will
doubtless draw their own conclusions and take appropriate
action.
Nevertheless, we would like to stress our conviction
that the Council must act only when it has conclusive
evidence of such breaches. We support the 18 November
2000 deadline for an initial Council decision on the matter.
That would give ample time for those named to respond to
the Panel’s allegations.
For far too long, UNITA has been left to its own
devices, violating the measures imposed by this organ with
impunity. Essentially, Savimbi knew that the Council
seriously lacked the will to enforce the sanctions regime.
Those days, we believe, are now gone. With the Panel’s
bold report and robust recommendations, and with the
adoption later today of the draft resolution before us, those
responsible for breaches and transgressions of the sanctions
regime will no longer go back to doing business as usual.

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
Malaysia will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of
Malaysia for the kind words he addressed to the Canadian
delegation.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me at the outset
express my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to your Government for convening this
important meeting on Angola. The fact that you are
presiding over this meeting is clear testimony to your
Government’s commitment to contribute to finding a
lasting solution to the Angolan conflict. I wish in
particular to commend Ambassador Fowler for his
commitment and his leadership in ensuring that sanctions
against UNITA are enforced. My delegation pledges its
full cooperation in the successful resolution of this issue.
Let me also acknowledge the presence of the
Minister of External Relations of Angola, Mr. Miranda.
We eagerly await his remarks.
The report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
sanctions against UNITA was considered in the open
debate of the Security Council held on 15 March 2000. At
that meeting, we reiterated that Security Council
resolutions on sanctions against UNITA were indeed
being violated by Member States, corporations and
individuals at the expense of the people of Angola, and
hence that UNITA was in a position to augment its
military strength and as a result continued to sow death
and destruction in Angola. In this regard, and in order to
add credibility and seriousness to the sanctions
resolutions, the Council must take the appropriate
measures to curb and destroy UNITA’s capacity to make
war.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC), the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries continue to
play an important role in support of the implementation
of the Council’s resolutions imposed against UNITA.
These organizations have on a number of occasions
expressed their concern at the deteriorating humanitarian
situation resulting from UNITA’s intransigence and
refusal to comply with its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. Furthermore, they have declared Mr. Savimbi a
war criminal who has rendered himself an invalid
interlocutor. In particular, we welcome the
pronouncements by the most recent meeting of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena de

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4129th meeting
18 April 2000

Indias, Colombia. In our view, it is imperative that the
Security Council heed the call made by the Foreign
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement in this regard.

issuing of arrest warrants to individuals who are playing
key roles in circumventing the Council’s resolutions
against UNITA.

Today the Council is going to vote on another historic
draft resolution — one which this time, if implemented,
will help bring peace to Angola and to the region as a
whole. Namibia will vote in favour of this consensus draft,
but first let me comment on some of its key elements.

Finally, SADC has played, and continues to play, an
important role in the implementation of the Council’s
resolutions against UNITA. However, it must be stressed
that the SADC countries lack the technical and financial
capacity to carry out its relevant programmes
successfully. Therefore, we appeal to the international
community to provide appropriate technical and financial
assistance to SADC with a view to strengthening the
effectiveness of the sanctions imposed against UNITA.
SADC is more than prepared to play its role. However,
the assistance of the international community is vital in
this regard.

First, my delegation considers the establishment of the
monitoring mechanism an important factor in this exercise,
and it is our sincere hope that the mechanism will receive
appropriate support from the Member States and the
Secretariat to enable it to accomplish the task ahead of it.
It is important in this regard that adequate technical support
and financial resources be provided to this mechanism so as
to enable it to do its job thoroughly.
Secondly, the Council must stand ready to take
appropriate measures by 18 November this year against
those who it determines have violated sanctions against
UNITA, as stipulated in the draft resolution. It would be
unjust and unfair to the Angolan people, who have suffered
for too long — more than 500,000 lives have been lost —
if this draft resolution became just another resolution.
Taking appropriate action against those States, corporations
and individuals that are in violation of the relevant
resolutions will send a clear message to possible violators
that the Council means business. This is the minimum that
the Council can do for the people of Angola.
Thirdly, my delegation takes note of the steps
announced by the Government of Belgium in support of a
more effective implementation of measures against UNITA
and indeed welcomes the measures taken by the Diamond
High Council in conjunction with the Government of
Angola to render sanctions more effective. We call upon
Member States and other concerned institutions to assist the
Government of Angola in its internal reform process with
a view to improving the effectiveness of the implementation
of sanctions against UNITA. We also take note of the
decisions taken by some Governments, both within and
outside Africa, to bring to justice their nationals found to be
sanctions-busters.
Another critical issue of great concern to my
delegation is the use of mercenaries by UNITA, whose
impact has been significant in sustaining the military war
machinery of the rebel movement. We call upon States to
do their utmost to discourage their citizens from serving in
UNITA ranks at all levels. In this regard, we support the

12

We look forward to continuing to work with the
Chairman of the Committee for the success of the work
of the Committee and for peace and stability in Angola
and in southern Africa in general.
The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for the kind words he addressed to me.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. We also wish to welcome Mr.
Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola, to
our deliberations.
My delegation pays tribute to Ambassador Robert
Fowler for his re-energizing of the sanctions Committee
established under resolution 864 (1993) and thanks him
for introducing the draft resolution before us today. We
fully endorse the draft, as we believe that it is important
for us to send a strong message that breaches of the
Council’s sanctions will not go unpunished.
Already the work of the Panel of Experts has borne
fruit, as Governments and others have begun to focus on
what they could do to improve the enforcement of
sanctions and to curtail existing violations. As the report
of the Panel reminded us, the purpose of the sanctions
was to provide a peaceful settlement to the conflict in
Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with the
obligations it undertook and by limiting UNITA’s ability
to pursue its objectives by military means.
The Security Council has given UNITA and Jonas
Savimbi all opportunities to bring peace to the longsuffering people of Angola. But we must recall that the

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
leaders of UNITA rejected the results of free and fair
elections held in 1992. They took advantage of the Lusaka
Protocol to regroup their forces, and they were aided and
abetted in evading the arms embargo, the travel and
financial sanctions and the embargo on diamond exports.
Those who aided and abetted UNITA in violating sanctions
are equally culpable, along with UNITA, for the
humanitarian tragedy in Angola. It is reported that over the
past 25 years, some 1.5 million people have lost their lives.
There has been a dramatic increase in infant mortality, food
shortages and starvation, and the number of internally
displaced persons was last year estimated at 1.7 million out
of a total population of 12.6 million.
It is in this context that the Security Council, by its
action today, will clearly indicate that the international
community strongly repudiates the actions of Mr. Savimbi
and is determined to cut off his sources of finance and
arms. But the measures in the draft resolution with regard
to the trade in arms, petroleum and petroleum products and
diamonds, and with regard to travel, representation and
financial measures, can be effective only if all Member
States adhere to the terms of the draft resolution.

4129th meeting
18 April 2000
The monitoring mechanism is an innovative one, and
we believe that it can provide an example for other
sanctions regimes. We therefore hope that it will be set
up expeditiously in order to allow it to report to the
Council by November 2000. We wish to commend the
Southern African Development Community countries, and
those geographically close to Angola, for the steps they
have already taken to tighten the sanctions.
The draft resolution before us has been carefully
drafted, providing, as it does, an opportunity for those
named in the report to respond before any action is taken
against sanctions busters, while at the same time
reminding States of the mandatory nature of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. Twenty-five years have
gone by. A whole generation of Angolans has not known
life without war. We owe it to them to seek to ensure that
the riches of their country are used for their economic and
social development, and not to perpetuate conflict.
The meeting was suspended at 1.45 p.m.

13
