5

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee
should be pursued, in order to put an end to this serious
situation by means of the immediate ~isarmament and
withdrawal of the said forces from the territory of the
Union of Burma or by means of their disarmament and
internment ;
5. Urges all States:
(a) To afford the Government of the Union of
Burma on its request all the assistance in their power
to facilitate by peaceful means the evacuation of these
forces from Burma ; and

( b) To refrain from furnishing any assistance to these
forces which may enable them to remain in the territory of the Union of Burma or to continue their hostile
acts against that country;
6. Invites the Government of the Union of Burma
to report on the situation to the General Assembly at
its eighth session.

428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE
708 (VII). Report of the Secretary-General on
personnel policy
The General Assembly,
Recalling the following provisions of Articles 100 and
101 of the Charter:
"Article 100
"l. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall not seek or receive
instructions from any government or from any other
authority external to the Organization. They shall
refrain from any action which might reflect on their
position as international officials responsible only to
the Organization.
"2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General
and the staff and not to seek to influence them in
the discharge of their responsibilities.
"Article 101
"l. The staff shall be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral under regulations established by the General Assembly.

"
"3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the
conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence

and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible.",
and
11 avi,ng remeu1ed and considered the report1 of the
Secretary-General on personnel policy,
1. Expresses its confidence that the SecretaryGeneral will conduct personnel policy with -these considerations in mind ;
-~- Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighth session a report on the
progress made in the conduct and development of personnel policy, together with the comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions thereon ;
3. It.vites the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to submit, after appropriate consultations with the administrative heads of the specialized agencies. their
recommendations as to any further action that may be
required of the General Assembly;
4. Calls upon all Members of the United Nations
to assist the Secretarv-General in the discharge of his
responsibilities as chief administrative officer of the
United Nations.
422nd plenar·y meeting,
1 April 1953.
1 See document

A/2364.

709 (VII). Terms of appointment of the second Secretary-General of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 11 (I) of 24 January 1946 and paragraph 32 of General Assembly resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946,
Decides that the terms of appointment of the second Secretary-General shall
be the same as those of the first Secretary-General.
423rd plenary meeting,
7 April 1953.
