United Nations

S/PV.5763

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5763rd meeting
Friday, 19 October 2007, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Christian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1770
(2007) (S/2007/608)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-55351 (E)

*0755351*

S/PV.5763

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007)
(S/2007/608)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/608, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1770 (2007).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and by Mr. Zalmay
Khalilzad, representative of the United States, on
behalf of the Multinational Force.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.

2

Mr. Pascoe: Before you, Mr. President, is the
first report issued pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007),
and it reflects the expanded nature of the new mandate
and preparations made by the United Nations for that
role. The report before you also illustrates the
magnitude of the challenges facing Iraq and the efforts
of the Government of Iraq, neighbouring countries, the
United Nations and the wider international community
to address them.
Iraq is faced today with an exceptionally complex
series of overlapping sectarian, political and ethnic
conflicts that have proved beyond the capacity of any
one actor or policy initiative to resolve. Violence aimed
at civilian populations and members of the Government
continues to impede efforts to establish stability in the
country and makes national dialogue challenging.
Increasing levels of displacement add to an already
alarming humanitarian crisis. Current conditions,
therefore, greatly impact the ability of the United
Nations to perform its duties and provide assistance to
those in need.
However, as the Secretary-General noted in his
report, there is an opportunity today that should not be
missed. September witnessed the lowest number of
Iraqi casualties for the year. The ceasefire declared by
the Mahdi Army, the Sunni insurgent alliance against
Al-Qaida, the pact reached by the Supreme Islamic
Iraqi Council and the Sadrists and the efforts by the
Multinational Force in Iraq and the Iraqi security
forces all appear to be contributing to this effect. These
events represent a political opportunity to transform
military-political development into a basis for
achieving broad national reconciliation.
With the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007), the
Council recognizes the need for an enhanced effort to
assist the people and the leadership of Iraq. In
particular, the new mandate creates the basis for
broader United Nations efforts in advancing national
dialogue, and the Secretary-General’s new Special
Representative will immediately explore possibilities
when he reaches Iraq in two weeks.
While it has proven difficult to strike a mutually
acceptable balance between the competing claims on
the basic issues of Iraq’s future amid ongoing violence,
mistrust and bitter memories, Iraqi leaders must move
beyond rhetoric and mere statements of intent. The
challenge now is to make progress on the constitutional
review and major legislation which is central to the

07-55351

S/PV.5763

process of reconciliation, such as that relating to oil
and the law to reform de-Baathification.
To truly make a difference on the ground,
however, these developments will need to form part of,
and contribute to, a wider political reconciliation
process in Iraq. This is primarily the responsibility of
the Iraqi Government, and the United Nations stands
ready to assist to that end. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) also remains
committed to supporting Iraqi preparations for future
electoral events by working to build the capacity of the
Independent High Electoral Commission and advising
on key electoral legislation.
Resolution 1770 (2007) envisions a strengthened
United Nations role in assisting the Government of
Iraq in promoting the constructive engagement of
regional countries, and the high-level meeting on Iraq
co-hosted by the Secretary-General and Prime Minister
al-Maliki on 22 September reinforced support for the
United Nations role in this area.
Iraq’s neighbouring countries, and others in the
region, remain vital for the stability of Iraq. While
competing views and national interests exist, all of
Iraq’s neighbours have an interest in limiting the
deterioration of the situation in Iraq, and no one wishes
to see instability engulf the region or spread to their
country. There is a need for neighbouring countries to
embrace a responsible and measured approach to Iraq’s
challenges. As the report highlights, the dialogue
among Iraq’s neighbours and other key international
actors initiated at Sharm el-Sheikh is encouraging. The
three working groups have convened and have
discussed concrete issues. The United Nations has
offered to support a mechanism to ensure adequate
follow-up on the expanded meetings of Iraq’s
neighbours and the working groups. It is our hope that
the next expanded meeting of Iraq’s neighbours, to be
held in Istanbul, Turkey, in early November 2007, will
address this matter in a constructive manner.
The high-level meeting on 22 September also
highlighted progress made in the implementation of the
International Compact with Iraq and in other aspects of
development and reconstruction assistance. The
Compact secretariat continues to oversee the work of
thematic working groups and to make progress on a
six-month work plan intended to move all aspects of
the Compact forward.

07-55351

The humanitarian situation in Iraq continues to be
alarming and provides ample evidence of the impact
violence in Iraq has on civilians on a daily basis. The
estimated number of Iraqi refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) rose to 4.2 million, with
monthly displacement rates climbing to over 60,000
persons. The Iraqi Cabinet decision to provide
financial assistance to refugee host countries, in
accordance with the commitment made in Geneva last
April, is a welcome and much-needed development.
Now it is time to finalize the delivery mechanism for
that support so that vital assistance to the refugee
population is immediately bolstered. The international
community also has a large assistance role to play, and
I hope that all commitments are honoured in a timely
manner. The ultimate solution to the humanitarian
crisis, however, will only be realized when the
political, economic and security situation inside Iraq
permits the safe return of refugees and IDPs to their
homes.
The Secretary-General’s latest report once again
expresses serious concern about the current human
rights situation in Iraq. The Government of Iraq has a
particular responsibility to bring perpetrators of human
rights abuses to justice, as well as to strengthen the
institutions that promote the rule of law, particularly
the security forces and the judiciary. The United
Nations welcomes the commitment of the Iraqi
Government to that goal. UNAMI and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
are committed to working closely with the Government
on how best to realize an early improvement in the
human rights situation.
Taking into account the current security situation,
the United Nations is working to create the necessary
preconditions to fulfil an enhanced role in Iraq. The
Secretary-General has increased the staff ceilings in
Baghdad from 65 to 85 and in Erbil from 29 to 35; an
outreach programme that places national liaison
officers in each of the Governors’ offices has begun,
and we are looking into re-establishing the United
Nations presence in Basra. UNAMI and the country
team have also adopted an area-based approach that
expands activities where circumstances are more
permissible. The Mission continues to work to become
increasingly self-sufficient in areas of logistical
support and security, and plans for a new integrated
headquarters in Baghdad have been developed.

3

S/PV.5763

In the light of the tasks and challenges before us,
the United Nations will continue to rely on Member
States for support. It is important that the United
Nations be afforded the necessary political and
humanitarian space to implement the new mandate, and
the ability of the Organization to talk with all sides
must
be
protected
and
respected.
Security
arrangements and financial and logistical backing are
also essential for the success of the United Nations
Mission in Iraq.
We are grateful to those Member States that have
provided protection and logistical support to the United
Nations presence in Iraq, including those providing air
support and troops for the Distinct Entity to provide
security for UNAMI. Given the new mandate in Iraq, I
urge Member States to provide additional financial and
logistical resources for the Mission. That includes
funding for dedicated air assets, support for funding for
the new integrated United Nations facility in Baghdad
and additional required security arrangements, such as
the provision of military advisers.
Of immediate concern is the status of the trust
fund established to support the Distinct Entity that
provides protection for the United Nations in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1546
(2004). This security arrangement will be required at
least through 2008. However, the trust fund will be
exhausted next month. Without immediate financial
assistance, the ability of the United Nations to operate
in Iraq could be severely compromised.
In conclusion, strong international efforts to
counter the unfolding crises in Iraq are critical. The
international community not only has a vital security
stake in the stability of Iraq; it also has a responsibility
to encourage and enable the Government of Iraq to
build inclusive and cumulative processes that can bring
about stability. While the Government of Iraq
acknowledges that it has the primary responsibility for
this task, the magnitude and number of challenges
confronting the Government entitle it to call upon the
international community for necessary assistance. It is
our belief that the new United Nations mandate,
matched by strong international support, provides the
necessary framework to move towards building a more
stable Iraq.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, Permanent Representative of
the United States of America.

4

Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): It is
my pleasure to report today on behalf of the
Multinational Forces in Iraq (MNF-I), as requested by
Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005)
and 1723 (2006).
I was pleased to hear the report on the work of
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
especially in the light of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1770 (2007) and the appointment of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We appreciated the efforts of
former Special Representative Qazi, and are ready to
work closely with Mr. De Mistura on how we can best
support UNAMI’s efforts under its expanded mandate.
We look forward to the work of UNAMI in its
expanded role, especially in assisting the Government
of Iraq to implement its programme of national
reconciliation, regional engagement and humanitarian
relief.
The United States shares with the people of Iraq
the goal of achieving a secure, stable and democratic
Iraq at peace with itself and its neighbours. To reach
that goal, Iraq must overcome profound political,
economic and security challenges. Progress in those
areas is inherently linked. For example, when the
Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I) and Iraqi security
forces made security gains in the provinces of Al Anbar
and Diyala, we enabled the provincial councils to hold
regular meetings, which in turn led to progress in
restoring services, developing the economy and
executing provincial budgets. As a result, by
September the provincial government of Al Anbar had
committed 80 per cent of its 2006 capital budget and
49 per cent of its 2007 budget.
Last year, recognizing that MNF-I could help
them to eject Al-Qaida, tribes in Al Anbar began to
fight with us against extremists. As a result, the
landscape of Al Anbar is dramatically different. The
security progress has been extraordinary. Seven months
ago violence was still rampant. Residents of Al Anbar
lived in fear of Al-Qaida, and MNF-I troops were
under daily attack. Now the situation is largely stable
and quiet, permitting reconstruction to take place.
Similar scenes are unfolding in parts of Diyala and
Ninawa. More and more Iraqis are mobilizing, with the
help of MNF-I and Iraqi security forces, to evict
Al-Qaida and extremist forces from their communities.
Shia extremists are also facing rejection. Recent
attacks by extremist elements of Jaish al-Mahdi on

07-55351

S/PV.5763

worshipers in Karbala provoked a backlash and
triggered calls for Jaish al-Mahdi to cease attacks
against Iraqi and MNF-I forces.
A key challenge for Iraqis now is to link those
positive developments in the provinces to the central
Government in Baghdad. The growing ability of the
provinces to design and execute budgets, and the
readiness of the Central Government to provide
resources for them, represent some of the nuts and
bolts of good governance and are success stories.
The support of the central Government is also
needed to maintain hard-won security in areas like
Al Anbar, by supporting increases in locally generated
police. The Iraqi Government has placed some 21,000
Anbaris on police rolls.
Improved security also creates the conditions for
progress in the national economy. Infrastructure is
being repaired, and markets are reviving. The Iraqi
Government has reported growth of at least 6 per cent,
with inflation slowing. The budget execution rate in the
provinces is at least twice that of last year. In addition,
the Government’s 2007 budget allocates $10 billion to
capital investment. Further improvement, especially in
the countryside, could bring down transport costs for
agricultural and manufactured goods. One sign of
confidence in the future of Iraq’s economy was the
recent issuance of three licenses for mobile telephones,
valued at a record $3.75 billion.
International and regional engagement are also
improving. In addition, with the adoption of resolution
1770 (2007) in August, we are seeing the International
Compact with Iraq moving forward. The United
Nations has reported progress in 75 per cent of the 400
areas Iraq has identified for action. We are also looking
forward to the next meeting of the expanded
neighbours’ group, which will convene in Istanbul in
less than two weeks. Staffan de Mistura, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for Iraq, will be in
attendance. We look forward to hearing his ideas on
how the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
can support the neighbours’ group in its constructive
engagement with Iraq.
Unfortunately, some of Iraq’s neighbours appear
to believe that they can benefit from instability in Iraq.
While claiming to support Iraq, Iran has provided
lethal aid to both radical Shia and Sunni militants
inside Iraq, who attack Iraqi officials, innocent
civilians and Coalition forces.

07-55351

Syria is also playing a destabilizing role in Iraq.
Although Syria hosted a meeting of the neighbours’’
border security working group, it continues to provide
safe haven for elements of the former regime, who now
serve as key financiers and leaders of the insurgency.
While Syria has arrested some foreign terrorists bound
for Iraq, it remains the principal transit hub for Iraqbound terrorists. To make credible claims to support
the Iraqi people, Syria should do more — such as
implement a screening process to make it more
difficult for foreign extremists to enter and transit to
Iraq.
On the security front, the 2007 surge has given
besieged communities the confidence to work with
MNF-I to defeat Al-Qaida and violent extremists. The
military objectives are, in large measure, being met.
Population security measures have made it more
difficult for terrorists to conduct attacks. The overall
number of security incidents in Iraq continues to
decline, because we have dealt significant blows to
Al-Qaida in Iraq, and we have disrupted Shia militia
extremists. The overall number of civilian deaths has
also declined in 2007, although the numbers are still at
unacceptable levels. The number of arms caches found
and cleared in 2007 increased by approximately 20 per
cent over the previous year. From June to September,
attacks with improvised explosive devices decreased
by about 20 per cent, as compared to the previous year.
Iraqi security forces continue to grow and to
shoulder more of the load, albeit slowly and amid
continuing concerns about the sectarian tendencies of
some elements in their ranks, inadequate logistics and
supporting institutions and an insufficient number of
qualified commissioned and non-commissioned
officers. There are now 152 Iraqi army, national police
and special operations forces battalions operating
alongside MNF-I — about two thirds of which are
capable of leading operations, albeit with some MNF-I
support. The Iraqi Defence and Interior Ministries are
employing 445,000 people, a number that could reach
519,000 by the end of the year. MNF-I has employed
counterinsurgency practices that underscore the
importance of units living among the people they are
securing. Accordingly, our forces have established
dozens of joint security stations and patrol bases,
manned by MNF-I and Iraqi forces, in Baghdad and
other areas across Iraq.
In mid-June, when all the surge brigades were in
place, MNF-I launched a series of offensive operations

5

S/PV.5763

focused on expanding the gains achieved in the
preceding months in Al Anbar province — clearing
Baquba and several key Baghdad neighbourhoods and
important areas in the so-called belt around Baghdad
and pursuing Al-Qaida in the Diyala River Valley and
other areas. Meanwhile, MNF-I engaged in dialogue
with former insurgent groups and tribes, in conjunction
with Iraqi officials, to broker local ceasefires and gain
their support in rooting out Al-Qaida in their
communities. We also continue to emphasize the
development of Iraqi security forces. Four provinces
have already been handed over to provincial Iraqi
control. We anticipate that several more will be
transferred to Iraqi control in the coming months.
The security situation in Iraq is being
transformed. Some of the players are changing sides.
Despite ongoing violence, we see a qualitative shift
against extremism as an improvement. Iraqis are taking
on more responsibility for protecting themselves. But,
in the coming months, we must redouble our efforts to
improve security within Iraq and prevent human
suffering, while preserving regional security and
stability. The leadership of Iraq also has a
responsibility to take concrete steps to pursue
reconciliation, so that the political track can catch up
with the improvements in security.
On 26 August, Iraq’s five most prominent leaders
from three major communities expressed gratitude for
the sacrifices these forces have made for Iraq and
agreed on the need for the continued presence of the
Multinational Force in Iraq. To that end, Iraqis stressed
the importance of renewing the mandate of resolution
1723 (2006) for another year. We expect to put forth a
draft resolution in that regard before the end of the
year.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I would
also like to thank the representative of the United
States for his presentation of the quarterly oral report
of the multinational force and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs for his comprehensive
briefing on the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI).
This is the first meeting to be held since the
adoption of resolution 1770 (2007), which constitutes a
turning point for the presence of the United Nations in
Iraq. Following reduced United Nations role in Iraq in
recent years, the time has come for the international
Organization to play a more effective part in assisting

6

the people and Government of Iraq in the process of
achieving security, stability and development.
The United Nations provides valuable assistance
to Iraq in several areas, such as constitutional support,
electoral assistance, reconstruction, development,
humanitarian assistance, human rights and other areas
that will help to speed up Iraq’s extrication from its
current situation, regain its natural position as a stable,
prosperous and active State in the international
community, and enable its people to benefit from its
enormous wealth. There is no doubt that the United
Nations can make a more effective contribution not
only in those areas, but in other areas as well, such as
encouraging the implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq and taking action to promote the
constructive role of the neighbouring countries in order
to serve the interests of Iraq and the Iraqi people.
The United Nations can also play a bigger role in
stimulating national dialogue in Iraq among the various
groups, given its comparative advantages and the
prevailing conditions in Iraq. We agree with the
Secretary-General that there is a need to seize this
opportunity. As time passes, we are becoming
increasingly convinced of the importance of national
reconciliation in Iraq among the various groups of its
people, and that this accord constitutes the most
important precondition for emerging from the current
difficult situation.
In order to succeed in their efforts to restore
stability to Iraq, build its national institutions and
reinvigorate its development, the Government of Iraq,
UNAMI and the multinational force need to make
concerted efforts and cooperate effectively among
themselves.
With regard to the issue of refugees and internally
displaced persons, the situation is deteriorating by the
day and, given its humanitarian dimensions, constitutes
a threat to stability. The Government of Iraq therefore
needs to resolve the problem, with the help of the
international community, and necessary assistance
must be provided to the neighbouring countries that are
bearing the brunt of the situation.
Another cause for concern is the issue of the
accountability of private security companies for their
violations of international humanitarian law and the
need for them to be held accountable for their crimes.
No violation of human rights in Iraq must be
overlooked and due process in dealing with detainees

07-55351

S/PV.5763

must be ensured. All who commit such violations must
be held to account.

hardening of the civil conflict and even the collapse of
the Iraqi State.

Ensuring the stability of the security situation
remains at the top of Iraq’s concerns. In our view, it is
essential to address the issue of stability through an
integrated approach that includes the continuous
strengthening of the Iraqi security forces, the
rehabilitation of former combatants from the armed
groups, and solving the humanitarian and socioeconomic problems that negatively affect the welfare
of the Iraqi people. National reconciliation should also
be supported and Iraqi leaders need to act in a spirit of
responsibility in that regard.

The complex situation is eloquently illustrated in
the problems of the future of Kirkuk and the tense
situation on the Iraq-Turkey border. In that regard, we
call once again for a peaceful settlement in the
northern Iraqi regions and reiterate that we fully
support the principle of the territorial integrity of Iraq
and Turkey alike.

Steps are currently being taken to strengthen
UNAMI so that it can carry out its mandated tasks
pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007). Ensuring the safety
and security of the Mission’s personnel should be a top
priority, especially in view of the lack of security in
Iraq.
Finally, we wish the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq and all the personnel
of UNAMI success in their difficult task.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing on the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
covering the months that have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1770 (2007), which reviewed and
considerably broadened United Nations authority in
Iraq.
We listened attentively to the briefing given by
the Permanent Representative of the United States,
Mr. Khalilzad, on the work of the multinational force.
Russia shares many of the assessments and
concerns on the situation in Iraq set out in the
Secretary-General’s report. Indeed, the situation there
continues to remain extremely tense. In spite of some
signs of improvement in the situation in Baghdad and a
number of provinces, violence and terrorist activity
remain integral realities in Iraq.
In our view, the greatest threat today is the
sectarian divisions in Iraqi society referred to at length
in the report. That phenomenon proves the need for
focused resolve in attempts to find a solution; it also
continues to sink new roots into Iraqi soil. We have
also heard alarming predictions about an inevitable

07-55351

The escalation of the Iraqi crisis might not only
dangerously destabilize the entire Middle East, but also
spill over far beyond its boundaries. It is obvious that
Iraq’s neighbours would not be well served by such
developments. We do not believe that the point of no
return has been reached. The possibility of achieving
stability remains. We are convinced that it is
impossible to normalize the situation in Iraq
exclusively by force. We therefore feel that a realistic
and lasting settlement can be achieved only through
political means, by developing broad-based inter-Iraqi
dialogue and achieving national reconciliation and
harmony. The United Nations can and must help the
Iraqis to do so.
Judging from the report, the United Nations side
is in agreement. Moreover, we fully support the
Secretary-General’s assertion that the United Nations,
participating in the Iraqi process, must enjoy the right
to interact with all parties and that this right must be
defended.
We recognize that, bearing in mind the current
acute security problems, it will not be easy for UNAMI
to assume new tasks, but we need to do everything we
can to that end, first and foremost by restoring Iraqi
confidence in the United Nations representatives. It is
therefore important to develop a mechanism for
cooperation with Iraq’s authorities that would allow the
Mission to play a credible in political and socioeconomic processes initiated by the leadership of that
country. In that regard, Baghdad must ratify the statusof-mission agreement as soon as possible so as to settle
once and for all the legal formalities for the duration of
its stay in the country. Finally, we believe that a firm
schedule for the multinational force’s stay might also
help to ease tension in Iraq.
We understand that a hasty withdrawal of
coalition forces would have deleterious consequences,
but that is not the true issue.

7

S/PV.5763

We are convinced that a timeline for reduction of
the foreign military presence in Iraq, with the prospect
of full withdrawal, would substantially defuse the
situation. We would like to draw the attention of
Council members to an incident to which the report
refers: the killing of Iraqi civilians by personnel of the
private security firm Blackwater. We share the
concerns stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
and we support the approach of the Iraqi authorities to
put an end to activities by the many mercenary groups
operating on Iraqi soil that violate Iraqi law. I should
mention that the exploits of those so-called
sub-contractors are hurting not only Iraqis, but also
Baghdad-based foreign diplomatic representatives,
including Russian representatives.
We believe that, without effective international
assistance to the political settlement process, the
leaders of Iraqi communities and parties will have
difficulty in overcoming their mutual distrust. As early
as 2003 we proposed the convening of a representative
international conference on Iraq, with the participation
of all major political forces in the country, including its
patriotic opposition, leading world Powers and
influential regional States. Although our initiative was
not acted upon at that time, it remains in force. We
have supported and will continue to support all
proposals that are in keeping with that approach.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing and the representative of the United States for
his briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/608)
indicates a reduction in the level of acts of violence,
but in Peru’s estimation that has not yet been sufficient
to prevent the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the wave of refugees
and internally displaced persons who are fleeing the
violence in Iraq. Nor has there been a significant
change in the human rights situation, in spite of
improved cooperation between the Iraqi Government
and the Multinational Force, as shown in the most
recent human rights report by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). On the contrary,
in some cases the situation has deteriorated, in
particular with regard to religious and ethnic
minorities. Iraqi leaders have not taken advantage of
the decrease in acts of violence to unblock the

8

deadlocked political process or to prevent sectarian
fighting.
Living conditions continue to deteriorate. Even
the water supply is no longer guaranteed; cholera has
broken out and school attendance is of great concern.
The worsening situation means that the cost of
reconstructing Iraq’s social, economic and political
fabric continues to increase. That is the price that Iraqi
civilians are paying for the lack of dialogue between
the country’s leaders and the lack of a spirit of
compromise in order to make headway on the sensitive
issues on the political agenda.
Peru is extremely concerned by the present
internal political situation in Iraq. Neither the
parliament’s failure to take decisions nor the
weakening of the Government due to boycotts and
resignations by some of its members contribute to the
stability of the country. This deepens distrust among
communities.
It is important to remember that the Iraqis
themselves bear primary responsibility for the future of
their country. We hope that the country’s various
sectors will understand that international efforts at this
stage of reconstruction require their commitment to
dialogue and reconciliation. We hope that the Prime
Minister will make every effort to lead that dialogue
and to work to revive the spirit of compromise among
his fellow citizens.
We believe that, to achieve that goal, essential
elements for dialogue and national reconciliation
continue to be the following: security issues; the
distribution of oil revenues; resolution of the problem
of Kirkuk; constitutional reform; allocation of
functions between the central Government and the
regions; and de-Baathification. In order to encourage
dialogue and democratic reconciliation, the security
situation must first and foremost be brought under
control. Terrorism, as well as militias and other armed
groups beyond the control of the State, must be
eradicated.
In this struggle, human rights and international
humanitarian law must be respected by all with a stake
in maintaining law and order and public security. In a
democracy, use of force not subject to the law and
inconsistent with respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law cannot be permitted. A
single, credible and non-sectarian body is required to

07-55351

S/PV.5763

legitimize the use of force in Iraq. Here, the militias
must be disarmed. Effective, credible and legitimate
security forces can be partners in stabilizing the
country and fully restoring its sovereignty. These
responsibilities must be transferred more quickly from
the Multinational Force to the Iraqi forces.

Secretary-General Pascoe and Ambassador Khalilzad
for their briefings.

Peru also regrets the deterioration in the human
rights situation and urges Iraqi authorities and the
international community to continue to build a
democracy that respects human rights. There must be
no place for impunity in the establishment of
democratic institutions in Iraq. The raison d’être of a
State is to protect the lives and the human rights of its
citizens. Those who attack the rule of law or human
rights should be called to account in a court of law.

The humanitarian and security situation described
this morning is extremely disturbing, inasmuch as
continuing violence forces ever-larger numbers of
civilians to flee their homes. There are now more than
2 million internally displaced persons and more than
2 million refugees. In that vein, I wish to pay tribute to
neighbouring countries and their peoples, who, in
extraordinary conditions, have to date have taken in
these refugees; I make special mention of Jordan and
Syria.

In the endeavour to restore hope to the Iraqi
people, progress in rebuilding the infrastructure and
economic and social development are of the greatest
importance. The International Compact with Iraq is an
important framework for international assistance.
Conditions for its implementation will improve with
improvements
in security, reconciliation
and
transparency, and with the enactment of national laws
that reflect solid political agreements on the
management of natural resources. Iraq’s oil wealth
must be dealt with in a responsible and transparent
manner. Distribution of oil revenue in a negotiated
fashion will help to improve the climate of
understanding among Iraqis, and will engender
confidence that those resources will benefit all citizens.
For any effort to stabilize Iraq to be viable,
neighbouring countries too must cooperate. Iraq and its
neighbours must continue to act cautiously and
diligently to address urgent issues on their common
agenda while avoiding unilateral action that would
complicate the delicate situation in Iraq. Peru urges a
stronger spirit of multilateral assistance for Iraq.
Finally, Peru expresses its support for the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. We consider that
it should continue, consistent with its mandate and with
the possibilities on the ground, to work to consolidate
all activities that can help attain political and legal
stability, institutional and economic reconstruction,
humanitarian assistance and the protection of human
rights in Iraq.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I wish to join previous speakers in thanking Under-

07-55351

Iraq continues to face challenges that involve
considerable risks to the region to the entire
international community. They include political,
security, humanitarian and economic challenges.

For its part, France is supporting the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in assisting internally displaced persons and
refugees. In that context, it is now more necessary than
ever to work together to find solutions by supporting
the efforts of the Baghdad authorities. On Wednesday,
17 October, the President of the French Republic
reaffirmed to President Talabani during his visit to
Paris that France firmly supports the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq. Of course, the Iraqis
themselves understand that they must come together in
order to regain control of their own future and to put in
place institutions that can bring about a consensus that
will enable them to build a society of peace.
The key is a genuine process of national
reconciliation that is as inclusive as possible in order to
isolate the forces that threaten the unity, sovereignty
and stability of Iraq. Moreover, the States of the region
have an important role to play and should therefore
show sincere and complete willingness to contribute to
stability and reconstruction in Iraq. France supports the
process involving neighbouring countries that led to
the establishment of thematic working groups, and
hopes that this process will lead to tangible results at
the ministerial meeting in the beginning of November
in Istanbul, where Mr. Kouchner, our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, will participate.
In the context of a withdrawal horizon for foreign
forces, the international community through the United
Nations should strengthen its own mobilization. We
support strengthening the role of the United Nations

9

S/PV.5763

Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
permitted the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007). After
the high-level meeting of 22 September, the first
proposals contained in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2007/608) — strengthening of staffing in Baghdad
and Arbil, a United Nations presence in Basra, setting
up a follow-up mechanism of the neighbouring
countries process — all of these proposals open the
door to strengthening the different areas where the
United Nations plays a role.
In the political area, there is a possibility to
contribute to dialogue and national reconciliation. We
are also thinking about what could be done to assist the
grave humanitarian situation, to strengthen the
protection of civilians, to enforce respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and to fight
against impunity. The initial responsibility lies, of
course, with the Iraqi Government, as it is not only the
protection of their own people that is involved, but also
the protection of United Nations staff and associated
staff. It is a disturbing situation as we have seen in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/608). It is
urgent to act.
In terms of economics, there is the International
Compact with Iraq. In this respect, we should recall
that in order for international assistance and
cooperation to be effective and in order for economic
growth to be a permanent fixture in Iraq, the authorities
must establish mechanisms and rules of management
that allow for good governance.
This strengthening of the United Nations
presence on the ground should obviously bear in mind
the constraints having to do with security. Here I would
like to pay tribute to the work done by UNAMI, as well
as the humanitarian workers. They are operating under
conditions that make it very difficult and dangerous to
contribute to the protection of civilians and to provide
assistance to people in need.

Iraq. Starting in the next few weeks, we will launch the
first initiatives in the northern part of the country with
an increase in France’s consular presence.
With everyone’s joint efforts, the people of Iraq
will be able to find the peace and security that they are
entitled in a State that is unified, free and democratic.
We are positively committed to this.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his
comprehensive briefing.
My delegation also thanks the representative of
the United States, who spoke on behalf of the
Multinational Force.
Ongoing violence in Iraq continues to pose
serious challenges to the Government and people of
Iraq in their efforts to achieve progress in
reconstruction and nation-building. After years of
hardship, the Iraqi people deserve peace, stability and
progress. Considering the significance of security and
stability for making progress in the political and socioeconomic sectors, my delegation has little doubt that
the Government of Iraq recognizes the importance of
enhanced efforts, in cooperation with international
forces, to find viable solution to the security concerns
in the country.
Since conflict in Iraq has been unfolding across
ethnic, sectarian and political lines, Indonesia holds the
view that responsibility for restoring security and
stability lies not only with the Iraqi Government, but
also with all factions in the country. In this regard,
Indonesia welcomes the ceasefire by some factions that
led to the decrease in violence during September 2007.

France supports and will continue to support the
United Nations in this difficult undertaking. My
country also intends to contribute to thinking done
within the European Union, encouraging it to become
more resolutely involved in Iraq through specific
initiatives.

The key to sustainable peace in Iraq is unity.
Continued high levels of displacement and political
gridlock have reduced the opportunity for concord. My
delegation therefore believes that the people of Iraq
should stand side-by-side at all levels, set aside all
ethnic, religious and political differences and work
together in order to respond to the challenges that
continue to confront the country. Genuine commitment
by all factions to political dialogue and reconciliation
is needed more now than ever.

As Bernard Kouchner indicated in New York on
22 September, France will become involved in
particular in supporting the health sector and justice, in
this latter case through the training of magistrates in

The international community should leave no
stone unturned in promoting conditions conducive to
such reconciliation. In that regard, my delegation
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of

10

07-55351

S/PV.5763

the Secretary-General in maintaining contacts with
political, religious and tribal leaders to encourage an
inclusive political process aimed at bolstering security
improvements in Iraq.
The International Compact with Iraq, which is
premised on a reciprocal relationship between
peacebuilding and economic prosperity, remains an
important framework for international partnership with
Iraq. The Compact will require institutional support in
order to be effective. Accordingly, my delegation
welcomes the establishment of the Compact secretariat
as an agency of the Government of Iraq operating with
the support of the United Nations to facilitate the
implementation of the Compact.
The reaffirmation of support expressed by
delegations in the September high-level meeting on
Iraq reflects the continuing solidarity of the
international community with Iraq. In our view, such a
reaffirmation should help to strengthen the
commitment of Iraqis to the goals of the Compact.
The continuing violence in Iraq has brought about
serious humanitarian consequences. It has caused not
only displacement, but also restriction of movement
and limitation of access for humanitarian operations.
We are troubled by reports of the increase in the
number of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons. The condition faced by Iraqi children is also a
source of particular concern.
With 4.2 million Iraqis being displaced,
humanitarian assistance becomes a daunting but
essential task. In this regard, Indonesia welcomes the
launch of a joint appeal by a number of United Nations
specialized agencies in September 2007 to address the
urgent health needs of Iraqi refugees in neighbouring
countries.
Coordination is essential in implementing welltargeted humanitarian aid for the Iraqi displaced
persons and refugees. Accordingly, Indonesia believes
that the United Nations can play a key role in
supporting the Iraqi Government and host
neighbouring
countries
to
coordinate
their
humanitarian activities.
Support from countries in the region remains
instrumental in building the capacity of the Iraqi
Government to respond to various challenges. The
continued implementation of the outcome of the Sharm
el-Sheikh conference, including its working groups, is

07-55351

of paramount importance. We also attach great
importance to the next expanded meeting of Iraq’s
neighbours to be convened in Turkey next month.
International partnership and support are key for
Iraq as it faces the innumerable challenges ahead. The
role and contribution of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is particularly pertinent in
helping the Iraqis achieve their goals. My delegation
recognizes the increasing responsibility of UNAMI as
tasked by Security Council resolution 1770 (2007),
which my delegation fully supported. We, however,
underline the importance to ensure a balance between
the expansion of tasks and availability of adequate
resources. This will eventually assure the success of
the Mission.
While taking into account the security challenges,
the deployment of UNAMI to new areas will increase
access for the Iraqis to international assistance. In this
regard, my delegation welcomes the dispatch of a
UNAMI team to explore the possibility of deploying
staff to a new location in Basra.
Finally, I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s full
support for UNAMI and its work in Iraq.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Like previous speakers, I
wish to express my thanks to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2007/608) and to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for the briefing.
We fully share both the positive and negative
assessments of others regarding the challenges, so I
will be very brief in my remarks.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
briefing on behalf of the Multinational force, and I
must say that we have noted and strongly welcome the
positive and encouraging developments on which he
has briefed us. Let us hope that in the future, those
encouraging developments will deepen and expand. I
believe that we all have the responsibility to give
oxygen to this process.
I think our starting point should be the SecretaryGeneral’s view, which was recalled by Ambassador
Pascoe: “there is an opportunity today that should not
be missed”. Once again, I think that that is a starting
point. We are at a critical juncture, and we have to
move quickly and decisively in all directions. Any
improvement in the security situation is an opportunity
to take, so that we can build what Iraqis really need: a

11

S/PV.5763

national compact, a shared vision of their common
future as a people and as a nation.
As stated in the report, by Mr. Pascoe in his
briefing and by other speakers preceding me, the
responsibility for the internal political process lies with
the Iraqi people and their legitimate institutions. But, at
the same time, the United Nations now has a
fundamental and substantially expanded role, as set
forth in resolution 1770 (2007). The Iraqi people, as
Ambassador Qazi told us in June, are faced with
choices that “are not black or white; nor are they zerosum” (S/PV.5693, p. 3). The United Nations is uniquely
suited to identify gray areas that can accommodate all
the legitimate concerns of the participants in the
political process, and it is up to all of us to empower it
to do so. I believe, that, as Ambassador Pascoe told us,
“it is important that the United Nations be afforded the
necessary political and humanitarian space to
implement the new mandate, and the ability of the
Organization to talk with all sides must be protected
and respected (supra)”.
Another crucial element is the ongoing regional
dialogue between Iraq and its neighbours, which has
been touched upon by many previous speakers. We
welcome last September’s initiative, by the SecretaryGeneral and the Iraqi Government, to convene a
ministerial meeting. We strongly support the ongoing
process that began with the extended meeting of
neighbouring countries at Sharm el-Sheikh, and we
look forward to the next meeting, to be held in
Istanbul. We have also noted, as a positive sign, the
indication of strong United Nations engagement in the
process of facilitating the dialogue with the
neighbours.
Furthermore, we continue to be extremely
concerned by the humanitarian situation. We commend
the efforts of those countries that have received Iraqi
refugees, as well as the efforts of the United Nations.
For its part, Italy responded to last July’s Joint Appeal
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF by giving
more than $4.2 million for activities to benefit Iraqi
refugees and internally displaced persons in Iraq, Syria
and Jordan.
We have to proceed effectively in the
implementation of the International Compact with Iraq
and in the reconstruction effort. Italy, as Co-Chair of
the
Donor
Committee
of
the
International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq (IRFFI), is

12

planning to convene the sixth meeting of the Donor
Committee in Bari, Italy, on 28 and 29 October, in nine
days’ time. At the Bari meeting, we will consider the
final recommendations emerging from the review of
the IRFFI terms of reference, conducted during the past
month. The goals of the review are, as we know, to
ensure strong Iraqi ownership and leadership of the
IRFFI process; to ensure clear alignment of the IRFFI
with Iraqi priorities as contained in the country’s
national development strategy and the International
Compact with Iraq; and to clarify and streamline the
values component of IRFFI governance. We are
confident that the revised terms of reference will
respond to all those goals.
A more effective IRFFI will be an important tool
at the disposal of the international community — a tool
that responds to the appeal of Ambassador Pascoe that
security arrangements and financial and logistical
backing are also essential for the success of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. That is what we
are trying to do.
At the same time, unified leadership by the
Secretary-General, through his Special Representative
for Iraq, over the contributions of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, as stipulated in
resolution 1770 (2007), is an essential step towards
making the international contribution to Iraq’s
reconstruction more effective.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to thank Ambassador Pascoe
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/608). Belgium agrees with its analysis and its
recommendations.
A little less than a year ago, the United Nations
sent a double warning to Iraq and the international
community as a whole: first, that there was a risk that
the continued waves of terrorist attacks and sectarian
violence could lead to a widespread civil war; and,
secondly, that there was a danger that such a
destabilization would affect not only Iraq, but the
entire region.
A year later, that risk and that danger are far from
having disappeared from Iraq. Certainly, we can
cautiously welcome the fact that, for the first time, the
number of victims seems to be on the decline,
particularly in Baghdad. But, whether in Baghdad,
Mosul or Basra, Iraqis — particularly civilians —
belonging to all faiths and ethnic groups continue to
suffer an intolerable level of violence. Today more than

07-55351

S/PV.5763

yesterday, that security challenge cannot be overcome
through an exclusively military approach.
With regard to its population, the Iraqi
Government now has the obligation to redouble its
efforts to achieve reconciliation among all parties,
based on the notions of the rule of law and respect for
fundamental rights. To that end, the tools available to
the Iraqis are well known: revising the Constitution to
restore Iraqis’ confidence in a State that guarantees that
all communities can enjoy their right to participate in a
common future; continuing the legislative work on
sensitive issues such as the management of
hydrocarbon resources, the Baathist legacy and the
implementation of article 140 of the Constitution; and,
finally, strengthening institutions — particularly the
law enforcement forces — based on the democratic
rule of law and respect for fundamental rights. For our
country, the efforts of Iraq’s Government and
parliament over the past few months confirm the
relevance of that assessment. However, a long road still
lies ahead, and greater efforts are needed to attain the
aforementioned objectives.
The other lesson of the past few months is the
twofold realization of the international community: on
the one hand, that the challenges facing Iraq do not end
at its borders, but also affect neighbouring countries
and the international community as a whole; and, on
the other, that it is our duty and in our interests to help
the Iraqi authorities in their efforts to find a response.
That realization has led to several initiatives,
which Belgium welcomes and in which we have
participated, directly or through the intermediary of the
European Union: the conference of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
displaced persons, held in April at Geneva; the
launching, in May at Sharm el-Sheikh, of the
International Compact with Iraq, aimed at its
reconstruction and development; the regional
consultation organized at the ministerial level by the
World Health Organization, held in late July at
Damascus; the forthcoming meeting at Bari to discuss
the future of the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq; and, in early November at Istanbul,
the continuation of Iraq’s discussions with its
neighbours and with major actors in the international
community.
Belgium supports the process begun by the Iraqi
Government
in
March
in
Baghdad.
That
systematization of a political and technical dialogue

07-55351

should permit increased stabilization of the region,
with mutual respect for the strengthened sovereignty of
Iraq and of its neighbouring States.
However, in addition to increasing the number of
these initiatives, we should ensure that we maximize
the benefits of the partnership thus created between
Iraq and the international community, by empowering
the Iraqi Government and regional actors and by
guaranteeing,
in
addition
to
their
unique
characteristics, the complementarity and coherence of
these initiatives so that we can have a real impact on
the daily life of the populations concerned.
It is out of this concern for coherence that
Belgium welcomes the renewed mandate that
resolution 1770 (2007) gave to the United Nations in
Iraq this summer. Although we are aware of the limits
imposed by the persistent lack of security, we express
our full support to the Secretary-General in his
determination to have the United Nations play a
strengthened role of coordinator and catalyst of
everyone’s efforts to help Iraqi people to build the
country that they deserve.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to join others in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his introductory remarks. We
welcome the opportunity for a briefing by Ambassador
Khalilzad on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.
I would also like to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay tribute to Mr. Ashraf Qazi and to thank him for his
distinguished contribution to the people of Iraq during
his three-year tenure as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq.
Although the situation in Iraq has improved to
some extent, the country still faces formidable
challenges in the political, security, reconstruction and
humanitarian spheres. The number of Iraqi refugees
and internally displaced persons has been increasing
monthly. The humanitarian situation in Iraq has
become the most serious humanitarian crisis
confronting the world today. How to further stabilize
the situation so that the process of Iraq’s peaceful
reconstruction and reconciliation can embark upon a
smooth path is an issue meriting serious consideration
by the Iraqi Government and the international
community. We subscribe to the views expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2007/608).
Political compromise and genuine attempts to
work across ethnic, sectarian and political lines are

13

S/PV.5763

needed now more than ever. In the final analysis, the
future of Iraq should be decided by the Iraqi
themselves. It is our hope that all political leaders in
Iraq will demonstrate courage, take resolute measures,
positively respond to the aspirations of the Iraqi people
and the international community and seek unity and
cooperation. Of course, achieving the proper solution
of the Iraqi situation and its issues also poses a test for
the international community. The United Nations
should continue to stand by the Iraqi people and should
be prepared to provide all useful assistance and help, as
required.
Resolution 1770 (2007) is very important. It
authorizes the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) to play a more active role in assisting
Iraq in national reconciliation, regional dialogue,
economic reconstruction and humanitarian relief. In
that connection, we are looking forward to full
engagement by the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, once he is
in Iraq. We hope that he will implement the mandate of
the resolution and take full advantage of the
impartiality, expertise and authority of the United
Nations, and that he will make a fully committed effort
to change the Iraqi situation for the better. It is our
hope, too, that the parties inside and outside Iraq will
provide
energetic
support
to
the
Special
Representative, to provide him with the conditions and
space he needs to play for his designated role.
Ensuring the safety and security of the facilities
and personnel of UNAMI is an important prerequisite
for the effective operation of the Mission. The security
risks in Iraq continue to constrain UNAMI’s daily
operations. We express our serious concern about that.
It is our belief that the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force should shoulder the critical
responsibility in that regard. No effort should be spared
to provide UNAMI with all the necessary security
guarantees so that it can carry out the operations
mandated by the Security Council.
A stable, united, prosperous Iraq will not only
live up to the aspirations and expectations of all of the
Iraqi people, but also be conducive to the peace and
tranquillity of Iraq’s neighbours and of the Middle East
region as a whole. The Sharm el-Sheikh process
initiated last May shows the resolve of countries of the
region to strengthen regional cooperation and maintain
the stability of Iraq. The international community
should pay heightened attention to the views and

14

suggestions of those regional countries on the issue of
Iraq. We are happy to see that Iraq has improved its
relations with neighbouring and other regional
countries. It is our hope that all parties concerned will
maintain this momentum of cooperation and will work
harder to make substantial progress at the second
expanded meeting of Iraq’s neighbouring countries, to
be held in Istanbul in November.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of Panama, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe and Ambassador Khalilzad
for the briefings that they have given us. We also take
note of the concern the Secretary-General has
expressed on the question of Iraq. We also thank
former Special Representative Ashraf Qazi for his
important work at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The delegation
of Panama is aware of the very difficult conditions in
which he and all UNAMI personnel have worked.
Iraq is experiencing a critical situation, and great
attention must be devoted to it not only by the Security
Council but by the international community in general.
We are deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation
as a consequence of the violence taking place in Iraq.
The UNAMI report on human rights in Iraq which was
released on 11 October shows the darkest side of this
conflict: millions of Iraqis forced to abandon their
homes, many of them living in dire conditions, without
access to food and basic services, with children being
particularly vulnerable to disease.
In view of this situation, the United Nations must
take on a more active role in Iraq, providing assistance
in order to strengthen the Iraq Government’s capacity
to respond in the best possible way to the humanitarian
needs of its people. UNAMI should carry out its work
in an impartial but not a neutral way. Its activities
should take into account all political, religious and
tribal sectors. Otherwise, it will only feed resentment
and create more violence. Only in that way will
progress be achieved in the social and material
reconstruction that can bring with it a reduction in
violence and the return to their homes of the current
4.2 million displaced and refugee Iraqis.
National
reconciliation
requires
a
true
commitment from the international community to
rebuild the institutions of a country that is divided by
deep wounds from the past. We call on the United
Nations to redouble its efforts in its activities to

07-55351

S/PV.5763

achieve inclusivity in the political process and dialogue
in Iraq. We stress the preponderant role of leaders of
Iraq in this context. Those Iraqi leaders need to have
political courage. Only in that way can violence be
reduced, and only by reducing violence can due respect
for the human rights of millions of Iraqis be
guaranteed.
We recognize the progress noted by the
International Compact with Iraq in its mid-year report,
and we trust that the international community,
especially neighbouring countries in the region, will
continue to support this initiative.
We also would like to recognize the importance
of Iraq’s presence and participation in the Council’s
deliberations. It is important that in the future the
Council continue to listen to Iraq’s opinion on the
participation of the United Nations in the conflict.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the
report before us and the representative of the United
States, Ambassador Khalilzad, for his briefing on the
activities of the Multinational Force in Iraq.
We view positively the rounds of talks,
negotiations and visits by the Iraqi Prime Minister to
neighbouring countries and further abroad in trying to
find lasting solutions to the problems of Iraq. We also
welcome the ongoing work of the International
Compact with Iraq and we note the commitment of the
participants, who work in partnership with the
Government of Iraq to ensure stability, security and
economic reconstruction.
Notwithstanding those positive developments, my
delegation remains gravely concerned that the security
situation in Iraq is still precarious. We reiterate that
any resolution to the conflict in Iraq must include an
all-inclusive
political
process
and
national
reconciliation and constructive dialogue with all
neighbouring States.
In that regard, we welcome the conference on
Iraq that is soon to be held in Istanbul and attended by
its neighbours. The role of regional actors cannot be
overemphasized, and my delegation supports all efforts
aimed at addressing the violence and the issue of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Regional
cooperation is necessary for ensuring stability not only
in Iraq, but in the entire region.

07-55351

The continued humanitarian crisis is cause for
serious concern and requires urgent collective
attention. If unresolved, the issue of internally
displaced persons and refugees could have dire
consequences for the country and indeed the entire
region.
We were disturbed by reports of activities by
military contractors that have resulted in the deaths of
innocent Iraqi civilians. We therefore once again call
upon all those involved in Iraq to exercise extreme
caution and for tighter regulations governing the
actions of private security companies.
It should be noted that the recent human rights
report of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI) indicated that UNAMI shares the view of the
International Committee of the Red Cross that
“private military firms must respect international
humanitarian law and that the increasing recourse
to their services ‘risks eroding the fundamental
distinction between civilians and combatants’”.
(UNAMI, Human Rights Report, 1 April-30 June
2007, para. 22)
Resolution 1770 (2007) bears testimony to the
determination of the international community to assist
the Iraqi people in moving beyond the current crisis.
My delegation strongly supports an expanded United
Nations role in Iraq, in line with our commitment to
multilateralism and conflict resolution. The United
Nations has a particularly important role to play with
regard to national reconciliation in Iraq. As the
Secretary-General indicated in his report, the United
Nations not only enjoys good relations with all parties
across the political spectrum in Iraq, but also has the
advantage of relying on past best practices gained from
operating in other global conflicts. However, with
regard to a more direct role of the United Nations, as
resolution 1770 (2007) itself implies, an expanded role
can only be realized as “circumstances permit”
(resolution 1770 (2007), para. 2). The safety of United
Nations personnel must be an overriding consideration.
We reiterate that, notwithstanding the events that
led to the current situation, the Security Council has a
responsibility to ensure that the powers granted to the
Multinational Force in Iraq are exercised in a manner
consistent with the decisions of the Security Council,
that Iraq’s natural resources and the funds in the
Development Fund for Iraq are used for the benefit of

15

S/PV.5763

the Iraqi people and that international law and human
rights laws are upheld and respected by all parties.
Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting on Iraq relating to the work
assigned to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI). We would also like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for the briefing that he gave on the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
1770 (2007).
A perusal of that report provides a review of the
overall situation in Iraq, with signs of hope but also —
and primarily — areas of great concern. In fact, Iraq
remains a country where violence reigns, fuelling
insecurity with tragic consequences for the daily lives
of people and increasing the phenomenon of internally
displaced persons and refugees flowing to
neighbouring countries and further. It is urgent for
Iraqi authorities, who hold the primary responsibility
for protecting their people, to take appropriate
measures to reduce that violence in order for the
decline in the number of casualties noted in September
not become a distant memory.
My delegation nevertheless welcomes the
ceasefire by the Mahdi army and the alliance of the
Sunni insurgents against Al Qaida, which has
contributed, even if only minimally, to a reduction in
the violence. As emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his report, the challenge will be “transform these
military-political developments into a basis for national
reconciliation.” (S/2007/608, para. 65)
National dialogue must continue in Iraq without
complacency, but also without exclusion, in order to
meet the challenge of violence and insecurity and roll
back the threat of civil war, which has for so long
hovered over the country. That effort, which must be
led by both political and religious Iraqi authorities,
must also be strongly supported by the international
community, which must not let its assistance flag in
that regard.
We are grateful to the Multinational Force, which
is carrying out a dangerous task in extreme conditions,
as just reported to us by the delegation of the United
States. However, we call on the Force to take into
particular consideration the repeated instances of
civilian casualties in its operations, so as not to lose the
hard-won support of the Iraqi people.

16

The same concept must be applied to private
armies that are not controlled by the Iraqi Government.
In that context, we welcome the adoption of resolution
1770 (2007) of 10 August, which has broadened the
mandate of UNAMI and the involvement of the United
Nations in coordinating tasks to rebuild Iraq in all
areas.
Congo notes the specific measures called for by
the United Nations to follow up on resolution 1770
(2007). The acknowledged experience of the United
Nations is incomparable in important areas such as
political and institutional assistance, in particular in
promoting political dialogue and electoral assistance,
economic development with a concerted implementation
of the International Compact with Iraq, the protection
of human rights, humanitarian aid and legal and
judicial assistance. There is no doubt that that
experience will make a great contribution to rebuilding
Iraq, which we all want to see unified, democratic,
prosperous, sovereign and at peace with itself and its
neighbours. In that regard, the constructive
commitment of neighbouring countries and other
countries in the region, as suggested by the SecretaryGeneral, remains vital to ensuring the stability of Iraq,
and my delegation encourages that vision.
In conclusion, my delegation would call for
solidarity on the part of Member States of our
Organization in supporting both financial and logistic
resources for Iraq in its difficult task of reconstruction.
Finally, we are pleased with the appointment of a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and wish him much success in his difficult work.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to join the
previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing. I also take this opportunity to
extend our thanks to Mr. Ashraf Qazi for the
outstanding work he has done in and for Iraq in his
previous capacity of Special Representative for Iraq, as
well as to all involved staff of the United Nations and
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I also thank United States Ambassador
Khalilzad for his report on behalf of the countries
making up the Multinational Force, among them my
own country, Slovakia.
As we have heard in the briefing, Iraq continues
to face many challenges, with the security situation on
the ground remaining highly complex. We regret and

07-55351

S/PV.5763

deplore the continuing high level of violence in Iraq
and its devastating effects on almost every aspect of
life. It remains a source of our constant concern. We
strongly condemn all those acts of violence and call for
additional efforts and measures to improve the security
situation, the protection of civilians and the overall
humanitarian conditions, which are truly alarming, as
we heard in the briefing by Mr. Pascoe.
Nevertheless, encouraging developments and
initiatives have been taking place at national, regional
and international levels recently. We believe that those
concerted efforts are vital in assisting Iraq to bring
about stability, security and prosperity in the country.
In this respect, the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1770 (2007) in August,
renewing and extending the mandate of UNAMI, is a
significant and welcome step. Slovakia supports a
strong United Nations presence and expanded mandate
in Iraq to help that country in its transition towards
stability, democracy, the rule of law and economic
prosperity. We are convinced that increased United
Nations assistance, strengthened presence and
expanded role will make possible further advances in
genuine political dialogue, national reconciliation,
economic reform, respect for human rights and the rule
of law in the country. We hope the Iraqi leadership will
use this assistance to achieve a sustainable solution to
the crisis in Iraq.
I would like to use this opportunity to reaffirm
my country’s support for a secure, stable, democratic
and prosperous Iraq and to reiterate our commitments
to this goal. In this regard, Slovakia also reaffirms its
unambiguous support for an active United Nations
engagement and role in implementing the International
Compact with Iraq. We are encouraged by the
conclusions of the mid-year progress report, which
highlighted significant achievements in many sectors
despite the difficult security situation.
We also welcome the establishment of the
Compact secretariat as an agency of the Government of
Iraq, which will facilitate the practical implementation
of Compact plans and activities on the ground. As a
member of the European Union (EU), Slovakia
expresses its readiness to participate actively and
constructively in common EU efforts to promote and
implement Compact priorities.
We fully share the view that the regional actors,
mainly Iraq’s immediate neighbours, could and should

07-55351

play a more active role in promoting Iraq’s peace and
stability. That would benefit not only Iraq, but also its
neighbours in turn, as well as the wider region. We
agree with Mr. Pascoe that constructive regional
engagement and contributions to the success of Iraq’s
stabilization remain instrumental and are in the interest
of all Iraq’s neighbours. We are therefore looking
forward to the next expanded meeting of Iraq’s
neighbours, to be held in Istanbul early next month. We
hope that meeting will further enhance a process of
regional confidence-building through concrete dialogue
and practical cooperation.
At the same time, we continue to believe that the
active engagement and full responsibility of the
Government of Iraq in the process of transition and
stabilization remain decisive. To put it simply, the Iraqi
ownership of this process is truly fundamental. Without
it, it will be difficult to succeed in tackling the many
challenges faced by this country and its people.
In this regard, we strongly encourage the
Government of Iraq, together with all relevant parties
and leaders in the country, to make substantial progress
on the promotion of political compromise and genuine
national reconciliation. It is imperative to act
responsibly and work across ethnic, sectarian and
political divides.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that it is
important that all possible efforts be undertaken to
address the increasing humanitarian suffering of a large
number of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons. Appropriate measures are also needed to
alleviate the heavy burden carried by neighbouring
countries, in particular Jordan and Syria, in this
connection. The role and activities of such bodies as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the International Organization for Migration
remain important and highly required. However, here
again — and especially in this particular case — we
see how imperative it is to promote successful national
dialogue in the reconciliation among all constituencies
and communities in Iraq. Only such an approach can
effectively prevent further outflow of people and
enable Iraqi refugees and displaced persons to return to
their homes.
Finally, we also would like to join others in
wishing the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General all the success in his new mission.

17

S/PV.5763

Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his presentation of the Secretary-General’s
report. That is the first report on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
since the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007). I would
also like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his own
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq, of which the United Kingdom remains the
second-largest contributor.
I would like to echo the Secretary-General’s thanks
to Mr. Ashraf Qazi for his tireless work as Special
Representative for Iraq over the last three years. We look
forward to working closely with the new Special
Representative as he takes steps to implement the
enhanced role, as set out in resolution 1770 (2007).
The Secretary-General reminded us this morning
of the point in his report that there is now an
opportunity that should not be missed. Over the last
eight months, as set out by General Petraeus in his
testimony to the United States Congress and by
Ambassador Khalilzad today, the Iraqi security forces
and the Multinational Force have had significant and
positive impact on security in Iraq, with sectarian
violence falling and successes against Al-Qaida.
These are very welcome developments, and they
need to be followed up by political steps towards
national reconciliation, driven by Iraqis and supported
and facilitated as necessary by the international
community. We encourage Iraqi leaders to build on the
agreements reached during the leadership conference in
August. In particular, we are keen to see further
meetings of the Prime Minister, the President and his
two Vice-Presidents to reach agreements on key
political issues. We welcome the priority the new
Special Representative has said he will give to
promoting national dialogue, as Mr. Pascoe set out
today.
Iraq is not going to succeed without the full
backing of its neighbours and States in the region. I
echo what colleagues have said in welcoming the
proposal made by the Secretary-General, at the highlevel meeting on Iraq last month, to establish a
secretariat for regional cooperation. We hope that this
can be discussed further at the Iraq neighbours meeting
in Istanbul in November, where the Special
Representative’s participation will be very welcome.
We hope that the meeting will approve the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal. The sooner the secretariat is

18

established, the sooner the principle of sustained
regional engagement and cooperation can have a
beneficial, practical effect.
The international community has to play its part,
too. Key partners have reiterated their commitment to
Iraq within the expanded neighbours’ process and at
the high-level meeting. This week, the European Union
committed itself to more active support for Iraq and the
United Nations presence.
The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
support of Iraq through our military, diplomatic and
development efforts. Following discussions with the
Government of Iraq and our Multinational Force
partners, Prime Minister Gordon Brown set out the
United Kingdom’s military and economic plans in the
south of Iraq, where we have lead-nation responsibility
within the Multinational Force.
As a result of the progress we have made in
training Iraqi security forces, and based on conditions
on the ground, we expect that provincial Iraqi control
will be established in Basra province in the next two
months. That would complete the transfer of
responsibility for security to Iraqi control in the four
southern Iraqi provinces that have been under British
responsibility. British forces will then focus on training
and mentoring the Iraqi army and police, securing
supply routes and policing the Iraq-Iran border, while
maintaining the ability to come to the assistance of
Iraqi security forces when called upon. Subject to
military advice nearer the time, we plan to move to a
second stage of overwatch in the spring of 2008, when
we will have fewer troops, with a more limited
reintervention capacity, largely focused on training and
mentoring.
In parallel, we will be supporting the economic
reconstruction work announced by Prime Minister
al-Maliki in July, including by helping to establish a
new Basra development commission, strengthening the
engagement of the international private sector in the
south and providing advice on investment and growth.
International support for provincial authorities is
important as they coordinate projects in the south that
will have a lasting effect. We are working closely with
the United Nations to advise on and facilitate the
establishment of a United Nations presence in Basra
over the coming months. I would draw attention to the
request for financial and logistical assistance made by
the Secretary-General, as set out by Mr. Pascoe today,

07-55351

S/PV.5763

which are needed to allow the United Nations to
implement its role fully. I hope that Member States will
consider what support they can provide.
As I said at the beginning, there is an opportunity
now for Iraq and for us all that we must not miss.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.
My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the comprehensive report (S/2007/608) he
has submitted pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007). We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his introduction and update on the report.
We also wish to thank Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad
for his briefing on the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I).
By resolution 1770 (2007), the Council expanded
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in the political and reconciliation
processes, while the Multinational Force maintained its
lead role in maintaining peace and security in the
country. The situation in Iraq remains challenging and
the degree of success in UNAMI’s work will largely
depend on the willingness of Iraqis themselves to bury
their differences for the sake of peace. In that regard,
Ghana is encouraged by the series of legislative
initiatives that the Iraqi leadership announced on
26 August 2007, aimed at breaking the impasse in the
political process. We are also encouraged by the effort
by the Constitutional Review Committee to submit its
final report to the Council of Representatives by the
end of this year.
Ghana welcomes the steps taken by the
Secretary-General,
including
his
meeting
on
22 September 2007 with the participants of the
expanded neighbours’ meetings — a meeting aimed at
mobilizing regional support and cooperation, which are
essential in facilitating the full and effective
implementation of the mandate of UNAMI — and the
progress of the International Compact with Iraq. In that
regard, we welcome the establishment of the Compact
secretariat, as well as the administrative and technical
support being provided on an interim basis by the
United Nations, the World Bank and other development
partners. My delegation further wishes to underscore
the importance of the six-month workplan being
developed
to
streamline
the
activities
and
implementation of the International Compact for Iraq.

07-55351

It is my delegation’s expectation that the next
expanded meeting of Iraq’s neighbours, which is to be
held in Istanbul, Turkey, will contribute to the
satisfactory resolution of issues relating to energy,
refugees and security — among other issues with farreaching regional and global repercussions.
In the light of recent ethnic tensions along Iraq’s
borders, Ghana appeals to all sides to exercise
restraint, and calls on Iraq’s neighbours to continue to
play constructive roles in the quest for durable peace in
the region.
In conclusion, Ghana remains concerned about
the political, security, economic, humanitarian and
human rights situation in Iraq. It wishes to commend
UNAMI’s work in promoting an all-inclusive political
dialogue — including its support for the constitutional
and electoral processes in Iraq — in order to create an
enabling environment for addressing the challenges
confronting the people of Iraq. Ultimately peace,
reconciliation and unity in Iraq can only be achieved
and sustained by Iraqis themselves.
Finally, it is our hope that the collective
endeavours of UNAMI, the Multinational Force and
neighbouring States will lead to the outcome the people
of Iraq and the international community desire, namely,
stability, unity and reconciliation in Iraq, in the interest
of world peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
At the outset, allow me to express my
appreciation to Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his presentation. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States, for his
statement on behalf of the Multinational Force.
We have before us the first report (S/2007/608) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) pursuant to resolution 1770
(2007), which included the expansion of UNAMI’s
mandate. That expansion has enjoyed wide acceptance
in the Iraqi Government, which considers it a reflection
of its continuing demands for activating and
strengthening the presence of the United Nations in

19

S/PV.5763

Iraq. We are confident that the skills, ability, and
effectiveness of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. de Mistura, along with
his team, will play a major role in the success of
UNAMI’s efforts in Iraq.
On behalf of the Government of Iraq and my
delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to Mr. Qazi for his efforts as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq during the previous period. We wish him
continued success in his new position as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Sudan.
The Secretary-General’s report presented an
account of the major political developments in Iraq,
UNAMI’s activities, developments in the security
situation and the status of the International
Reconstruction Funding Facility for Iraq (IRFFI). We
support the Secretary-General’s valuable remarks at the
end of his report. However, we would like to outline a
few key aspects related to the main challenges facing
Iraq. Those challenges are still present, but their danger
has begun to diminish. They impose on the
Government and people of Iraq enormous tasks that
need to be accomplished.
The first challenge is terrorism and the means to
confront it. The security plans carried out by the Iraqi
army and the national security forces with the
assistance of the Multinational Force have contributed
to surrounding the terrorists in separate parts of Iraq.
The remnants of Al-Qaida, along with the Saddamists,
are suffering continued defeats. That has been clearly
reflected in the security situation in Iraq, which has
witnessed tangible improvement, and the decline in the
levels and number of terrorist activities, along with a
significant reduction in the threat of civil war in Iraq.
The second challenge, which is a legacy of the
previous regime, is a shattered infrastructure and a
weak economy caused by internal and external wars
waged by the former regime in Iraq. It was therefore
incumbent upon the Government of Iraq to launch
ambitious plans for comprehensive reconstruction, to
provide the necessary services for the citizens of Iraq
and to rebuild the economy on a sound and modern
basis that would enable the Iraqi economy to contribute
effectively to the international economy. However, Iraq
cannot accomplish those goals without the effective
assistance of the international community.

20

The International Compact with Iraq, which was
launched at Sharm el-Sheikh in May 2007, plays a
significant role in that respect. It has reinforced and
strengthened national and international commitments
in the political and economic fields, the rule of law, the
reinforcement and protection of human rights, and the
establishment of democracy. As is well known, the
United Nations has a lead role in the Compact.
The third challenge is achieving national
reconciliation, and here I would like to refer to the
statement made by the Iraqi Prime Minister before the
General Assembly on 26 September. He said:
“We think of national reconciliation as a life
boat, a perpetual peace project and a safe harbour
for the political process and the democratic
experience. We also believe that national
reconciliation is not the responsibility of the
Government alone. It is a collective responsibility
held by the political powers, intellectual leaders,
religious leaders, the educated, civil society
organizations and all the active powers in the
Iraqi arena. National reconciliation is the
strategic choice that has saved our country from
slipping into the pit of a sectarian war that was
planned by the enemies of freedom and
democracy after they blew up the tomb of the two
Askari imams in Samara.” (A/62/PV.6, p.31)
Despite those challenges, the Iraqi Government is
continuing the reconstruction process in different
fields. The budget for 2008 has been set. It is the
largest budget in Iraq’s modern history. A sum of
$10.5 billion has been allocated to investment
programmes, and the budget for the provinces has
increased by 25 per cent relative to last year’s budget.
The investment law, which will transform the Iraqi
economy from a centralized to a market economy, has
been approved, and the Iraqi Government has
completed a draft oil and gas bill that will secure the
fair distribution of Iraq’s oil revenues. Furthermore, the
Government is also working towards strengthening the
purchasing power of Iraqi citizens and raising the
salaries of current and retired employees. It is also
preserving the stability of Iraq’s currency and
preventing its fluctuation against other currencies.
With regard to political reconciliation, the Iraqi
Government has completed an accountability and
justice bill that it has presented to the Council of

07-55351

S/PV.5763

Representatives as a substitute for the deBaathification law. Tens of thousands of officials of the
former Government have been returned to their former
Government positions regardless of their political
affiliation.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report, there
is concern about the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Iraq due to the flow of refugees to
neighbouring countries and the internal displacement
of people escaping terrorist, militia and criminal
activities. The Iraqi Government has been working
hard to fulfil its responsibilities in that regard and to
create suitable conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced individuals to their homes by
confronting illegal activists regardless of their
sectarian or political affiliation.
The improvement of the security situation in several
unstable areas has contributed to the return of a large
number of families to their homes. However, the problem
continues and requires support and large contributions
from concerned international organizations, foremost
among which are the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner
for
Refugees,
the
International
Organization for Migration, the World Health
Organization,
UNICEF
and
UNESCO.
Those
organizations need to assist the refugees and the host
countries alike, and the Iraqi Government has pledged to
offer its assistance to those countries as well.
Regarding human rights, the main challenge for
the Iraqi people is terrorist activities and crimes that
target innocent civilians. We are pleased to see positive
signals in the Secretary-General’s report on the
cooperation of the concerned Iraqi authorities and the
authorities of the Iraqi Kurdistan region with United
Nations human rights officials. We hope that the
upcoming visit of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on torture and other inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment will achieve
positive results in reinforcing and protecting human
rights in Iraq.
Pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007), UNAMI’s
mandate covers critical and essential issues related to
the present and future of the new Iraq. The most
important of those are UNAMI’s role in national
dialogue and reconciliation, the requirements of
holding elections and referendums, and assisting in
constitutional review, in addition to achieving
compromise regarding internal borders and facilitating

07-55351

regional dialogue concerning the issues of border
security, energy and refugees. There is no doubt that
those issues are critical and should be addressed with
specific mechanisms and with the prior approval of the
constitutionally elected Iraqi Government, as stated in
the letter of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
6 August, contained in document S/2007/481, which
refers to the Iraqi Government’s desire to expand
UNAMI’s mandate. Without doubt, the effective
implementation of that mandate requires the return of
the specialized agencies, funds and programmes to
work in Iraq and to increase their staff in the field.
We look forward to Iraq’s playing an active role
in achieving stability and security in the Middle East.
Iraq aspires to be an arena for all parties to engage in
dialogue, rather than a space for settling issues.
Towards that end, we initiated the neighbouring
countries’ meeting and hosted the American-Iranian
dialogue in Baghdad because stability and security in
Iraq positively affect the security and stability of the
whole region and contribute to the enhancement of
international peace and security.
To achieve that goal, Iraq must be capable of
advancing itself and should be able to shake off the
legacy of the former regime and be liberated from its
financial burdens. Iraq is still suffering from the heavy
burden of compensating for the Kuwait invasion by the
Saddam regime, while it remains in need of the support
of the international community and the donor
countries. Iraq has paid large sums amounting to more
than $22 billion dollars, and it continues to pay.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the letters
of the Prime Minister of 24 June and of the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of 15 August addressed to the Security
Council concerning that issue. The letters request the
Council at the present time to suspend the deductions
and to reduce the proportion of deductions to a level
that Iraq can maintain given its current situation. That
would be achieved in coordination with the
Compensation Committee until the matter can be
addressed at an international conference or resolved
bilaterally between Iraq and the countries concerned.
We hope that the Council responds positively to Iraq’s
request.
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21
