S/PV.8603

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8603rd meeting

Monday, 26 August 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26189 (E)
*1926189*

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, and Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security.
Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Chergui are joining the
meeting via video-teleconference from Paris and
Tokyo, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council today,
in line with resolution 2479 (2019), of 27 June, which
extended the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until
31 October 2019.
Important developments have taken place in the
Sudan Since I last briefed the Security Council, on
14 June (see S/PV.8549). Most notably, on 17 August,
the Transitional Military Council and the Forces
of Freedom and Change signed the agreements on
transitional arrangements for the forthcoming 39-month
period. The signing ceremony was attended by Heads of
State and ministers from neighbouring countries, other
ministerial representatives from the Gulf region and the
European Union, and the Chairperson of the African
Union. The United Nations was also witness, with the
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa representing the
Secretary-General.
Following the signing ceremony, the Sovereign
Council, consisting of five military personnel and
six civilians, including two women, was sworn in
on 21 August. Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan assumed
2/19

26/08/2019

the presidency of the Sovereign Council, and the
Transitional Military Council was formally dissolved.
Later that day, a renowned economist and United
Nations veteran, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, was sworn in
as new Prime Minister. The new Cabinet is expected to
be sworn in by 1 September. Of note, the transitional
agreements entail a pledge to end all outstanding
conflicts in the Sudan, which could bring long-term
stability to Darfur and other marginalized areas. Talks
between the new Government and various armed groups
in the Sudan are expected to take place, including with
the Sudan Revolutionary Front, which includes some of
the Darfur movements.
In Darfur, the security situation remains largely
unchanged. Intermittent clashes between the Sudanese
Armed Forces/Rapid Support Forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction continue in Jebel
Marra. Intercommunal tensions, particularly between
farmers and herders, escalate during the harvest
season. UNAMID has observed herders adopting a
more aggressive posture during the current season
and continues to work with State authorities to reduce
those tensions. Peaceful demonstrations continue,
particularly in the Kalma camp for internally displaced
persons, where elements sympathetic to Abdul Wahid
are opposed to the agreements made in Khartoum.
Other Darfur armed groups are not yet part of the
national political process, although there have not been
signs of renewed military activities involving them.
On 27 June, the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minnawi faction
signed a ceasefire with the Transitional Military
Council, facilitated by President Deby Itno of Chad.
That illustrates that the strategic environment in Darfur
has not shifted since the publication of the latest special
report in June (S/2019/445). The remaining conflict
drivers and armed groups outside the peace process
still pose potential risks to sustainable peacebuilding.
With the establishment of the Sovereign Council,
the timeline for resuming the drawdown of UNAMID
may be revisited after the end of the pause on 31 October.
Decree 102, which demanded the transfer of UNAMID
camps to the Rapid Support Forces has been rescinded,
and the Transitional Military Council has confirmed
that the end-use of UNAMID camps handed over to the
Sudanese authorities will be civilian. UNAMID is in the
process of developing a road map to articulate site-bysite handover arrangements. To that end, UNAMID held
a technical-level meeting with the Sudanese authorities
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in Khartoum on 5 August. During the discussion, the
Sudanese authorities reiterated their pledge to dedicate
UNAMID camps to civilian purposes, while asking
for the donation of other mission assets. UNAMID
and Sudanese officials agreed that those resources
should be earmarked for the organizations supporting
peacebuilding and community stabilization, in line
with the overall transition concept.
UNAMID and the United Nations country team
continue working together to provide transition support
to the State-liaison functions in four key areas: the rule
of law, livelihoods, immediate service delivery and
human rights. For the period from 1 July to 31 December
of 2019, UNAMID allocated $17.2 million for State
liaison functions activities out, of its total programmatic
funding of $19.6 million. As of August, seven out of
10 memorandums of understanding had been signed
with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
While most of the projects for the second half of 2019
built on activities already implemented during the first
phase of State liaison functions implementation, from
January to June of this year, livelihood support for
return areas has received an additional $3.3 million to
foster confidence between internally displaced persons
and host communities.
The military takeover of power in April posed
some challenges to the implementation of State liaison
function activities. For example, in relation to human
rights and rule-of-law support, UNAMID and the
United Nations country team shifted their focus from
national institutions to a community-based approach to
strengthen the capacity of local actors, including the
National Human Rights Commission in Darfur, civil
society and community-based organizations, to address
protection concerns. Adjustments have also been made
to enhance information sharing, coordination, and duty
of care for personnel embedded in the State liaison
functions structures, based on lessons learned from the
first phase of the process.
To coordinate transition planning, UNAMID
and the United Nations country team established an
interim transition team in Khartoum earlier this year.
The team relocated to Darfur after the change of
Government in April and is continuing consultations
with relevant mission sections and the Office of the
Resident Coordinator. The team is expected to become
a fully fledged and functional joint transition cell by
early September, with a finalized staffing structure
and associated terms of reference. The transition cell

S/PV. 8603

will be further supported by a liquidation team from
Headquarters to provide a dedicated surge capacity,
if the exit of UNAMID were to be completed by
December 2020.
As reported during our previous briefing,
the Department of Peace Operations has initiated
discussions with the African Union to develop a joint
political strategy for post-UNAMID engagement.
Commissioner Chergui will also address this subject.
Once the new Cabinet is formed, we will engage
relevant interlocutors on a range of issues, including
the drawdown of UNAMID, planning for a transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, next steps for the
Darfur peace process, and post-UNAMID engagement.
In line with the vision of the new Government to resolve
all internal conflicts, and in close consultation with the
Government, we would like to explore various options
to support Sudanese interlocutors in addressing the
remaining conflict drivers in Darfur.
In that context, both the African Union (AU) and
the Sudanese interlocutors have proposed a meeting
of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism to further
discuss future AU-United Nations engagement in and
on Darfur on the side lines of the General Assembly. As
discussions with the AU and Sudanese authorities on the
joint political strategy and post-UNAMID engagement
in Darfur are likely to solidify through those initiatives
in late September, the deadline for a special report on
the subject, due to the Security Council by the end of
September, might need to be extended by a few weeks.
We congratulate Sudanese parties for having
navigated the unprecedented task of relinquishing a
highly centralized rule that lasted for more than 30
years and enduring protracted negotiations that led
to a civilian-military coalition Government. With the
support of the African Union, Ethiopia, on behalf of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
other key partners, including members of the Security
Council, the people of the Sudan demonstrated that
they have chosen the path of inclusive decision-making,
equality, equity, freedom and human rights for all.
This is an opportunity to put a definitive end to
the conflict in Darfur. Doing so will require both
an irreversible transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and the engagement of those groups that
have not been part of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur in the peace process. Donor support will be more
critical than ever to assist the simultaneous transitions

19-261893/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan, particularly
considering the economic crisis that triggered the
political change. Commissioner Chergui and I plan to
travel to the Sudan together in early October and look
forward to briefing the Council again on the visit,
which would also involve discussions with the new
Government on post-UNAMID engagement.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: I wish to express my sincere thanks to
you, Madam President, for giving me this opportunity
to update the Security Council on behalf of African
Union Commission on the situation in Darfur and the
work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) since the adoption of
the communiqué of the 856th meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, on 13 June, and
resolution 2479 (2019), adopted by the Security Council
on 27 June. I am honoured to do so alongside my good
friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix.

26/08/2019

organizations for ransom, robbed commercial
trucks and looted property of local medical and
humanitarian organizations.
Notwithstanding the relatively improved security
situation in Darfur, internally displaced persons (IDPs)
continue to express security concerns — mainly,
increased criminality, destruction of farms and
unlawful land-occupation issues. Since the beginning
of the farming season in June, tensions have been
growing between farmers and herders, with the latter
depriving the former of access to their land. That has
resulted in increased attacks by the pastoralists against
the local farmers and IDPs across Darfur. The removal
of various Government officials and the redeployment
of some Government security forces to Khartoum has
created administrative and security gaps, presenting
a challenge in effectively managing tensions and
providing basic services to the population.

For the past decade or so, UNAMID has stood
as a commendable illustration of synergy between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations in
responding to the needs of humankind and addressing
the ill effects of conflict and political instability.

The current farming season is likely to witness
more land-related violence, which might affect harvest
prospects. In that regard, UNAMID has put in place
measures to reduce tensions and threats, including by
intensifying inclusive engagement with communities
and national stakeholders, while simultaneously laying
the foundation for peacebuilding as part of the mission’s
transition process.

At the outset, I wish to congratulate the people of
the Sudan on the signing of the landmark constitutional
declaration two weeks ago. This is a remarkable
milestone, ushering the country into a new phase of
its political history and towards the consolidation of
democracy and peace.

UNAMID continues to engage the Government to
further strengthen mechanisms for addressing human
rights concerning Darfur. The mission also conducted
the monitoring, investigation and verification of
violations and abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in the region.

Against the backdrop of fast-evolving political
developments in the Sudan that culminated in the
collapse of the former Government of the National
Congress Party, UNAMID continued to implement
its mandate as set out in resolutions 2429 (2018) and
2479 (2019). The African Union supports the delay in
the drawdown plan to reduce the military component
ceiling to 4,050 to allow the mission to protect its sites
and installations, in particular the logistics hub in El
Fasher, thereby maintaining a strength of 4,375.

The inadequate footprint and capacity of
rule-of-law institutions in Darfur — including with
regard to the judiciary, the police, prosecutions and
prisons — outside the main urban centres continued to
have an adverse impact on the security situation and
in terms of ensuring accountability for serious crimes
and human rights violations. A prevalence of crime,
including conflict-related sexual violence, has been
reported in the greater Jebel Marra area, including
Golo, Kass, Kabkabiya and other parts of Darfur.
Furthermore, the root causes of conflict and continuing
intercommunal conflicts arising from issues related to
land and other conflict drivers remain unaddressed.
Conflicts involving armed movements of the SLA/AW
continue to result in displacements in many areas of
Jebel Marra.

The overall security situation in Darfur remains
volatile, with intermittent armed clashes between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid faction (SLA/AW) around Golo in Jebel
Marra. During the reporting period, the SLA/AW
abducted local civilians and staff of non-governmental
4/19

19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

On the political front, following sustained efforts
and intense pressure from the joint African Union
and Ethiopian mediation, as well as the international
community, the Transitional Military Council and the
Forces for Freedom and Change agreed on a political
declaration and a constitutional document, which were
signed on 17 July and 17 August, respectively. Those two
documents, in particular the constitutional document,
provide for a power-sharing arrangement during a
transitional period of 39 months, while outlining the
key priorities of the Transitional Government during
this period.
In that regard, the first six months of the transition
will be devoted to peace negotiations and achieving
comprehensive peace in all conflict areas of the
Sudan, including Darfur and Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states. The constitutional document devotes
a separate chapter to comprehensive peace issues,
detailing the peace process and special measures that
will be taken to achieve comprehensive peace and to
address the root causes of the conflicts in the Sudan.
However, the armed movements, represented by the
Sudan Revolutionary Front, which are also members of
the Forces for Freedom and Change, are of the view
that their concerns have not been sufficiently reflected
in those documents, as agreed between the Sudan
Revolutionary Front and the Forces for Freedom and
Change in Addis Ababa on 25 July. Meanwhile, in
my discussions with the President of the Sovereign
Council, Mr. Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan, and Prime
Minister Hamdok the inclusion of armed movements in
the new process is a top priority.
With uncertainties about the directions the peace
negotiations would take, the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur remains stalled. The
constitutional document, which governs the transition
period in the Sudan, provides for the completion of
comprehensive peace no later than six months from its
signing. It also stipulates that past peace agreements
reached between the Government of the Sudan and the
armed movements shall be reviewed to address their
shortcomings and to ensure comprehensive peace is
achieved. In view of those fast-moving developments,
it is important that the armed movements be fully
engaged in the political process.
So far, stakeholders seem to hold divergent views
on the way forward, but it is our considered view
that the Sudanese stakeholders and the international
community have invested a lot in the Doha process,

S/PV. 8603

which should continue to serve as a basis for our efforts
towards an early conclusion of the conflict. Bringing
the negotiations to Khartoum as an alternative,
however, might require an agreement on the cessation
of hostilities and strong security guarantees for the
armed movements.
Moreover, at this critical juncture, it is important
that the international community take a coordinated
approach and consider how best to support the peace
process in order to ensure inclusivity and a successful
outcome. Moreover, it is important to note that the
leader of the SLA/AW, Mr. Abdul Wahid al-Nour, and
the leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth, Mr. Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, remain outside of the
peace process and continue to refuse to engage. It is
imperative that they be persuaded to join the process,
otherwise — and I cannot stress this enough — they
will remain spoilers.
In conclusion, it is worth noting that the current
political environment and the changes taking place
in the Sudan provide a unique opportunity for ending
the armed conflict and achieving comprehensive and
lasting peace in Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole. The
international community should seize this opportunity
to demand constructive engagement by all the actors
concerned. As Mr. Lacroix announced to the Council,
our two organizations — the United Nations and the
African Union — will continue to join efforts and
hands in helping all stakeholders achieve that goal. I am
very happy to join him once again on a visit to Darfur
in early October.
The African Union will continue to be at the
forefront and provide full support for the Sudan’s
efforts and for the fulfilment of the aspirations of the
people of Darfur and the rest of the Sudan for just and
lasting peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking our briefers. This is a very positive
moment, and therefore, I hope, a very positive meeting
of the Security Council. The people of the Sudan have
brought about unprecedented change through their
demands for a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
future. I congratulate not only the people of the Sudan
but also the African Union (AU) and the Government

19-261895/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of Ethiopia for their mediation efforts. The Council
welcomed those recent events in a press statement
on 21 August (SC/13927). I would reiterate today the
United Kingdom’s support for the Sovereign Council
and its appointment of Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as
Prime Minister.
The 17 August agreement contains a number of
important commitments, such as a pledge to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms and a
commitment to accountability and justice, including
a commitment to establish a national independent
committee to investigate the violent acts committed on
3 June and other incidents of human rights violations
and abuses. We very much welcome those commitments
made by the Sudan and encourage all those with a
stake in the Sudan’s future to ensure the timely and
full implementation of the agreement in order to make
the demands of the Sudanese people a reality. The
United Kingdom will, of course, support the new Prime
Minister and the new Government as best we can.
For decades, the Sudan has been plagued by internal
conflict. But, with the beginning of a new chapter in
the Sudan’s history, we — and, more important, the
people of Darfur — can begin to feel a sense of hope
and optimism. The new Government has committed to
achieving a fair comprehensive and sustainable peace in
the Sudan and to prioritize the peace process, which we
very much welcome. We call on all sides, in particular
the armed movements, to engage constructively,
immediately and without preconditions in negotiations
to finally deliver a peaceful solution to the conflict
in Darfur.
Remaining on Darfur for a moment, I would note
that the United Kingdom remains one of the largest
humanitarian donors: over $100 million was given by the
United Kingdom last year for humanitarian assistance.
And there have been many humanitarian implications
of the conflict in Darfur. As the new Government works
to deliver peace, may I also request it to take immediate
steps to help address the humanitarian situation. In
particular, one very concrete step that could be taken
would be to ensure full access for those seeking to
provide support, through the removal of bureaucratic
impediments imposed by the previous Government on
humanitarian actors. I hope that is something that the
Sudan will be able to move quickly on.
The uncertainty in the Sudan during the mandate
renewal led, as we all know, to a pause in the transition
6/19

26/08/2019

from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. When the Council
adopted resolution 2479 (2019), I said that there needed
to be meaningful progress on a number of fronts
before the transition could resume (see S/PV.8566).
The transition to a civilian-led Government has clearly
been agreed. We believe that it is extremely welcome
that there is now a legitimate partner for the United
Nations and the African Union to engage with on the
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the transition
to peacebuilding. I would like to thank Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for some of his updates on some of the wider
issues. However, he talked of some reassurances given.
I would just like to ask Mr. Lacroix whether, at this
stage, the Rapid Support Forces have withdrawn from
the former UNAMID team sites so that they can be
used for civilian purposes or whether this is instead
something that is under discussion. It would be helpful
to know what the status of those former team sites is.
In addition to the genuine sustained commitment
of the new Government and the armed movements,
continued international efforts will clearly be required
in support of the new Government in tackling the
underlying causes of the conflict. May I say here that it
is good to hear about the joint visit proposed by UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui
and indeed the suggestion that there may be a further
spotlight on the issue during the high-level week.
We will therefore need to see, for example, political
support to the peace process, including implementation
and monitoring of future peace agreements. Continued
human rights monitoring and capacity-building
will clearly be required. There will also be a need
for humanitarian development support, particularly
for Darfur’s almost 2 million internally displaced
persons. Such support may be best provided through a
continued United Nations-AU presence in Darfur after
UNAMID’s closure. In that regard, we look forward to
the AU and the United Nations providing the Council
with options for a follow-on mechanism to UNAMID
in the upcoming special report at the end of September.
These options should be comprehensive and build
on the opportunity that this moment in the Sudan’s
history represents.
Let me conclude by again welcoming the
positive developments under way in the Sudan, again
commending the people of the country for the incredible
transformation that they have undertaken and to say
that, after decades of conflict, poor governance, human
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rights abuses and economic mismanagement, the new
Government has not only a momentous opportunity
but also a momentous task ahead of them. The United
Kingdom stands ready to work with the new Government
and the people of the Sudan as they seek that transition
to a peaceful, democratic and prosperous future.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner
Chergui for their comprehensive and insightful briefings.
Let me start by commending the agreement signed
on 17 August and the establishment of the transitional
Government. We acknowledge and commend the
people of the Sudan for bringing about that peaceful
change. It is important that perpetrators should be
held accountable for the violence against peaceful
protesters and be brought to justice. What we are now
witnessing in Khartoum are central steps towards
achieving a peaceful future for the Sudan. That is good
news, which the Security Council also underlined in
its press statement (SC/13927) last week. It is indeed a
unique opportunity.
The new Government and the people of the Sudan
now need the substantial support of the international
community to ensure a successful transition. We intend
to use the opportunity of the upcoming ministerial
week of the General Assembly for an in-depth exchange
on how the international community can support the
transition process in Khartoum.
Germany has been actively engaged in the past and
present through the friends of the Sudan on mediation
and other stabilization efforts as well as in the field
of humanitarian assistance. There is no question that
we will continue to support the Sudan in these times
of change. It is in that spirit that the German Foreign
Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas, will travel to the Sudan
next week.
There are huge challenges ahead for the new
Government in Khartoum regarding the unresolved
conflicts in Darfur and the two Areas. There is no
automatic peace dividend for Darfur emanating from
the political changes in Khartoum. Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui have just
reminded us of the pending security challenges in
Darfur. A comprehensive peace deal for Darfur is still
missing. Hence it is important to recall and welcome
the commitments of the new Government to conduct
peace talks with armed groups. Peace in Khartoum
must be extended also to Darfur. We fully agree with

S/PV. 8603

Commissioner Chergui’s analysis that overall peace
in the Sudan does not automatically lead to peace in
Darfur but that the goal to achieve lasting peace also in
Darfur needs additional efforts.
That is why, among the many economic and political
priorities with which the authorities in Khartoum are
confronted, securing lasting peace in Darfur must not
be an afterthought but at the core of the Government’s
agenda. The history of the Sudan has shown that the
marginalization, exclusion and discontent on the
peripheries lead to instability in the whole of the
country. For that reason, from our point of view, it is
crucial that the new Government take up the challenge
and regain the trust of all Darfuris.
Let me turn to the African Union (AU)-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
The United Nations and the African Union, through
UNAMID, are partners for the new Government to
secure lasting peace in Darfur. UNAMID continues to
play an important role in protecting civilians, fostering
the rule of law and tackling the root causes of the
conflict. Crucially, it has a strong mediation capacity.
UNAMID could be an important partner for peace for
the new Government. The Security Council now needs
to consider how the international community could best
support peace in Darfur in the light of the new realities
in the Sudan. As the Council, we must look into options
to provide the necessary international support for the
Sudan beyond the lifespan of UNAMID.
Germany is therefore very interested in hearing
from the United Nations and the AU in the joint report
requested by the Council for October the nature of
such support. In our view, one possible option could
be a special political mission, jointly led by the United
Nations and the AU with a strong focus on peacebuilding
and mediation. We now need to think strategically
regarding the way ahead. The withdrawal of UNAMID
must not be rushed but conducted in a responsible
and sustainable manner in order to avoid a security
vacuum and, most importantly, a possible relapse into
conflict. The conditions on the ground must be right
and international and national capacities must be in
place first before the transition. It must be ensured that
the UNAMID tasks are taken care of and that we do
not leave a vacuum that provides a new opportunity for
tension and conflict.

19-261897/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Chergui for their briefings.
The inhabitants of Darfur have lived with this war
for years and do not expect miracles. They want security
and to be able to return home. The challenges facing
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) therefore reflect the broader factors
that continue to fuel the conflict. Today, achievements
such as improvements in security remain fragile.
Nearly 2 million people are displaced and outbreaks
of violence continue.
There is a risk that UNAMID may leave Darfur
without a comprehensive political agreement in place
that encompasses all groups and that its transition
may leave significant protection, human rights,
peacebuilding and development challenges that require
long-term solutions.
In order for the mission to prevent that, consolidate
its achievements and continue to build on them, it is
necessary for the Council to provide sufficient flexibility
to adjust the transition activities to the political
environment. In addition, any post-exit presence should
be equipped with the capabilities required for ceasefire
monitoring, disarmament and demobilization. In terms
of peacebuilding, it is also necessary to have the tools
to address the root causes of the conflict and to monitor
and address intercommunal violence, widespread
displacement and human rights violations.
The situation in Darfur is linked to the ongoing
political process. For that reason, it is imperative that
the UNAMID exit process be planned in conjunction
with a viable political process that includes all parties
in order to ensure sustainable peace.
On a very positive note, on 17 August, four months
after a protest movement that removed Omar Al-Bashir
from power, the opposition Freedom and Change Forces
coalition signed a power-sharing agreement with the
ruling military junta. This agreement will pave the
way for elections after a three-year period of reforms
monitored by civilians.
In that context, the Security Council should give
UNAMID the flexibility it needs to navigate this fragile
political situation and continue considering options for
an international presence after withdrawal from Darfur.
That will allow us to address the outstanding political,
peacebuilding, security, human rights and development
8/19

26/08/2019

challenges and will ensure that Darfur remains on the
path to lasting peace.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and African
Union (AU) Commissioner Chergui for their briefings.
My statement will focus on three issues, namely,
political developments, the situation in Darfur and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
First, it would be remiss of me not to begin
by welcoming the signing of the agreement on the
establishment of a new transitional Government and
transitional institutions and the swearing in of the
Prime Minister and the Sovereign Council. The people
of the Sudan deserve peace, stability and prosperity.
Momentum in realizing that hope is now evolving in
the Sudan. Indonesia congratulates the people of the
Sudan for that accomplishment and commends their
commitment to a peaceful transition.
The mediation role undertaken by the African
Union and Ethiopia is, indeed, laudable. The signing
of the transitional agreement is only the beginning of
the hard work. It must serve as a stepping stone for
further tangible progress, including sustainable peace
and socioeconomic recovery.
All parties in the Sudan should remain committed
to the effective implementation of the agreement
and refrain from actions that could undermine its
implementation. Inclusive dialogue is key to resolving
any differences. My delegation calls on the international
community to provide all necessary assistance
during this crucial period, while respecting Sudanese
sovereignty and national ownership.
Secondly, we note that the security situation
in Darfur has remained relatively stable, with little
disruption to the trends that have emerged since 2016.
Of course, there are a number of persisting challenges.
The Darfur peace process is stalling; conflict drivers,
including access to land and resources, have not been
systematically addressed; and human rights violations
continue to occur, including against women, children
and internally displaced persons.
The transitional agreement contains the parties’
commitment to achieving fair, comprehensive and
sustainable peace in the Sudan by addressing the root
causes of conflict and the impacts of war. We are
pleased to see that the Sudanese Prime Minister has
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

vowed to make peace one of his priorities. We urge
all armed groups to cease violence and destabilizing
activities and engage constructively in the discussions
towards peaceful solutions to the conflict. Indonesia
also stresses the imperative for the full protection
of civilians, unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance and strict observance of international
humanitarian law.
That brings me to the third issue. My delegation
was a member of the Council when it authorized the
establishment of UNAMID 12 years ago. Indonesia has
been a proud contributor of peacekeepers, both military
and police, to UNAMID since 2008. Much has been
achieved through the work of UNAMID in Darfur,
including improved security. Peacekeeping, however, is
not a silver bullet. There is a limit to what it can achieve.
The present challenges in Darfur are no longer of a
peacekeeping nature but require more peacebuilding and
stabilization efforts. We trust that the upcoming special
report will provide recommendations on the appropriate
course of action regarding UNAMID’s drawdown.
Our position on UNAMID’s drawdown remains
consistent. It must be responsible and guided by a
careful and honest assessment of the situation on the
ground. We take note that the United Nations and the
AU continue their discussions to develop a joint political
strategy for engagement after UNAMID. Regardless of
dynamics on the ground that might affect the issue of
UNAMID’s drawdown, we should not lose our focus
and must spare no efforts in assisting the people of
the Sudan in attaining a peaceful life in the near
future. We cannot overemphasize the need for ample
and meaningful consultations with the transitional
Government in the Sudan.

S/PV. 8603

compromise and reconciliation that prevailed when it
was signed.
France extends its wishes for success to the new
authorities, in particular the Prime Minister and the
Sovereign Council, in the essential tasks they will
have to fulfil — concluding a peace agreement with
the armed groups, organizing free and democratic
elections in 2022, reviving the economy and building
the rule of law. France reiterates its readiness to support
the Sudanese people in this new chapter of their history.
France welcomes the successful mediation conducted
by the African Union and the Ethiopian Prime Minister
and hopes that this diplomatic investment continues
with the ongoing mobilization of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the United Nations and all friends of the
Sudan, which is essential during this transitional phase.
The women and the young people of the Sudan have
been remarkable in their mobilization, initiative and
courage, sometimes even sacrificing their lives. They
have been the driving force behind this revolution. We
owe it to them to ensure that they are fully involved
in the transition. In that regard, we welcome the
constitutional document’s quota of 40 per cent women
in the composition of the transitional legislative council.
Lastly, we all recall the victims, particularly those
who fell on 3 June. The crimes committed must not go
unpunished and their perpetrators must be prosecuted
and tried in accordance with the rule of law.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to warmly thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
and Mr. Smaїl Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for their important briefings.
France welcomes the close coordination between the
United Nations and the African Union on Darfur.

Secondly, in that context, we have an unprecedented
opportunity to build lasting peace in Darfur. One of the
major challenges of the transition will be to negotiate
a comprehensive peace agreement in Darfur. France
welcomes the commitment undertaken by the new
Sudanese authorities in the constitutional document to
resolving the conflict in Darfur within six months, and
we call on all armed groups and the new authorities to
commit in good faith to building that lasting peace.

I would like join others in welcoming the turning
of an important page in the history of the Sudan. The
signing of the constitutional document on 17 August,
which the Council welcomed in a press statement
(SC/13927) and which defines the transitional
framework, was a significant step. We call on the
parties to respect the declaration in the same spirit of

We know that Darfur remains a fragile region.
Civilians continue to suffer from residual clashes in
Jebel Marra. Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are
regularly subject to abuses, including sexual violence.
In addition, the root causes of the conflict, including
access to land and the future of the 2 million IDPs, have
not been fully addressed.

19-261899/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

26/08/2019

Beyond that, I would like to recall the importance
of combating impunity in Darfur. Grave violations,
as well as against children, including sexual violence,
have been committed for a long time and continue
to be committed. All parties to the conflict have an
obligation to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court and its Prosecutor, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005).

We also support a substantial presence of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Darfur
following UNAMID’s departure. After a peacekeeping
operation that will have lasted for more than a decade,
it is essential to ensure the continued support of the
United Nations to assist the country in the area of
human rights. We have that moral responsibility to the
people who live there.

Finally, it is time to engage in a dialogue with the
new authorities on the United Nations presence in the
Sudan. In June, we decided to suspend the withdrawal
process of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for four months (see
S/PV.8566) because we had no reliable or internationally
recognized interlocutor. We also had real concerns
about the use of UNAMID camps, once transferred to
the Sudanese authorities.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix and African Union Commissioner Smaïl
Chergui for their detailed briefings.

We now have new legitimate and credible
authorities, with whom we can work, pending the
formation of a Government at the end of the month. We
need to have a frank and constructive dialogue with
them on the timetable and conditions for UNAMID’s
withdrawal. It is imperative that we have the assurance
that transferred sites will be used for civilian purposes,
in accordance with the agreements concluded between
the United Nations and the Sudan.
The main question we must ask ourselves today
pertains to the presence of the United Nations after
UNAMID’s departure. The political strategy of the
United Nations and the African Union on the follow-up
mechanism, which will be submitted to us in a month’s
time, will be essential in that regard.
As Jean-Pierre Lacroix underscored, we are
entering the peacebuilding phase and we all know
the challenges that brings. France believes that we
must continue to support peace in Darfur after the
departure of the peacekeepers, as has been the case
in other countries. The country team will not be able
to do it all. We therefore support the establishment of
a special political mission, whose mandate would be
defined by taking fully into account the priorities of the
Sudanese people. The political mission could support
the implementation of the peace agreement, the return
of displaced persons and the resolution of land issues
and intercommunity conflicts, as well as the protection
of women and children. It could also continue to
strengthen the capacity of the administration and
security forces in Darfur.
10/19

Two months ago, we voted in favour of resolution
2479 (2019) on the technical rollover of the mandate for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). Russia understood the position
of the African Union, which advocated conducting an
analysis of the situation in the Sudan and developing a
well-thought-out plan for the responsible drawdown of
the hybrid peacekeeping operation. As members will
recall, at that time, we said that we should limit the
extension of the mandate to a month or two. We were
confident that, within that period, the Sudanese would
be able to overcome the difficult domestic political
situation and resume substantive dialogue on the
modalities of UNAMID’s exit.
Developments have shown that we were right. We
welcome the signing of a constitutional declaration
on 17 August in Khartoum by the representatives of
the Transitional Military Council and the Forces for
Freedom and Change. That agreement is without a
doubt an important step towards ensuring solid stability
within the country over the long term. We would like
to particularly note the mediation efforts of Ethiopia
and the African Union, including under the Ethiopian
chairmanship, in the negotiations process. That was
a concrete example of the idea that African problems
require African solutions.
We must also pay tribute to the Sudanese people,
who have been able to overcome discord and reach an
agreement against the backdrop of continuing external
pressure. Regrettably, as in the past, we still note that
there are various outside forces that try to exploit the
difficult political situation in the country and tailor the
political developments in Khartoum to their narrow selfinterests. We repeat that resolving the domestic crisis in
the country is a matter for the Sudanese themselves.
The language of ultimatums and blatant inference in the
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8603

affairs of a sovereign State are absolutely unacceptable.
It could all lead to heightened tensions.

African Union and Ethiopia in ensuring mediation and
helping all parties to reach this historical agreement.

With regard to the situation in Darfur, we can see
a significant improvement in the security situation. We
also note that there has been some normalization in the
humanitarian sphere. The general trend in regions that
the Blue Helmets have already left has not changed. We
believe that that again demonstrates that the Security
Council made the right decision when it reduced the
military component of UNAMID and decided on the
withdrawal of the mission in 2020. In September, we
look forward to the special report of the United Nations
and the African Union containing specific proposals
on the UNAMID drawdown. We would like to stress
that we are against any attempts to change the mission’s
exit plan. The challenges facing Darfur today are of a
peacebuilding, not a peacekeeping, nature. The time has
come to focus on recovery and economic development
in Darfur and that should now be the priority of the
international community.

I would like to address three basic aspects today:
the situation in Darfur, the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the upcoming mandate.

In conclusion, I would like to extend our condolences
to the Government and people of the Sudan with regard
to the 62 Sudanese who died at the beginning of July
following the heavy rainfall and flooding. According
to the media, that natural disaster seriously damaged
the country’s economy and affected almost 200,000
people. More than 37,000 homes were destroyed. The
international community should come together to
provide assistance to Khartoum in that very difficult
situation. Once again, we urge all efforts to be directed
towards economic support for the Sudan, with a focus
on peacebuilding tasks and the development challenges.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we very much thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Mr. Smaïl Chergui for their briefings.
We sincerely congratulate the leadership,
Government and the brotherly people of the Sudan on
the political achievements and the agreement reached
by the Transitional Military Council and the Forces
for Freedom and Change on 17 August pertaining to
the transitional period. We reiterate our support for
the Sudan at this delicate stage and beyond, while
we eagerly await the concerted efforts that will help
achieve the aspirations of our brothers in the Sudan
for a promising future. We reaffirm our support for the
Sudan, its unity, sovereignty, stability and territorial
integrity. In this regard, we commend the role of the

We have monitored the situation in Darfur over the
past two months as the Sudan was witnessing positive
developments. It was clear that, as in previous years,
there has been continued stability in the security
situation around Jebel Marra. UNAMID’s exit strategy
has had little impact on that situation in most parts of the
province. This reaffirms that the gradual withdrawal of
UNAMID has achieved its objective. We look forward
to the armed groups participating in good faith and
without preconditions in a dialogue to join the political
process, reach a political solution and strengthen peace
in Darfur.
The current and future issues to be addressed in
Darfur with regard to land ownership, climate change
and the safe, dignified and voluntary return of internally
displaced persons are all related to post-conflict
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping is no longer the best way,
as in the past, to address such issues. We therefore call
on UNAMID to continue on its current path, in line
with resolutions 2479 (2019) and 2429 (2018), as well
as last year’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/19).
Regarding UNAMID’s exit, we commend its
dedicated efforts to achieve a smooth transition in
Darfur. We condemn any attack against UNAMID by
any party. We call for the achievements of UNAMID
over the past 12 years to be maintained. We are
responsible for those achievements and encourage
and support the measures of the Sudan to extend its
sovereignty throughout Darfur.
We also stress the importance of continuing the
mission’s gradual withdrawal until next month, in
line with UNAMID’s mandate. We recall the 14 June
resolution of the African Union Peace and Security
Council — the Security Council’s counterpart and
partner in UNAMID — which calls on the Security
Council to extend the UNAMID mandate for 12 months.
With regard to the upcoming mandate, we will
continue to work with our colleagues inside and outside
the Council to guarantee that the upcoming UNAMID
mandate, given the joint assessment to be presented
to the Security Council in September, will be short

19-2618911/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and clear in confirming one of the exit options. We
furthermore hope that it will be in line with the wishes
of the Sudan, the host country, and its capacities; focus
on specific areas, such as capacity-building, supporting
the rule of law and enhancing national ownership; and
strengthen the transitional process by consolidating
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
country team in Darfur.
We thank the brotherly Sudan for its cooperation
and look forward to further cooperation during
the remaining period of mandated drawdown and
withdrawal in a smooth and safe manner.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the briefing on the situation in
Darfur and the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
commend Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, and Mr. Smaїl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
on the quality of their briefings.
By adopting resolution 2479 (2019), on 27 June,
which authorizes the technical renewal of UNAMID’s
mandate until 31 October, the Security Council granted
itself a four-month evaluation period, at the end of which
it must decide whether or not to withdraw the mission.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction the positive
development in the situation in the Sudan since the
adoption of the resolution, as evidenced by the signing,
on 17 August, of an agreement between the Transitional
Military Council and the opposition alliance of Forces
of Freedom and Change on the formation of a new
Government and the institutions responsible for leading
the transition. The establishment of the Sovereign
Council and the appointment and inauguration of
Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as Prime Minister open up a new
chapter in the Sudan’s history. Those developments
must be consolidated by the formation of the future
transitional Government.
My country, which believes in the capacity of
the Sudanese people to overcome their differences
and create a political and social environment that is
conducive to the preservation of peace and stability,
welcomes this historic moment and sincerely hopes that
the spirit of dialogue that prevailed in the negotiations
will be maintained. In order to boost that positive
momentum, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the Sudanese
authorities and political actors to work together to
12/19

26/08/2019

ensure economic recovery, with a view to meeting the
pressing social demands of the people.
My country takes this opportunity to welcome the
mediation and good offices of Ethiopia, the African
Union and the United Nations, with the support of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. That is
a virtuous example of preventive diplomacy and the
result of exemplary cooperation between the United
Nations and regional actors.
My delegation is of the view that the relative
stability in the situation in Darfur cannot overshadow
the persistence of security vulnerabilities, as illustrated
by sporadic incidents between security forces and
civilians, intercommunal tensions and the criminal
activities of armed movements. The humanitarian and
human rights situations in Darfur continue to be of
concern with regard to the obstruction of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
and the persistence of violence against civilians, as well
as sexual violence.
In that context, Côte d’Ivoire once again reminds
the parties to the conflict that reconciliation and lasting
peace in Darfur will be possible only in an environment
marked by definitely silencing the guns and holding
a dialogue-based process to resolve the crisis. We
therefore encourage the new Sudanese authorities
to contribute actively to that process by engaging in
negotiations with the armed movements in Darfur,
with a view to creating the conditions needed for the
withdrawal of UNAMID in June 2020. My delegation
urges regional actors to support the ongoing peace
process by contributing to the effective implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and the
road map emanating from African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.
Côte d’Ivoire especially looks forward to the
recommendations of the joint United Nations-AU
evaluation report to be published on 30 September.
That report should enable the Council to decide on
the withdrawal of UNAMID on the date foreseen. My
delegation hopes that any UNAMID withdrawal will
be orderly, based on a phased approach and take into
account security progress and vulnerabilities. It also
must consider the need to maintain reserve capacities
until the final closure of the mission.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its call to the
Sudanese parties to continue the dialogue and urges the
United Nations and the African Union to continue to
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

act together in order to support sustainable peace and
stability efforts in Darfur.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): I join the speakers who
preceded me in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui for their very
informative briefings.
Allow me at the outset to congratulate the sisterly
Republic of the Sudan on the agreement signed on
17 August between the Forces of Freedom and Change
and the Transitional Military Council in the Sudan on
the establishment of a transitional Government, headed
by a Prime Minister who will govern the State jointly
for 39 months and should lead the country towards
reconciliation, reconstruction and free and inclusive
elections. We would like to highlight and commend the
important and constructive role played by the African
Union and the Ethiopian Government in mediating and
negotiating the achievement of that historic agreement.
Equatorial Guinea commends the commitment
of the people of the Sudan to a peaceful transition
and to ensuring the effective implementation of the
transitional agreements. We also appreciate the support
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
other members of the international community.
The agreement is concrete proof of the importance
of subregional and regional organizations and the
surrounding countries in terms of resolving disputes,
given that they have a better understanding of the
situation on the ground. In other words, Africans, local
governments, regional and continent-wide institutions
and African leaders are better off and are the main actors
in dealing with the continent’s problems and conflicts.
However, despite the satisfaction we have just
expressed, we must not underestimate the major
problems and challenges that the new Government will
face. That is why it is urgent to establish without delay
the strategies and mechanisms needed to improve the
local economy, entrench lasting peace and stability
and promote inclusion and national reconciliation,
while at the same time reaffirming the Government’s
commitment to a transition process that effectively
leads to inclusive and transparent elections, with a view
to ensuring the advent of sustainable peace throughout
the country.

S/PV. 8603

Moreover, we encourage the parties to acknowledge
the need to rapidly resume the negotiations for a peaceful
resolution to the conflicts in Darfur, South Kordofan and
Blue Nile states. We encourage all the parties to engage
constructively, immediately and without preconditions
in those discussions. The Security Council must support
such efforts. In that regard, we commend the joint visit
that the African Union and the United Nations will
make to the region. We also appreciate any effort made
towards the consolidation of the situation in the Sudan.
The Sudanese have understood that they must put the
overriding interests of their country and their people
before any other consideration, and that commitment
merits praise.
In the context of UNAMID, it is essential to
emphasize that one of the main tasks of the Government
is to address the issue of Darfur, ensure a continuous
decrease in violence throughout the region and continue
the reconciliation processes. The Doha Agreement for
Peace in Darfur remains the basis for the process in
Darfur, and Khartoum must commit to continuing along
that path. We already know that the new authorities
have already prioritized peace.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea lends its full
support to the transitional Government of the Sudan
and invites it to liaise as soon as possible with the
representatives of the United Nations and the African
Union in the Sudan, as well as to cooperate closely
with UNAMID, working together in coordination and
harmony to achieve the objectives set for the next 39
months of the transitional Government.
Lastly, we call on the transitional Government to
ensure that Sudanese women are provided the space
in which they can play their role in this new political
dynamic in which the brotherly country of the Sudan
is entering.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the holding of this meeting and for the
important briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Smaïl Chergui.
Peru joins other delegations in welcoming the
constitutional declaration signed on 17 August between
the Forces of Freedom and Change the Transitional
Military Council in the Sudan on the establishment of a
new transitional Government under civilian leadership.
The agreement is an important first step towards
achieving peace and stability throughout the Sudan.
We are confident that the agreements reached will end

19-2618913/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the violence that has already resulted in many victims
in Khartoum. We especially appreciate the parties’
commitment to respecting human rights and basic
freedoms in the Sudan.
In particular, we welcome the commitment to enable
the protection of women’s rights with the ultimate aim
of ensuring gender equity with regard to the enjoyment
of their civil, political, economic and social rights. We
hope that the establishment of the new transitional
Government will also have a positive impact in Darfur
where cases of human rights violations and incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence continue.
We reiterate the responsibility of the Security
Council to ensure a successful withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) — as the Under-Secretary-General
mentioned earlier — that does not create gaps leading
to tensions or new risk factors and does not jeopardize
the gains made in the areas of protection, the rule of
law and human rights. All of that is predicated on the
required State ownership of the process, which will
contribute to ensuring that the agreement reached in
the Sudan is fully implemented within the planned
time frame.
In that regard, we look forward to the assessment
and recommendations of the Secretary-General on
the appropriate course of action to determine the
number of UNAMID troops that will be needed and
the joint political strategy of the African Union and
the United Nations for its withdrawal. We therefore
welcome the announcement of the upcoming visit by
his representatives to the Sudan.
Meeting all those goals will also require the
establishment of national institutions capable of taking
on those processes and preventing and resolving
conflicts, while forming a national consensus on good
governance, focusing on the welfare of the people through
humanitarian access and spearheading initiatives to
counter the major causes underpinning conflicts.
Lastly, we acknowledge the successful mediation
efforts of Ethiopia and the African Union to achieve the
agreements that were reached. We must also recognize
the role of the people of the Sudan and the countries
of the region. We encourage the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and donor countries to provide the
required support to the transitional Government of
the Sudan in this important phase for the future of the
14/19

26/08/2019

country and to continue in joint efforts to promote the
necessary consolidation and maintenance of peace in
that country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui
for their briefings.
At present, the situation in Darfur is generally
stable and the humanitarian situation continues to
improve, owing not only to the vigorous and effective
performance of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the full
cooperation of international partners and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, but also
to the active efforts of the Sudanese Government in
maintaining peace and stability in Darfur.
The transitional Government of the Sudan was
established just recently, which will help further
improve the situation in Darfur. The international
community should continue to provide assistance
to Darfur, consolidate gains made and advance the
reconstruction process.
First, the international community should support
the Sudanese Government in assuming the primary
responsibility for maintaining security in Darfur,
assist it in enhancing its own security and governance
capabilities and ensure that the functions of maintaining
security in Darfur are handed over to the Sudanese
security forces in a gradual and smooth manner. China
supports the withdrawal of UNAMID by 30 June 2020,
as scheduled in accordance with resolution 2429 (2018).
Secondly, the international community should
restart the Darfur peace process as soon as possible.
The establishment of the transitional Government of
the Sudan provides a golden opportunity to restart the
peace process in Darfur. China hopes that all parties
concerned in Darfur will seize the current window of
opportunity, effectively renounce military solutions,
restart the peace process as soon as possible and resolve
conflicts and differences through political means, such
as dialogue and consultations, in order to achieve
lasting peace and stability in Darfur.
Thirdly, the reconstruction process in Darfur
should be accelerated. Darfur is currently in a
transitional phase from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
including early reconstruction and development. The
international community should actively provide
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian assistance and economic support to help
the Sudanese Government settle displaced persons,
build and improve local infrastructure and achieve
independent economic development in Darfur.
China has always supported the Darfur peace
process. As one of the major troop-contributing
countries to UNAMID, China has mad positive
contributions to maintaining peace and stability in
Darfur over the years. China stands ready to work
with the international community and continue to play
a constructive role in achieving peace, stability and
development in Darfur.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner
Chergui for their briefings.
The United States congratulates the people of the
Sudan on the 17 August signing of the constitutional
declaration and political agreement between the Forces
of Freedom and Change and the Transitional Military
Council. We are encouraged by this first step in the
establishment of a civilian-led transitional Government.
The United States commends the mediators from
the African Union and the Government of Ethiopia
for their efforts to broker this landmark agreement.
Our own special Envoy for the Sudan witnessed the
signing, and the United States will continue to support
its implementation.
We are optimistic that those positive developments
will bring peace and security to the Sudanese people. The
international community now needs to see the speedy
implementation of the 17 August agreement, including
the formation of the Council of Ministers and the
Legislative Assembly. In that regard, the inauguration
of Prime Minister Hamdok and the Sovereign Council
on 21 August shows progress towards the formation of
a stable transitional Government.
We look forward to seeing the progress of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) vis-à-vis its benchmarks in the
September report of the Secretary-General. We expect
all Sudanese stakeholders to cooperate with UNAMID
with regard to the protection of civilians, the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the return of internally
displaced persons in line with international standards.
UNAMID must have unhindered access to all team
sites so that the mission can carry out its mandate.
The Rapid Support Forces’ delay in returning those

S/PV. 8603

sites to community-based institutions and their lack of
cooperation with United Nations personnel is deeply
concerning, and we look forward to hearing UnderSecretary-General’s Lacroix’s response to the question
by the representative of the United Kingdom about the
status of those sites.
We welcome the public Prosecutor’s establishment
of the independent committee to investigate the 3 June
crackdown by the Rapid Support Forces and the news
that those allegedly involved in the 29 July shooting
deaths during the El Obeid protests were arrested
and are awaiting trial. It is imperative that all those
responsible for violence against civilians be held
accountable. The United States calls on the Sudanese
authorities to follow through on their commitments in a
timely manner so that UNAMID can continue to draw
down its forces and a broad transition to peacebuilding
can begin.
The United States will continue to support the
people of the Sudan in their pursuit of a future that they
deserve, with a civilian-led Government that protects
the rights of all Sudanese citizens and leads to free and
fair elections.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank the UnderSecretary General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Smaïl Chergui, for their comprehensive briefings. I
also welcome my old friend and peer, the Chair of the
Group of African States for this month, Ambassador
Omer Siddig of the Sudan. I would like to focus my
intervention on two key issues, namely, the political
situation and developments in Khartoum and the
situation in Darfur.
On the political situation, we welcome the recent
signing of the constitutional declaration in the Sudan
and congratulate the parties for reaching this historic
milestone. We also welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Prime Minister of Ethiopia on behalf of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union in bringing the parties together and
ending months of unrest. We particularly commend
the African Union Special Envoy, Mohamed El Hacen
Lebatt, and the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister
of Ethiopia, Ambassador Mahmoud Dirir, on their
role in facilitating the mediation that resulted in the

19-2618915/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

26/08/2019

power-sharing agreement. The establishment of the
Sovereign Council, which includes two women, to be
led in the first 21 months by Lieutenant General AbdelFattah Al-Burhan, is a welcome development. We also
applaud the appointment of Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as
Prime Minister.

is expected to provide an assessment of the situation
on the ground and recommendations on the appropriate
course of action regarding the drawdown of UNAMID,
as well as a joint African Union-United Nations political
strategy detailing options for a follow-on mechanism
to UNAMID.

The real work begins now. We urge all Sudanese
stakeholders to implement the commitments made in
the agreements, in order to meet the aspirations of
the Sudanese people for sustainable peace, security,
reconciliation and development. The people of the
Sudan have yearned for peace for too long and
sacrificed too dearly. Their aspirations need to translate
into tangible dividends on the ground. In that regard,
we urge all parties to redouble their efforts to work
together to rebuild a united, inclusive and strong Sudan
underpinned by democratic principles.

In the meantime, it is worth underlining that the
root causes of the situation in Darfur must be addressed
in a sustainable manner. As such, the rejuvenation of
the Doha peace process is very important, particularly
given its current unclear trajectory. We trust that the
renewed hope ushered in by the current agreement will
create impetus for the peace process in Darfur and
we encourage all armed groups to cooperate and join
the political dialogue with a view to working towards
comprehensive peace and reconciliation throughout
the Sudan.

It is vital that the region and the African Union
continue to provide assistance to the political process in
the Sudan. The support of the international community
remains a critical part of enhancing the work of the
region and unlocking those international institutions
and processes that will allow the Sudan to rebuild its
economy. Moving forward, it is imperative to create an
enabling environment and provide support to the parties
to ensure the full implementation of the agreements. We
should safeguard against external interference and give
the parties the space to chart their trajectory towards
peace and development.

Lastly, the international community must support
the parties in the Sudan as they work towards
consolidating peace and stability in their country. That
support should address socioeconomic challenges, with
the primary focus being on economic development
and the mobilization of necessary financial resources
to bolster the country in its economic recovery. We
commend the countries that have already contributed
in that regard.

We are encouraged by the improving relations
between the countries in the region. This rapprochement
is a step in the right direction for regional peace and
stability and will contribute to the ideal of silencing
the guns on the continent by 2020. We urge the leaders
in the region to continue this positive momentum of
political dialogue, to strengthen regional stability and
to utilize the same determination to help resolve the
Somalia question.
The situation in Darfur continues to improve.
However, remnants of insecurity find expression in
the form of human rights and humanitarian challenges.
Therefore, it is imperative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to
continue discharging its mandate as issued by the
Security Council.
South Africa looks forward to the joint report of
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in September. The report
16/19

It is our view that the Sudanese people must
capitalize on the prevailing positive environment to
identify, drive and direct priorities, strategies and
activities for building and sustaining peace during the
transition and the UNAMID drawdown process, as well
as for managing outstanding and unresolved issues
between the Sudan and South Sudan. South Africa
welcomes and supports the visit to the Sudan by both
Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Chergui, planned for October.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Ambassador Smaïl Chergui, for
their briefings.
We welcome the signing of the constitutional
declaration in the Sudan on 17 August. The agreement is
the result of long negotiations and represents a key step
towards long-lasting peace, democracy and prosperity
in the Sudan. We also welcome the appointment of the
11 members of the Sovereign Council and the swearingin of the Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, on
19-26189

26/08/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

21 August. We commend the Sudanese people, in
particular women and young people, for their strong
yet peaceful action. All efforts must now be directed
towards implementing the agreement in the same spirit
of compromise and reconciliation that enabled the
stakeholders to achieve this historic milestone. In that
connection, I would like to stress the importance of the
following aspects.
First, there is a need to ensure inclusiveness by
bringing together all segments of society, especially
women, who were often at the forefront of the peaceful
protests, and representatives of all regions of the
country. Secondly, the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the Sudanese people, including the right
to freedom of assembly, freedom of expression,
freedom of the press and freedom of religion, must be
respected. Thirdly, impunity must be addressed by, for
instance, putting in place an independent commission
of inquiry into the deadly events of 3 June, establishing
a country office of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and engaging
in dialogue with the International Criminal Court
to ensure that those who are under an arrest warrant
are brought to justice, either before the International
Criminal Court or the national courts. And, fourthly,
civilians must be protected, including by allowing
unhindered humanitarian access.
Belgium fully supports the transition process
and looks forward to engaging with the civilian-led
transition authorities. Belgium welcomes the crucial
mediation role played by the African Union and Ethiopia
and the support provided by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the United Nations and the
entire international community. We encourage those
actors to continue to support the Sudan.
However, we remain concerned about the situation
in Darfur. Darfur remains a fragile region where the
root causes of the conflict, including access to land
and the future of displaced persons, have not yet been
fully resolved, as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Commissioner Chergui reminded us. The fact
that, unfortunately, some groups in Darfur rejected the
17 August agreement shows that Sudanese stakeholders
must continue to work for a peaceful and equitable
solution for all, including a peace agreement between
all Sudanese parties and the different rebel groups. We
have been presented with a unique opportunity to put
an end to the various conflicts that have been ravaging
the country for far too long.

S/PV. 8603

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) mandate will be
reviewed once again by the Council in October. In
the meantime, the Council must continue to follow
closely the situation in the Sudan in general and in
Darfur in particular. The UNAMID exit process cannot
be disconnected from developments in the rest of the
country. In that regard, we look forward to the joint
report of the United Nations and the African Union,
which will formulate a shared political strategy with
options for an appropriate and carefully calibrated
presence in Darfur.
In conclusion, the Sudan is experiencing a historic
moment in its history as a result of the courage and
aspiration to freedom, peace and justice of its people.
Significant challenges to sustainable peace remain, but
the Council will continue to support the country as it
continues its transition.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui for their
insightful briefings.
Poland welcomes the signing of the agreement on
the establishment of a new civilian-led transitional
Government and transitional institutions between the
Forces for Freedom and Change and the Transitional
Military Council in the Sudan. We commend the people
of the Sudan for bringing about the peaceful transition.
We also welcome the appointment of the new Prime
Minister, which we see as an important step in creating
a civilian-led Government. We praise the international
community, in particular the African Union and
Ethiopia, for its mediation efforts.
It is of crucial importance that representatives
of Darfur participate in the process of transition at
the national level and that the Darfuri people benefit
from the new political reality. We hope that this new
political dynamic in the Sudan will also bring back
the momentum to the peace process in Darfur and
will prompt the Darfuri rebel groups to engage in
negotiations with the new Sudanese authorities.
When it comes to the situation in Darfur, we note
with regret that violations of human rights, including
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as violations
of international humanitarian law, continue to occur
across the region. We strongly condemn the targeting of

19-2618917/19

S/PV.8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the civilian population — especially those who are most
vulnerable, such as women, children and internally
displaced persons — by security personnel and the
Rapid Support Forces, as well as militias. It is our
strong belief that the authorities should spare no effort
to hold the perpetrators accountable and do their utmost
to fight impunity in Darfur. In that context, I would
also like to reiterate our call upon the Government of
the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur
to cooperate fully with, and provide any necessary
assistance to, the International Criminal Court and its
Prosecutor, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Poland will continue to closely follow the
developments in the Sudan and in Darfur, including
in the context of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) mandate
renewal scheduled for October. We are willing to
look into every proposal concerning United Nations
engagement in Darfur post-UNAMID. Bearing in mind
the persisting and numerous human rights violations in
Darfur, we believe that issues such as ensuring respect
for human rights and the protection of civilians should
be reflected in options for political engagement in
Darfur after UNAMID’s withdrawal.
We continue to believe that, during the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and in order to
achieve lasting peace in Darfur, particular emphasis
needs to be put on socioeconomic conditions, including
the provision of health services and workplaces,
education, trade, basic economic infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as on establishing effective
rule of law across Darfur. Without the support of
the international community and securing funding
for development in Darfur, we are putting the gains
achieved with great effort over the past decade at risk.
In conclusion, let me express our gratitude to all
UNAMID personnel, the United Nations country team
and the humanitarian actors who continue to work
tirelessly to help to achieve sustainable peace in Darfur.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Allow me, at the outset, to
express my delegation’s appreciation for the exemplary
manner in which you, Madam President, have been
18/19

26/08/2019

leading the work of the Security Council during the
month of August.
My delegation would also like to convey its thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner
Chergui for their contributions regarding the situation
in Darfur. Our gratitude also goes to the members of
the Security Council for their respective interventions
during this meeting and for the support they have
expressed towards my Government and country to
ensure the transition’s success.
The Darfur of today is completely different from
the Darfur of some years ago, when the Security
Council began addressing the situation. Even the
Sudan of today is no longer the Sudan the Council has
known over the past 30 years. The Sudan of today is
a country that upholds democracy, justice, the rule
of law, transparency, liberty, freedom and equality.
It is a country where youth and women will be fairly
represented at all levels of Government.
Allow me, once again, to salute the peacekeepers
all over our planet and direct my special respect to the
women and men who serve in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Our
condolences and sympathy go to the families of those
who lost their lives serving in Darfur as they protected
civilians there. Our regard and esteem are directed
to the United Nations, the African Union and to the
Council for their follow-up and perseverance in the
quest for peace in Darfur.
My Government will dedicate the first six months
of its transitional tenure to realizing durable peace and
sustainable stability throughout the country. We call on
the international community to join my Government in
inducing the revolutionaries who fought to topple the
previous regime to join hands with us in order to relieve
the plight and miseries of our people, who have suffered
the consequences of war. We also encourage countries
that host some leaders of armed groups to convince
them or prompt them to embrace peace in good heart
and good faith, since the pretexts upon which they took
up arms are no longer there.
Based on the current realities, we reiterate that
peacekeeping is not the right option in Darfur. It is
time to shift to peacebuilding, recovery, development,
security and stability for my people there. The Security
Council adopted resolution 2479 (2019) in June.
The resolution decided to defer the consideration of
UNAMID’s timetable for withdrawal until October
19-26189

26/08/2019

S/PV. 8603

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

based on hypothetical expectations on developments
that were then taking place in Khartoum. However,
time has proved the opposite. My delegation calls for
new members of the Security Council to pave the way
for UNAMID’s withdrawal by June 2020, as stipulated
and agreed upon.
Prior to June 2020, the date set for UNAMID’s
complete withdrawal, we believe that it is incumbent
on the Council to revisit resolution 1591 (2005), in
particularly the restrictions that the Council imposed
on the movement of arms and of troops in and within
Darfur. It is of particular and paramount importance
to empower the Sudanese law enforcement bodies to
be fully equipped in order to bulwark law and order,
protect stability and prevent any relapse into or recourse
to violence in Darfur.
The Security Council is aware that Darfur is
adjacent to volatile hotspots in the region, where
terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram are active
and where illegal migration and human trafficking are
rampant. For those and other reasons, the Council may
agree with us regarding the necessity of fully equipping
different Government agencies and law enforcement
entities in the post-UNAMID period. My Government
reiterates its commitment to working closely with the
United Nations country team and the entire United
Nations system in realizing the stability and recovery
of Darfur.
The realization of peace is my Government’s
priority during the coming six months. Stabilization
and sustaining peace are our ultimate objectives during
the three years of the transition and the post-transitional
period in the democratic rule of the Sudan.
We are cognizant and aware that peace has its
merits and requirements, particularly with regard to
the returnees, be they internally displaced persons
or refugees. Preparations for their return require the
international community to help the Sudan in creating
a conducive atmosphere and services for them. The
international community’s assistance is also required
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, the rehabilitation of deserted or destroyed
services infrastructure, mitigating the negative effects
of desertification and climate change and ensuring
transitional justice and reparations. Those needs and

others will be discussed with relevant United Nations
bodies and other regional organizations.
My Government is committed to ensuring access for
all those in need of receiving humanitarian assistance.
We again reiterate that all sites vacated by UNAMID
will be assigned to and used for humanitarian and
civilian purposes.
Finally, I am pleased to say that my country
has taken the first step in the lengthy road towards
recovery, along which we anticipate the international
community to be a power by our side. We are ready to
engage positively with all.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Mr. Lacroix: I will try to answer the question posed
by the representative of the United Kingdom regarding
the situation of camps in relation to the Rapid Support
Forces (RSF). I can say that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
not been in a position to verify that the RSF have
vacated the camps that have already been handed over
by UNAMID. That is essentially because its interaction
with the Transitional Military Council has been quite
limited over the past month. What we have, as I said,
is a commitment by the Transitional Military Council,
and I have just heard the Ambassador of the Sudan
reiterating that commitment, that all camps that have
been handed over will be used for civilian purposes. We
certainly look forward to the Government of the Sudan
delivering on that commitment.
With regard to the camps that need to be, but have
not yet been, handed over by UNAMID, we also look
forward to productive discussions with the Government.
As I said, UNAMID is currently working on a road
map regarding site-by-site arrangements in that spirit.
I believe that the tripartite mechanism that is to be held
in New York to which I alluded will also be very helpful
for us to advance on this very important issue.
The President:
his clarifications.

I

thank

Mr.

Lacroix

for

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

19-2618919/19
