S E C U
‘.

‘,
L_j

R

1 T

y

C 0

UN

C 1 &

j ‘:

‘,. :::/

:

“- :’ .‘,

: j

0 F F I C, a A L R:::E,#O R D,-.$

,,

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1761
st

MEETING:

17 JANUARY

1974
,

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 176 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement by the President
Adoption of the agenda

....................................

......................................

Inclusion of Chinese among the working languages of the Security Council:
(a) Letter dated 10 January 1974 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 11187);
(b) Letter dated 11 January 1974 from the Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 119Q) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

WPV.1761

I

:.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
fgures. Mentionof such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

-.

.‘.‘.I,
i .
.’

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

/.j,

.‘:

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY -FIRST

Held in New York on Thursday,

17 January

President: Mr. Gonzalo J. FACIO (Costa Rica).

MEETING

1974, at 10.30 a.m.

work of this highest of the executive organs of the United
Nations.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauri-.
tania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

4. I wish to express my best wishes to the Secretary
General and to his staff, as well as to the representatives of
the nations that continue to be members of this Council, in
the hope that this year thatis now beginning will be fruitful
in the achievement of solutions to the problems and tasks
put to us.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l761)
5. I should-like to pay a tribute of admiration and esteem
to the representative of Panama, whom I am replacing,
Ambassador Boyd. His outstanding contribution and example we in my delegation will endeavour to follow.

I. Adoption of the agenda.

2. inclusion of Chinese among the working languages of
the Security Council:
(a) Letter dated 10 January 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1187);
(b) Letter dated 11 January 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1190).

6. Article 23 of the Charter indicates to the General
Assembly the requirements for the election of a Member of
the United Nations to the Security Council. First and
foremost, the General Assembly must pay due regard to the
contribution of Members of the United Nations to the
maintenance of international peace and security and to the
other purposes of the Organization, and also to equitable
geographical distribution.

i%e meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.

7. Costa Rica is sure that when it was elected to occupy
this high post the General Assembly did in fact duly assess
its qualifications. My country believes that in its domestic
conduct and its international activities it has contributed to
the maintenance of peace, to the reaffirmation of fundamental human rights, to economic, social and cultural
co-operation among nations, to respect for the legal
equality of States and the self-determination of peoples.
Costa Rica has never failed to comply with the primary
international obligation that has been raised to a fimdamental tenet of the Charter, namely, to solve disputes by
peaceful means and not to resort to force to threaten the
independence or territorial integrity of any other State.

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): At the
beginning of 1974 Costa Rica began its tenure as an elected
member of the Security Council. At the same time it
assumed the presidency of this main executive organ of the
United Nations. Thus a twofold honour and a double
responsibility have been placed on our shoulders, a responsibility which we accept with humility and promise to carry
out with dedication.

2. Presiding today over this first meeting of the Council in
1974, I am happy to welcome the other new members, the
Byelorussian SSR, the United Republic of Cameroon, Iraq
and Mauritania, and I am sure that I shall be interpreting
the general feeling when I congratulate the representatives
of the outgoing members, Guinea, India, Panama, the
Sudan and Yugoslavia, for the contribution they made to
the efforts of the Council to maintain international peace
and achieve international justice.

8. In Costa Rica all human beings enjoy fundamental
freedoms without any distinction for reasons of race, sex,
language or religion. Our country has unilaterally carried
out general and complete disarmament. In 1948 Costa Rica
abolished the army as a standing institution. Only in order
to fulfil international obligations or to defend ourselves
against aggression could a temporary military force be
organized, and in any case it would still be subject to the
civic authorities under article 12 of the Constitution in
force in my country now.

3. In the course of the month of December 1973 the
Council was very wisely presided over by Ambassador
Huang Hua, the representative of the People’s Republic of
China. I have sought his advice and I have tried and will
continue to try to follow his example, so that in the course
of this month I shall successfully be able to preside over the

9. Thus, for more than 25 years we have lived without
armed forces and have invested in education and public
health what at one time was invested in instruments of war.
1

16. When an understanding was lacking among the superPowers, the Security Council lost its peace-making efficiency, and that is the logical corollary of its very structure.
However, this should not lead us into disillusion nor even to
think of dissolving the United Nations. To perfect the organ
by taking into account the real form of its constitution is a
challenge that we must take up, because were the United
Nations to disappear the most probable alternative would
be not another more effective body but , the rule of
international anarchy.

We have required that our national defence respect intemational law, the suitable functioning of the regional arrangements of the new world, and primarily, the activities of
this Security Council, of which today, with such pride, we
form a part.
10. with regard to equitable geographical representation,
again we believe that Costa Rica is duly qualified. Our
candidacy for this post was unanimously put forward by
the Latin American Group. Therefore, today, together with
Peru, we are honoured to represent the desire for international peace and security felt by all nations of Latin
America.

17. Since the end of the Second World War more than 100
armed conflicts have broken out in which the great Powers
were not in direct confrontation. This proves to us that
small nations can also provoke local wars. It is only the
great Powers that can unleash world wars. Obviously,
therefore, we must ensure that localized conflicts do not
take place. But our major concern must be to avoid the
outbreak of a world conflagration that might lead to the
use by the super-Powers of their’ nuclear arsenals. The
Security Council must act efficiently to put an end to local
conflicts, but, furthermore, its members must also endeavour to avoid those conflicts among the small nations leading
into or escalating to a world war where nuclear weapons
would eradicate our very civilization.
,.
18. If we wish this Council truly to guarantee intdmational peace and security, we must work indefatigably for
the supposed basis of its structure to become effectivenamely, harmony among the great Powers. Therefore, the
members of the Security Council and the Members of the
United Nations in general have no ‘more important task
than that of wiping out the last vestiges of the cold war and
creating an atmosphere of international ddtente.

11. The present Government of Costa Rica began in 1970
a policy of universalizing our diplomatic relations, abandoning the dogmatisms of the cold war and of determined
support for peaceful coexistence and contributing to
relieving international tension. We believe that these new
aspects of our foreign policy, added to the traditional
international conduct of Costa Rica, are good grounds that
make our country able to carry out constructive work in
this peace-making organ of the United Nations.
12. It is known, but not always publicly avowed, that the
Charter of San Francisco is based upon one essential
political hypothesis and that is harmony and co-operation
among the great Powers. And since the maintenance of
peace is the primary objective of the United Nations, its
peace-making machinery is based on the theory of joint
action by the five great Powers. It is for that reason that
they were given permanent seats in the Security Council. It
is for that reason that the veto was created, as a guarantee
that the Security Council would not use its wide powers
without the agreement of the most powerful nations.

19. Peaceful coexistence is difficult in a world in which
social systems as opposed as are those of the great Powers
confront one another, but just because it is difficult does
not mean that it is impossible. Let us not forget that the
alternative is the nuclear holocaust of mankind.

13. For some, this concentration of power in the hands of
the permanent members bespeaks an effort to establish a
world government of the great Powers, which might subject
the other nations of the world to domination by an
international oligarchy.

20. The relaxation of international tensions that has
occurred in the last few years proves that negotiation bn
replace confrontation.

14. For others, the paramountcy of the major Powers is
the just price that the medium-sized and smaller nations
have to pay to obtain the co-operation of the more
powerful in the international Organization of States, and
the veto is the safety valve to ensure that the United
Nations shall not overextend itself by adopting commitments that are unreal or beyond its powers to fulfil.

21. Dialogue must continue for States to solve peacefully
their differences, and to manage to create a new structure
of peace that will guarantee justice for all. But it is not only
the great Powers which should participate in that dialogue.
For such a dialogue to be effective the voice of the small
and medium-sized nations must also be heard, because, as
has been the case, the smaller nations can contribute very
valuably to creating an appropriate atmosphere for detente.

15. Regardless of the goals set as an ideal, the fact of the
matter is that the United Nations was so conceived as to
ensure that the maintenance of international peace and
security can be achieved only through the agreement of the
great Powers. To change such a situation not only would a
new organization have to be created, but also it would be
indispensable for the mind and spirit of the main protagonists on the international arena also to be transformed. But
this goal is not within reach at the moment, nor can we be
sure that it might be the most suitable. It would be better
to base ourselves on what we can reasonably expect of the
foreign policy of States. Otherwise, we run the risk of
preparing catalogues of what is desirable instead of building
on what is possible.

22. The dogmatic intransigence adopted by the fanatics of
capitalism and socialism in the face of peaceful coexistence
must be set aside and must be defmed as social psychosis.
23. Those who speak of the immorality of negotiating or
coexisting with those who believe in ideologies other than
one’s own have to be reminded that the problems of war
and peace involve the highest of moral values: the right to
live. Therefore, much more immoral than negotiating with
an ideological adversary is closing the door to dialogue
2

Spanishand Russianamong the working languagesof the
General Assembly, and subsequently Spanishand Russian
were also included by the Security Council among its
working languages.

itself. For when it implies a mass and indiscriminate
destruction of lives, war is itself the greatest of immoralities.

Adoption of the agenda

28. At the twenty-eighth sessionof the GeneralAssembly,
in 1973, the Chinesedelegationput forward the proposalto
include Chineseamongthe working languagesof the General
Assembly and the Security Council. On 18 December1973,
the General Assembly unanimously adopted resolutions
3189 (XXVIII)
and 3 191 (XXVIII)
to include Chinese
amongthe working languagesof the GeneralAssembly and
accordingly to amendthe relevant provisionsof the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. Resolution
3189 (XXVIII)
also states that the General Assembly
considersit desirableto include Chineseamongthe working
languagesof the Security Council.

l%e agenda was adopted,

Inclusion of Chinese among the working languages of the
securitv council:
Let& -dated 10 January 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1187);
”fb) Letter dated 11 January 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the Unit&l Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1190)
,24. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council has just included in its agenda the
question concerning the inclusion of Chinese among the
working languages of the Security Council. This question
was drawn to the attention of the Security Council in the
letter dated 10 January 1974 [S/21187/,
by which the
Secretary-General transmitted to the Council the text of
General Assembly resolution 3189 (XXVIII), in which the
Assembly, inter a&z, considered it desirable to include
Chinese among the working languages of the Security
Council.

29. In pursuance of the General Assembly decision, the
Secretary-General transmitted on 10 January resolution
3189 (XXVIII) to the Presidentof the Security Council. On
15 January the Security Council, presided over by the
President of the Council, held consultations on the inclusion of Chinese-among the working languagesof the
Security Council and amendmentof the relevant provisions
of the provisional rulesof procedureof the Council. Weare
very pleased that all our colleaguesof the Council are
holding a formal meeting today which’will adopt measures
with regard to the relevant draft resolution. The Chinese
delegation wishesto expressits appreciation to the President of the Security Council and all the Council members.
We should alsolike to expressour thanks to the Secretariat
departments concerned for helping to draft the resolution
and the amendmentto the provisional rules of procedure.

25. I should like to note that when it adopted that
resolution on 18 December 1973 the General Assembly had
before it a report of the Fifth Committee1 recommending
the adoption of the draft resolution and informing the
Assembly of the budgetary requirements it would entail.
This report of the Fifth Committee, in turn, was based on
the relevant information provided to it by the SecretaryGeneral in the note2 submitted in accordance with rule 155
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.

30. Mr. FAKIH (Kenya): Pennit me first, Mr. President,to
offer my congratulations on the election of your country,
Costa Rica, to the Council and on your assumptionof the
presidency of the Council for the month of January. With
your well-known skills, and sinceyou come from a country
whose tradition of justice and respect for human rights is
well known, I am confident that your delegation will
dischargethe duties of your high office with excellence. I
assure you that my delegation will co-operate with you
fully not only during this month but alsoin the future in
the searchfor solutionsto the problemsthat will come time
and againbefore the Council. Naturally, African questions
‘loom large in my delegation’smind, and on these we look
forward to the support of your delegation.

26. Following receipt of the Secretary-General’s letter
transmitting the Assembly’s decision and of a formal
request from the representative of China that a meeting be
held to consider this question fS/11190],
I engaged in
consultations with all the members of the Security Council,
in the course of which a draft resolution [S/11292/ has
been worked out that appears to meet with general
agreement. It is designed to give effect to the wishes
expressed by the General Assembly through the appropriate
amendments to the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council. The draft resolution and the annex
containing the revised draft rules of procedure have been
circulated prior to this meeting.

31. May I take this opportunity alsoto congtitulate the
sister Republics of Cameroon and Mauritania on their
election to the Security Council. Weare looking forward to
working very closely with them on all matters during their
term of office. Our congratulations go also to the friendly
delegations of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic
and Iraq, the latter a country with which we enjoy
beneficial diplomatic relations. Welook forward to working
in full cooperation with them in the Council.

27. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
As is known to all, Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish are the five official languages of the United
Nations. The Charter of the United Nations provides in
explicit terms that the texts in the five languages are
equally authentic. At the beginning, only English and
French were the working languages. Later, the General
Assembly successively adopted resolutions to include

32. My delegation expressesits thanks to the Ambassador
of the People’s Republic of China for the exemplary
manner in which he conducted the businessof the Council
dtiring the month of December.

Records of the General
Assembly, Twentyeighth
Session, Annexes, agenda
items79 and 100, documentA/9301.
1 Official

2 A/C.S/lSZS.

3

33. ‘It is my pleasant task to thank our former non-aligned
colleagues in the Council and to wish them well-namely,
the, delegations’ of- Guinea, India, Panama, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia. My delegation worked harmoniously with them
during’ the past .year.. We greatly gained from their experience and expertise on the work of the Council. We view
their retiring ‘with a tremendous sense of ‘loss. We shall
follow their good example and, like them, work to advance
constructive, solutions to issues and problems before the
Council.
..) ,
:

40. It is with a feeling of great satisfaction that the USSR
delegation declares its readiness to co-operate with the new
members of the Security Council and to maintain continuous, business&ke contacts with them for the purpose of
enhancing the role of the Council in actively promoting
further consolidation of international detente and in
strengthening peace and security.
41. At this fast meeting of the Council in the new year,
we must also express our very sincere appreciation to the
distinguished representatives of those five countries whose
period .of membership in the. Council expired on -31
December 1973. I am referring to the representatives of
Yugoslavia, Ambassador Mojsov; of India, Ambassador Sen;
of Guinea, Mrs. Cissd; of the Sudan, Ambassador Abdulla;
and of Panama, Ambassador Boyd.

34. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before: us on the inclusion of Chinese .as a
working language of the ‘Council and, the subsequent
amendments to’ the provisional rules of procedure. To us
this is a sequence of events .which ‘we think we should
follow’ since the other, four official languages are’ already
working. languages of the Council. In doing this we respond
to the wish of the General Assembly, a democratic organ of
our Organization.

42 We shall .recall with appreciation our work with them
in the Council,‘their active and enterprising proposals aimed
at strengthening peace and security, and their,particularly
active role v+hin the group of non-permanent members bf
the Council representing the non-aligned countries when,
during the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly,
the Council was discussing the question of the situation in
the Middle East. With their active participation, the Council
decided for the first time to conduct a United Nations
peace-keeping operation in the Middle East in accordance
with the Charter, the principles of the Charter governing
the conduct of such operations by decision of the Council
were reaffirmed, and the principle of establishing United
Nations armed forces on the basis of equitable geographical
representation was also upheld and implemented.

35. Chinese is, of course, an ancient language spoken by
over.800 million people and our vote today is an index of
our appreciation of this fact. We trust that United Nations
documents will now find their way throughout China.
36. And for us from Africa, it has not been lost on us that
while the languages of all continents are heard in this
chamber, ours is the only continent whose tongues have yet
to be officially accepted at the United Nations. My
delegation is not putting forward any concrete proposals
now, but Africa cannot remain for ever the only continent
without a language at the United Nations.
F7.,c Mr. MALIK

43. The USSR delegation will take great satisfaction in
continuing in the future its co-operation and friendly,
businesslike contacts in the United Nations and its organs
both with them personally and with the delegations which
they head.

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Today, at this first meeting of
the Security Council in the new year, the USSR delegation
would like to begin by wishing the members of the Council
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations a Happy
New Year, good health in the new year, personal happiness,
and successin their joint efforts to ensure that the Security
Council discharges the main responsibility entrusted to
it-the maintenance of international peace and security.

44. The past year was filled with major international
events of great importance. It is impossible in this brief
statement to enumerate them all in detail. Suffice it to say
that 1973 was a year marked by a further perceptible easing
of international tension and a strengthening of the trend
towards consolidating international peace and security and
towards ‘the development of friendship and co-operation
among nations with a view to ensuring a fundamental
restructuring of international relations based on the principles of peaceful coexistence between States. It is now
clear to everyone that the problem of peaceful coexistence
is the question of questions in contemporary international
relations.

38. I should also like ‘to extend a welcome to you,
Mr. President, as a distinguished representative of the Latin
American continent, with the majority of whose countries,
including your own, the Soviet Union maintains and is
developing relations of mutual understanding, co-operation
and friendship. The members of the Security Council
remember you for the outstanding statement which you
made at the Council’s meetings in Panama. The USSR
delegation wishes you success in the responsible office of
President of the Council, and we for our part shall make
every effort to co-operate with you.

45. In his new year message to the Soviet people, Comrade
Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, noted that 1973
had witnessed significant successes in the international
arena. In that connexion, he stated:

39. We also take great satisfaction in welcoming all the
other new members of the Security Council-the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, in the person of its
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Ambassador Smirnov; Iraq, in the person of the Deputy Permanent Representative, Ambassador Zahawie; United Republic of Cameroon, represented here by Ambassador Booh
Booh, and Mauritania, in the person of Counsellor Ould
Mouloud .

‘The war in Viet-Nam has at last come to an end. The
political climate in Europe is changing for the better. The
bonds of friendship linking our country with the fraternal
countries of socialism and with all peace-loving States
have been further strengthened. Our country is making an
active contribution to the defence of the legitimate rights
of the Arab peoples, which have been the victims of
4

‘1

aggression by Israel, and to the achievement of a lasting
and just peace in the Middle East. The negotiations held
and the agreements concluded by the Soviet Union with
the United States of America and a number of other
States have been of great importance in easing international tension.”
46. At the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly,
an overwhelming majority of Member States acknowledged
and noted the importance and usefulness ofintemational
detente and of the indisputable fact that the Assembly
session itself was held in conditions of d6tente. That
assisted the Assembly in adopting a whole series of positive
decisions aimed at strengthening peace and international
security, bringing about disarmament and the reduction of
military budgets, and preparing for the World Disarmament
Conference. For the first time, the General Assembly in its
decisions recognized and reaffirmed the principle of a link
between detente and development, between development
and disarmament. It was recognized that development was
possible only under conditions of peace and security; it was
also recognized that disarmament was important for the
purposes of development. Crucial decisions were taken’by
the Assembly on decolonization, the elimination of aparrheid and many other questions.
47.’ The General Assembly thus made an important contribution towards strengthening detente with a view to
ensuring that the continuing process of reducing mternational tension is made irreversible. Hence the tasks
confronting the Security Council. As the principal organ of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council is duty-bound to concentrate its efforts on this noble task so as to make its own
substantial contribution -tow%&r -~strengthening intemational detente and consolidating peace and security.
48. Today’s meeting of the Security Council was convened
iu connexion with a resolution adopted by the General
Assembly at its twentyeighth session. The aim of the
meeting is the adoption by the Council of a decision which
will carry further and strengthen that Assembly resolution.
It is therefore appropriate to recall that the Security
Council has a duty to the General Assembly under another
Assembly resolution, too. At its twenty-seventh session, the
General Assembly, on the initiative of the Soviet Union,
adopted resolution 2936 (XXVII) on the non-use of force
in international relations and permanent prohibition of the
use of nuclear weapons. The resolution contained a
provision to the effect that the Security Council for its part
should take a decision aimed at developing and strengthening that-Assembly resolution. So far, however, the Council
has not done so. It is high time that it did.
49. A major international event of 1973 was the convening in Moscow of the World Congress of Peace Forces. It
was-in the full sense of the word-a world-wide forum of
world public opinion, which had as its slogan the concepts
of peace and friendship among peoples. Its representative
character is attested to by the following facts. It was
attended by a total of 3,200 delegates from 144 countries
representing more than 1,100 political parties and national
organizations and movements. Leaders or representatives of
more than 120 international organizations took part in the

‘?,

work of the Congress. TheWorld Congress of Peace Forces
was an event of tremendous political importance. Its
decisions and documents provided an analysis of the main
trends. in the development of international relations, underscored the need to make detente irreversible and ‘defined
the tasks currently facing peace forces in their noble
struggle for peace and friendship among peoples.
50. In speaking of the efforts undertaken with a view to
strengthening peace, we must also draw attention to two
other important international events. In Geneva, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in which
35 States are participating, has been resumed for the second
phase of that international gathering:When that phase has
been conciuded, a third and final phase of the Conference
at the highest level will follow in the spring or summer of
this year. That will give fresh impetus to international
ddtente and co-operation.
51. The Middle East Peace Conference has been convened
in Geneva and is continuing. There is divergence ‘m the
positions of its participants, but there is a real possibility of
reaching a settlement of this acute international problem,
which is a source of tension both in the Middle East and
outside that region. Practical steps must be taken towards
peace, realism and a renunciation of the policy of expansionism.
52. In that connexion, one must express regret that there
has not yet been any lessening of the shrill outcry of the
enemies of ddtente, the enemies of peace and security, who
are trying to turn the world back to the dark days of the
cold war. Fortunately for the peoples of the whole world,
these hostile forces are in the minority and are isolated
both within the United Nations and outside it. Their efforts
are in vain. They will not succeed in breaking the will and
the irresistible desire for dttente and peace of the peoples
of the whole world and the overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations. That was vividly and
convincingly demonstrated and reaffirmed at the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly, the Congress of
Peace Forces and the Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries.
53. Speaking of the tasks to be faced in the new year,
Comrade Brezhnev, in his new year message from which I
have already quoted, declared that in 1974 the Soviet
Union would set itself the task of consolidating and
developing all the good aspects of our mutual relations with
many States. In that regard, he particularly stressed the
importance ‘in the new year of the following task: “As in
the past, we shall seek to further the process of infernational detente and to infuse it with real substance.
Inspired by communist ideals, we shall resolutely continue
to uphold the noble cause of peace and friendship among
peoples since it is the most urgent and vital task of our
age.”
54. We take great satisfaction in saying today that the
Soviet people, like the other peoples of the world, are more
fhan ever before enjoying the real, tangible fruits of the
Soviet Union’s peace-loving Leninist policy of peaceful
coexistence.

’

55. With regard to the item placed on the agenda of the
Security Council and now under discussion, the USSR
delegation to the twentyeighth session of the General
Assembly expressed its attitude when it supported the
proposal on this question during the discussion in the Fifth
Committee and in the General Assembly. We take a similar
position now in the consideration of this matter in the
Security Council.

60. With regard to the item on today’s agenda, inclusion
of Chinese among the working languages of the Security
Council, my delegation’s view was expressed at length in
the General Assembly when it cosponsored the draft
resolution proposing this. Therefore, the draft resolution
contained in document S/11192 is one that I am sure the
Council will adopt unanimously. It is the just and necessary
step to ensure that the work of the United Nations-in tIiis
case, specifically, the work of the Security Council-shall be
as efficient as the work of the world Organization should
always be. Thus, having made the necessary changes in the
rules of procedure, we shall have taken the required steps
for ‘Chinese, in addition to the other four working
languages, to become a working language of the Council. ;-

56. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): On this my
first day in New York after an enforced absence I should
like to express my heartfelt thanks to the many friends here
and among the United Nations community generally who
so kindly communicated their good wishes at the time of
my illness and subsequent operation and during the period
of my convalescence. At such a time the moral support of
one’s friends is a potent secret ingredient influencing your
view as you reflect on the past and the future that you and
mankind face, and I shall not forget how many of you were
kind enough to extend your hand of friendship.

61. Before concluding my statement, I wish to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing Ambassador Scali back
with us completely recovered. 1 must say that I feel a
certain nostalgia at the absence of the representatives ,of
Guinea, India, Panama, the Sudan and Yugoslavia, with
whom we enjoyed working last year in the Council.
: ,,,

57. Happily, Mr. President, this fmt occasion for you to
preside over the Security Council is one for dealing with a
noncontentious matter. Happily, the views .of the United
States on all aspects of the issue are well known and I am
not obliged to repeat them now. There is no sign of
opposition from any quarter. Therefore, there remains for
me only the pleasurable duty of welcoming five new
colIeagues to membership of the Security Council. To the
representatives of Cameroon, Costa Rica, Iraq, Mauritania
and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic I should like
to extend a personal welcome and to reaffirm my desire
and that of my delegation to work constructively and
realistically to make the Security Council continue as a vital
organ of the United Nations system.

62. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): As this is the.‘f&t
meeting of the Council in the new year, I should like to join
previous speakers in offering good ,wishesto all members of
the Council, and particularly to express my delight in
re-welcoming here our friend and colleague the Ambassador
of the United States, whom we missed for a number.of
weeks.
:
63. Mr. President, it gives my delegation a particular and
indeed a double pleasure to welcome you and your
delegation as one of the five new members of the Security
Council this year, and to congratulate you on assuming the
most honourable and most responsible duties of President
of the Council. Our pleasure ln welcoming Costa Rica to
the Council, where it serves, Iike Austria, for the first time,
is based In the first place on the traditionally good relations
between our countries, but also on the fact that Costa Rica
appears to be particularly well suited for membership of the
Council. Indeed, few countries can be considered more
qualified to serve the noble purposes of the Council than
your own, Mr. President, whose peace-loving character has
been convincingly demonstrated by a number of concrete
steps. This augurs well for the work of the main organ of
the United Nations which is responsible for the -maintenance of international peace and security. 1 should like to
add, Mr. President, that my delegation intends to cooperate fully in your endeavours to fulfil your duties and in
the duties of the Council in the coming year.

58. I should like to make an exception to my delegation’s
usual role of avoiding honorific courtesy statements which
sometimes, it seems to us, become overlong and delay the
business of the Council. Quite simply, Mr. President, I want
to say how fortunate we are that the Council begins the
new year under your distinguished leadership. Like others
at this table, my delegation is well aware of your
outstanding accomplishments in Costa Rica, in this hemi;
sphere and on the world stage. Your eloquent remarks
today and the manner in which you have been heading the
work of the Council to this point are evidence that a bright
new chapter in the annals of your career is currently being
written.
59. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): My
first words must be words of welcome to the delegations of
the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the United
Republic of Cameroon, Iraq, and Mauritania as new
members of the Council to which my delegation offers full
co-operation in ensuring success for our work in the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is a
task in which, in connexion with the Middle East, we
struggled shoulder to shoulder with Panama, a sister
country of Latin America, with which we co-operated in
the Council last year and which has now been replaced by
Costa Rica, which today is represented brilliantly by you,
Mr. President, Mr. Gonzalo Facie, its Foreign Minister, who
will be presiding over the work of the Council for this
month.

64. I am also very happy to congratulate, on behalf of my
-delegation, the four other new members of the Security
Council, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialii Republic, Iraq,
Mauritania and the United Republic of Cameroon, on their
election. We extend our greetings to the representatives of
those countries, three of which are also represented in this
Council for the first time, and we are looking forward to
co-operating with them hr. a way that will reflect the good
and the traditionally friendly relations which my country
has maintained with all of them.
65. The year 1973. did not afford us an opportunity- to
express our gratification at the co-operation we enjoyed
6

\

with the former five non-permanent members of the
Council, namely, Guinea, India, Panama, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia, which have now left this chamber. It would be
extremely difficult to pay a tribute here exhaustively and
Individually to the representatives of those five former
members of the Council: Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse of
Guinea, Ambassador Sen of India, Ambassador Boyd of
Panama, Ambassador Abdulla of Sudan and Ambassador
Mojsov of Yugoslavia. However, every one ,of them has
:made his own brilliant contributions to the aims and
purposes of the Council; every one of them has served the
cause of peace extremely well.
‘4’.
66. Let me rid1
briefly here the brilliant role that
Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse played as the fti woman member
and the first woman President of this Council. Her great
taIent was especially given to the direction of the work of
the Council Committee on sanctions. To Ambassador Boyd
of Panama the Council owes the initiative for the historic
first meeting of the Council in Latin America, a most
significant event which undoubtedly contributed to the
strengthening of peace and security in a most important
region of the world. Ambassador Sen of India brought to
the Council the vast experience and prestige of his country,
the greatest democracy of the world, India, whose constructive contributions helped enhance the work of the Council
in many a difficult moment. Ambassador Abdulla of the
Sudan distinguished himself equally’ on many occasions,
and I should like to pay a particular tribute to him in his
capacity as a member of the Security Council Special
Mission to Zambia.

70. Including another language among the working languages necessitates a revision of a number of rules falling
within the scope of two chapters of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, and I should like to add a brief
comment at this juncture concerning the annex to the draft
resolution, dealing with the revision of the provisional rules
of procedure. These amended rules are brought up to date
and into line with the corresponding rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
71. In revising these two chapters the Council, in the view
of my delegation, should not lose sight of the overall
problem of reviewing and updating other chapters of the
rules of procedure as *veil. We are all aware that a number
of rules have never been operative and that other rules
might need clarification- or revision in the light of the
practice that the Security Council has developed over the
quarter-century that has elapsed since the rules of procedure were first formulated by the Council. On certain
subjects new rules might eventually be added. I refer to this
problem because it seems to my delegation to be a most
important one. The rules which govern the Council’s
proceedings should correspond as closely as possible to the
existing realities. They must constitute a clear and agreed
framework for the efficient conduct of our business.
72. Members of the Council may recall that, in response to
the General Assembly’s call for the views of Governments
on ways and means of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Security Council in accordance with the principles and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations-I refer to
resolution 2864 (XXVI) of 20 December 1871 -my Government suggested several ways of improving the Council’s
effectiveness within the existing framework of the Charter,
one suggestion being that the Council itself might have a
new look at its rules of procedure. Let us not forget that
the General Assembly in its most recent resolution on the
subject,.that is, resolution 3186 (XXVIII) of 18 December
1973.

67.. A foal word of tribute is directed to the representative of Austria’s friendly neighbour to the south, Yugoslavia. Few members of this Council have served it with
more imagination and dedication than Ambassador Mojsov,
and many decisions the Council has taken in the past two
years bear the mark of his intellectual capacities.

‘Draws the attention of the Security Council, when
considering steps to enhance its effectiveness in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, to the views and suggestions submitted by Member States in response to General Assembly resolution 2864 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971
and 2991 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, as contained in
the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports submitted
in accordance with these resolutions”.

68. Finally, let me also profit from this occasion to say a
word of gratitude to Ambassador Huang Hua for the
distinguished way in .which he guided the difficult work of
the Council during the month of December 1973.

\

69. Pernnt me now to revert briefly to the subject of the
day and speak on the most important matter before us this
morning. The operative paragraph of .the draft resolution
before us calls for the ‘inclusion of Chinese .among the
working languages of the Council., My delegation fully
supports‘this draft resolution, just as it supported General
Assembly resolution 3189 (XXVIII), which made Chinese a
working language of. the General Assembly. Previous
speakers have .pointed out that the number of working
languages of the Council has gradually increased over past
years. Four years ago the Council decided to add Russian
and Spanish .as working languages to the working languages
then in use, namely, English and French. The adoption of
the draft resolution today will be the logical consequence
of those decisions, and henceforth there will be a complete
identity between the official languages of the Organization,
which from the beginning have been those mentioned in
Article .I 11 -of the Charter, and the working languages of
the Council.

73. Let us also bear in mind that when we discussed the
Security Council’s last report to the General Assembly
there was agreement among members that early this year
the Council should also review the structure and format of
its report. In this connexion the month of February was
mentioned as a possible starting date. With this in mind, I
want to express the hope that our decision today will be a
starting-point for a more general review of the rules of
procedure and for the gradual adoption of measures in this
field which might strengthen the effectiveness of the
Council, in response to the desire expressed by the General
Assembly and the .membership of the Organization at large.
The Council, which is the master of its procedure, should
remain as effective an instrument as possible for the
maintenance of world peace and security.
7

74. Mr. DE CUIRINCAUD (France) (intetprerarion from
French): Mr. President, at the outset permit me to address

eminent place in which he stands in our eyes do not have to
be mentioned. Inflexible on matters of principle, but open
to discussion, Ambassador Huang Hua made known the
views of his country-sometimes rigorous but always logical
and dictated by national interests-concisely and in measured tones that only stressed the weight of his arguments.
In this arena, as in the world scene, China speaks and it is
listened to. ,
;
’

to you the warmest congratulations of my delegation on
the accession of, your country,. Costa Rica, to the presidency of the Security Council. You have done honour to
the Council and our Organization as a whole in making a
special voyage here to start our work despite your onerous
duties in handling the foreign affairs of your country. We
are very grateful to you and we wholeheartedly wish you
successin the performance of your high duties.

79.‘ It is only normal and just, given the place that China’
occupies in the world and .its position as a permanent
member of the Council, that the Chinese language be given
the status of a working language, both. in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly. It is particularly “this
weight of evidence and reason”, to .mention a well-known
phrase, which prompted France to co-sponsor the draft
resolution which was ultimately adopted on 18 December
by the Assembly as resolution 3189 (XXVIII). It is also
these ties of close friendship that link our two countries
and that were proved during the September visit of the
President of the French Republic to China, where he was
received with sucha warm welcome.
,:

75. I am very happy to see at this table once again the
representative of the United States, Mr. Scali, fully recovered from his illness. I wish to assure him of our warm
regard and of our pleasure at seeing him once again in the,
Security chamber, more ready than ever, I am sure, to take
a leading part in our work.
:’
76. I should like also to extend a cordial welcome to the
four other States, the Byelorussian SSR, the United
Republic of Cameroon, Iraq and Mauritania, which have
also now joined the Council, and I wish to assure them that
at all times the French delegation will offer them understanding and warmth, thus reflecting the excellent relations
that exist between their countries and mine. I have no
doubt that their participation will contribute to enriching
our work and making it more constructive for the cause of
world peace.

80. These are the primary reasons that led my country to
advocate a wider use of the Chinese language in our work.
There are, however, more general reasons and particularly
the growing interest shown in the world, ,and particularly In
Western Europe, in that language, which has behind it a
very lengthy history and is used by one fifth of mankind.
Today, in France,. the study of the Chinese language is no
longer left to a group of researchers or original thinkers.
Today, to learn the language is still a bold and long-term
undertaking, but it is no longer unheard of. In our
universities the enrolments for courses in Chinese, which
two or three.decades ago could be counted on the+fmgers of
one hand, today number hundreds if not thousands, and,
since the fortunate resumption of dialogue with China, a
similar phenomenon has been noted in the United States. In
a word, Chinese is no longer the private domain of a small
group of specialists and, without having become entirely
generalized, the study of language today already goes
beyond the somewhat starchy ranks of sinology .

77. This meeting, which offers us an opportunity of
welcoming five new members to the Council, also calls for a
tribute by us to the five members that left us on 31
December last-Guinea, India, Panama, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia-for the contribution they made to our work.
Each of them assisted the. Council with the specific
experience gained from its geographical situation, its
culture, its past or its present concerns and directions. But
that contribution was far greater than what we might term
a spontaneous one. Imbued with a remarkable senseof the
responsibilities flowing from membership in the main organ
entrusted with international peace and security, each of
their representatives in one way or another tried in this
chamber to find solutions that were not so much a
reconciliation of disparate views or the result of a balance
of forces as an expression of what the international
community should consider to be both legitimate and
reasonable. Inspired by fundamentally convergent concerns,
their initiatives and their acts all went towards the same
goal, which was the general interest. I am linked to all five
representatives by feelings of very close and sincere
friendship and admiration. The Council has owed them a
great debt for their two years and they have earned the
appreciation of the other Members of our Organization. But
they should know that even if they are not sitting with us
today, their awareness and knowledge of matters, and the
quality of their approach, will still make of them invaluable
counsellors to the members of the Council.

81. Another reason for strengthening the position. of
Chinese in the Organization is the very nature of the
language. It has been admired because of the intrinsic
beauty of its characters, and it was known that, from T’ou
Fou, Li T’ai-po and T’ao Yuanming to Mao Tse-tung, it
had been the language of the poets, excelling more than any
other in describing the beauty of a landscape, the fleetingness of a moment or the depth of a state of mind. But
Chinese is something other than the language of phllosophers and aesthetes; it is also a practical, concise language,
remarkably adaptable to political, diplomatic and technical
vocabulary’even of today’s world. Many people stil1 believe
that it is a language of vagueness and approximation. Yet
Chinese possessesits own precise term to define each of the
terms that crop up in our discussions and our texts. This
exactness stresses the mastery and skill of the excellent
group of Chinese interpreters and translators whose assistance is so precious to us, and to whom my delegation
wishes to pay a tribute at this moment. It is true that the
inclusion of Chinese among the working languages will
doubtless increase their workload considerably and will-call

78. Finally, since by a happy coincidence the subject of
our meeting today deals with China, it is a specific pleasure
to congratulate Ambassador Huang Hua for the constant
effectiveness and the courteous authority with which, in
the course of last month, he presided over the Council. The
prestige with which he carried out his work and the
8

for a reinforcement of their numbers. Although we~‘are
opposed to any measure that might increase the’ financial
burden of the Organization, my delegation feels that in this
case it is an investment that is filly justified and that the
future work of the Council will prove the wisdom of our
decision.
82. Sir Laurence MciNTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all, on behalf of my delegation, extend a
warm welcome to you in your capacity both as the
representative of a new non-permanent member of the
Security Council and as President of the Council for the
month of January. As our colleague of France has just said,
it is an added honour to this Council that your country
should be represented, and represented so eloquently, by its
diStinguished Foreign Minister at this opening meeting of
the year.
83; The fact that alphabetical accident has exposed you,
as it did our Indonesian colleague last year, to the duties of
the presidency in Costa Rica’s fast month of membership
of the Council is a double guarantee of my delegation’s full
cooperation and support.
84. 1,should like also to pay a tribute to the very effective,
conscientious and courteous work of your predecessor,
Ambassador Huang Hua, throughout the month of December. Let me also welcome cordially the other four new
non&permanent, members of the Security Council: the
Byelorussian SSR, Iraq, Mauritania and the United Republic of Cameroon, and extend to them a similar assurance of
our desire to co-operate constructively with them in the
year that lies ahead.
85. The past 12 months have illustrated’ that this Council
can act decisively and in concert when called upon to do.so.
No small part wasplayed in this regard by the five outgoing
members of the Council-Guinea, India, Panama, the Sudan
and Yugoslavia-and to them my delegation expresses its
sincere appreciation, not only for the wry able and
effective work they have performed but for the guidance
they have given and the consideration they have shown to
my delegation in its fast year on the Council.
86. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution that is before us [S/11292] and the consequential changes in our provisional rules of’procedure which we
consider appropriate and desirable for the future conduct
of the business of the Council.
87. Mr. JAMIESON (United Kingdom): Mr. President.
since this is the fast meeting this month; I should Iike id
join others in paying high tribute to the exemplary and
efficient conduct of the Council’s businesg under the
presidency of your predecessor, Ambassador Huang Hua of
China.
88. Secondly, I should like to join our colleagues in
welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency of the Council and to
the Council itself.
89. The links between our two countries have always been
close, sharing, as we do, a common belief in democratic
traditions. Your country’s record at the United Nations is a

distinguished one, .and’ it’it&%s
the importance which
Costa Rica attaches to the ‘role of the Cduncii and of the
Organization as a.wh& that you yourself should be here to
preside over tti meeting. I listened with close interest and
attention to your thoughtful remarks at the outset of this
meeting, and I believe that they augur well for the
contribution which your delegation wilI make to the work
of this ‘Council. We shall benefit from your distinguished
leadership during January, and my delegation willingly
pledges you its close co-operation.
90. I wish also to ‘welcome to the Council our colleagues
from the Byelorusfin Soviet Socialist Republic, Iraq,
M&nitania and, not least, the United Republic of Cameroon, whose recent change of nomenclature has happily
made us neighbours in this Council. My delegation offers all
the new members a warm welcome and looks forward to
working closely with them during the next two years.
91. And since 1 have been welcoming new faces, perhaps I
too may welcome the return of an old face, that of our
friend and colleague. Ambassador Scali, looking, I am glad
to say, a good deal healthier than when we last saw him.
92. I do not propose to enter into a review of the events
of 1973, but I cannot let the first meeting of the Council in
1974 pass without putting on record our warm gratitude to
those members of the Council who left it at the end of last
year. Each of those five members in their own way
contributed substantially to our work, and I do not think
that anyone who participated in the discussions on the
Middle East in the last quarter of 1973 would challenge the
judgement that the retiring members, together with others
who happily remain, made a most valuable impact-an
impact of realism and pragmatism-on the work of the
Council for preserving international peace and security.
93. On the substance of our agenda today, I wish merely
to recall the fact that my delegation supported resolution
3189 (XXVIII)
when it was adopted by the General
Assembly on 18 December 1973. We recognize the importance and value of according Chinese the same status as the
other four official languages of the Council, and we are
therefore happy to vote in favour of the draft resolution in
document S/l 1192.
94. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, it is
with great pleasure that my delegation joins previous
sp&kers in welcoming Costa Rica to the Security Council
and in congratulating you, Sir, on the assumption of the
presidency ,of the Council for this month. Having been in
the same position last year, my delegation knows how it
feels to assume the presidency immediately after election to
the Council. But we know that the presidency is in good
and competent hands, and my delegation would like to
assure you of our whole-hearted co-operation in the
execution of your important responsibilities as President of
this Council.
95. My delegation would like to express its high appreciation to the -out-going President, Ambassador Huang Hua of
China, for his competent leadership during the month of
December when he presided over the Council’s activities.
9 ,

96. My delegation also welcomes most warmly the other
new members of the Council-the
Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Iraq, Mauritania .and the United Republic of Cameroon. We are looking forward to working
together productively with them in this coming year.

fgures. these words constitute an encouragement for the
policy -of peace, co-operation and understanding among
nations so tenaciously pursued by the President of the
United Republic of Cameroon. His Excellency El Hadj
Ahmadou Ahidjo .

97. It is a great pleasure indeed for me to associate myself
with the expressions of appreciation and gratitude to the
outgoing members of the Council-Guinea, India, Panama,
the Sudan and Yugoslavia-for their most valuable contribution to the work of the Council during their term in the
Council. It will not be easy for my delegation, and for me
in particular, to get used to the absence of Mrs.Jeamre
Martin CissC, Samar Sen, Aquilino Boyd, Rahmatalla
Abdulla and Lazar Mojsov from this Council.

103. Having benefited from the continuous concern of the
international community, my country fully appreciates the
priceless contribution that the United Nations has made
and continues to make to the maintenance of world peace
and the emancipation of oppressed peoples.
104. This is to say that during the term of’its membership
in the Council,my Government will always work constructively with a view to giving practical expression to the noble
ideals proclaimed in the Charter of our Organization and
freely accepted by our States-which is to say, in the final
analysis, for the building of an international community
more conscious of its common destiny and freed from the
scourges of war, poverty, colonialism and racism.

98. My delegation hopes that in this last year of our
membership we can maintain the high standard of performance that has been set by them and continue the concrete
and positive contributions to the efforts to find solutions to
the problems with which the Council has been confronted.
Indonesia is proud to have been together with them in the
group of non-aligned members of the Council in a common
effort to contribute constructively to the Council’s work.

105. I turn now to- the question of the inclusion of
Chinese among the working languages of the Security
Council-the agenda item before us. My Government’s
position will be in conformity with that which it tookin
the vote on General Assembly resolution 3189 (XXVHI),
adopted on 18 December 1973, in which the Assembly,

99, With regard to the item on our agenda, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution in document
S/l 1192, as we are of the opinion that it is only logical to
end the difference between the official and the working
languages when it is reduced to only one languageChinese-which is the language of about 800 million
people who have contributed so much to civilization.

“‘Decides to include Chinese among the working languages of the General Assembly and to amend accordingly the relevant provisions of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly;
“Considers it desirable to include Chinese among the
working languages of the Security Council;“.

100. Mr. BOOH BOOH (United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation from French): Mr. President,‘1 take pleasure
in extending to you, on behalf of the Government of the
United Republic of Cameroon, my warm congratulations
both on the brilliant election of your country, Costa Rica,
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council and on
your own assumption of the important office of President
of the Security Council for this month. I am convinced that
thanks to your lengthy political experience, to which your
present function as head of the diplomacy of Costa Rica is
eloquent testimony, you will succeed in directing the
proceedings of our Council to the general satisfaction. You
can always count on the fullest co-operation of my
delegation for the satisfactory discharge of your delicate
responsibilities.

106. The unanimous adoption of that resolution. clearly
points up the pertinence and justice of the concerns of the
sponsors of the draft resolution now before the Security
Council in document S/l 1192.
107. My delegation is convinced that by according Chinese
the same status as that enjoyed by French, English, Russian
and Spanish, the Council will offer all its permanent
members identical working conditions in close concordance
with the identical obligations and prerogatives they enjoy
under the Charter of our Organization, which to me seems
quite right and proper.

101. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
my deep gratitude to the States members of the Organiza. tion of African Unity for the confidence they expressed in
my country when they lent their unanimous support to its
election to the Council. I can assure them of my Covernment’s resolve to spare no effort to assist in the quest for
satisfactory solutions to problems of vital importance for
Africa which are before this Council.

108. I also note with interest the fact that considerations
of efficiency, which to me seem essential in this field, have
not escaped the sponsors of the draft resolution before us.
Indeed, from the information available to us, it appears that
the adoption of Chinese, whose importance and wealth are
well known, as a working language of the General Assembly
and the Security Council will help increase the efficiency of
the work of the United Nations.

102. To the permanent members of the Security Council
it is my pleasure to say how much my delegation
appreciated the warm words of welcome they have addressed to the United Republic of Cameroon as it takes up
its responsibilities as a member of this important organ of
the United Nations. Coming from such distinguished

109. For all those reasons my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
110. Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): Iraq was last a member of the
Security Council 15 years ago. The world has witnessed
many important events and developments during those
10

years. What Iraq experienced in that period could well
qualify it as a microcosm of the emergent world which, for
lack of a better term, came to be known as the third world.

another resolution approving the inclusion of Arabic as an
officiai and working language of the General Assembly and
its main committees.

111. Ostensibly sovereign and independent since it joined
the League of Nations in 1932, the country wasin fact still
shackled by a mandate which lingered on under the guise of
pseudo-independence. It was in the last few months of its
previous membership in the Security Council that Iraq was
fmaIly able to terminate that particular form of foreign
domination to which it had been subjected since the end of
the First World War. That was not the end of the struggle.
It was only the beginning of a long and arduous campaign
which profoundly changed not only the’ political, diplomatic and military character of the State but also the social
a&economic structure of the land. That struggle achieved
its final fulfilment in 1972, when the present Government
of Iraq, under the leadership of President Ahmad Hassan
Al-Bakr and the Arab Baath Socialist Party, nationalized
the major holdings of the foreign oil companies that had
monopolized all petroleum operations in the land for half a
century.

115. Before concluding, I should like to thank all the
members of the Asian Group which endorsed Iraq’s
candidature to the Security Council and all the representatives who have today kindly extended a word of welcome
to the new non-permanent members of the Council. I
should also Iike on behalf of my delegation to extend our
own congratulations and best wishes to our new
. colleagues.
116. Mr. President, I must congratulate you on two
counts: your country’s membership of the Council and the
high honour of presiding over its deliberations for the
month of January. At the historic meetings of the Security
Council held in Panama City last year at the invitation of
the Government of Panama,’ I had the honour to represent
my country as an observer, together with other Arab
delegations, as a token of our solidarity with the hopes and
aspirations of the peoples of the great Latin American
continent. We sincerely hope that Costa Rica’s membership
in the Security Council will demonstrate your country’s
increasing understanding of and co-operation with the
non-aligned community in conformity with the general
trend in Latin America of increasing awareness of the
identity of interests of all developing countries of the third
world. The co-operation and solidarity we find within the
non-aligned community is not, however, limited to their
narrow national goals or material gains but also involves
safeguarding the basic principles of the Charter to attain a
better world based on freedom, justice and equity.

112. The Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, rightly
pointed out in his first press conference of this year that
the world community is moving into an entirely new era of
international relations. Since its emergence as a republic in
1958, Iraq has strongly adhered to and advocated the
principles of the non-aligned movement to achieve a new
world order based on independence, progress and justice.
Full and genuine sovereignty meant not only freedom from
foreign political and military domination but also the
emancipation of the developing countries from the ruthless
control and exploitation of multinational corporations and
conglomerates. My country hopes to bring its experience in
this multifaceted struggle to the service of the countries of
the third world in order to promote the causes of
non-alignment.

117. Mr: SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian): The delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR is taking part for the first time in the
work of the Security Council as one of its members.
Accordingly, we should Iike to express our sincere appreciation to the delegations of all those States which, at the
twentyeighth session of the General Assembly, upon the
recommendation of the group of Eastern European States,
supported the election of the Byelorussian SSR to nonpermanent membership in the Council for 1974-1975. Our
awarenessof the trust placed in us is enhanced by a senseof
the enormous responsibility which the Republic assumed
with its election to membership in this most important
international organ.

113. The importance and the growth of the non-aligned
movement as a positive factor in international relations was
best demonstrated by the outstanding contributions made
by the out-going non-permanent members to the work of
the Council. Bach and every one of those representatives,
individually and collectively, discharged his duties in an
exemplary manner. They set a standard of excellence and
Integrity of which the non-aligned community could justly
be proud. Their defence of the principles of right and
justice, their genuine solidarity with the people of Palestine
and with other Arab countries, will not be easily forgotten.
Iraq, for its part, will continue to adhere to its declared
policies until the Palestinian people regain their inalienable
rights and until the injustice done them is finally undone.

118. Permit me to congratulate you, Mr. Minister, on your
assumption of the office of President of the Security
Council for January and to express our thanks for your
words of welcome addressed to the Byelorussian SSR. We
should also like to express our appreciation to the
delegations of the Soviet Union, Kenya, the United States
of America, Peru, Austria, France, Australia, the United
Kingdom, Indonesia and Iraq for their congratulations to
the Byelorussian SSR upon its election to the Security
Council. We should like in turn to offer our sincere
congratulations to the other new members of the Security
Council-Iraq,
Mauritania, Cameroon and Costa Ricawhich, together with Byelorussia, took their places on
1 January of this year as non-permanent members of the
Council. At the same time, we should like to pay a tribute
to the delegations of Yugoslavia, India, Guinea, the Sudan

114. Coming to the item on our agenda for today, my
delegation fully and wholeheartedly supports the inclusion
of Chinese among the working languages of the Security
Council. This draft resolution is, in fact, the final procedural act in the process of the restoration of the rights of
the People’s Republic of China in the United Nations, a
cause Iraq has actively advocated since 1958. The draft
resolution before us is of special significance to my
delegation since it follows a similar resolution adopted by
the General Assembly, which had on the same day adopted
11

arisen. These achievements are founded upon the unquestionable advantages of the social and governmental system
of socialism and of the Leninist national policy 8nd the
monolithic solidarity and friendship of our peoples,

and Panama for their worthy contniution to the work of
the Security Council until the expiry of their membership
in that organ on 3 1 December last.
.
,‘.
Il9. The. delegation of the Byelorussian SSR expressesits
readiness to co-operate with all the.members of the Council
in the interests of strengthening peace and international
security.

124. The Byelorussian SSR is participating in the work of
the Security Council at 8 significant time. when the forces
of peace and progress resolutely struggling against ,those
who oppose the easing of international tension are gaining
more and more ground. Concern with the strengthening of
peace
is one of the most important tasks of our time; and
therefore of the Security Council

120:. The Byelorussian people, which lost over two and 8
half million-a quarter of its population-during
the last
war?‘,know full ‘.well .the value of peace. That is why,
‘.throughout its history, the Byelorussian SSR, together with
all the other Soviet republics, has made and continues to
make a valuable contribution to the realiiation of that
dream of mankind-in the words of the Charter of the
United Nations, ‘Yo save succeeding. generations from the
scourge of, war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”. The Byelorussian SSR took an
active part in drafting the Charter and was one of the 51
States which signed it and became founder members of the
Organization.

12$,. As a representative of the mighty community. of
socialist States, the Byelorussian SSR will continue to work
for even greater solidarity among the fraternal countries of
socialism and the other forces of peace and progress inthe
world.
126. Lately there ‘has. been 8 further ‘strengthening~ of
friendly relations between the socialist States 8nd the
countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America that uphold
peace and the consolidation of national independence:

121. The Byelorussian SSR, actively participating in the
work of this international Organization, has .been represented at all 28, sessions of the Geneml Assembly and at
numerous other international conferences and forums
convened under the auspices of the United Nations. Soviet
Byelorussia is 8 member of many international organizations and specialized agencies-the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Universal
Postal Union, the international Telecommunic8tion Union,
the International Labour Organisation, the World Meteorological Organization-as well as the International Atomic
Energy Agency. In all these and other. international
organizations, the representatives of our Republic 8dVOCate
broad international co-operation and tirelessly defend the
policy of peace and friendship among peoples.

127. Both in Indo-China and in the Middle East it has
been demonstrated in practice that the solidarity ‘of the
Soviet people and of the countries of the socialist community with the forces of national liberation and social
progress is 8 most important factor of internation8l life
which assists peoples in asserting their legitimate rights
and
.
interests.
128. We shall continue to support the just struggle of
peoples for their national independence 8nd social progress
in the interests of the broad working masses 8nd to oppose
aggression and the policy of force in relations between
countries; we shall continue to support respect for sovereignty and to oppose interference inthe internal affairs of
States. In other words, our foreign policy fully accords with
the Charter, 8nd we shall help to enhance the role and
authority of the Organization in finding.8 solution to the
complex problems of the world.

122. Throughout the 28 years of its participation in the
work of the United Nations, the Byelorussian SSR, guided
by its Leninist peace-loving foreign policy, has done its
utmost to ensure the achievement of the purposes and
principles of the Charter, constantly striving to make the
Organization an important and’ effective instrument for the
strengthening of peace and the easing of international
tension and to ensure that it is utilized in the interests of
all-round co-operation on the basis of equality. The
Byelorussian SSR has frequently inifiated or co-sponsored
constructive proposals concerning the most pressing issues
and has actively sought to ensure their adoption and
implementation.

129. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR ‘*in the
Security Council, together with the delegations of other
peace-loving States, will do its utmost to further international detente, to ensure lasting peace and security for
peoples and to prevent another war. There can be no other
pOSitiOn on our part ViS-&ViS the questions Of war 8nd
peace. Our attitude is founded upon Marxist-Leninist
ideology and philosophy and is determined by our whole
way of life and by the nature of our socialist order, the
purpose and meaning of which is not destruction, but the
creation of material and spiritual values for the benefit of
the people.

123. During the years of Soviet power, truly grandiose
changes have been made in Byelorussia in 811spheres of the
economy and social life Those years have been marked by
a rapid upsurge of industry and by advances in agriculture,
technology, science 8nd culture. Thus, for example, the
volume of industrial production .rose by 8 factor of 136
during thii period, with 8n increase of almost 150 per cent
during the past eight years alone. The talents 8nd gifts of
our people have flourished. Generations of people of 8n
entirely new spiritual and moral stamp-staunch fighters
8nd builders, ardent patriots and internationalists-ha

130. Noting the great successesachieved in consolidating
peace, we are fully 8ware that the struggle to transform the
principles of peaceful coexistence into 8 universal standard
for relations among States with differing systems will
require intensive and, obviously, protracted efforts. Although the aggressive imperialist forces take into account
the new disposition of forces in the world, they are
continuing to pursue 8 policy which demands constant
vigilance on the part of peace-loving States,
12

13 1. All progressive and peace-loving forces are now faced
with the task of turning the detente achieved in key areas
of the development of international relations into a stable,
lasting and, indeed, irreversible phenomenon.
132. With regard to the discussion of the .item on the
agenda for today’s meeting of the Security Council, the
delegation of the Byelorussian SSR will vote’ for .draft
resolution Sllll92
and for the amendments thus made
necessary in the relevant provisions of chaptersVII1 and IX
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
J
‘. ‘.. ’ ” 3 . .
133. In conclusion, I should like once again to assureyou,
Mr, President, and all the members’of the Council of the
readiness of the Byelorussian SSR.to engage in broad and
fruitful co-operation in the consideration of ‘the various
questions on the Council’s agenda.
. .’
!
134.. Mr. OULD MOULOUD (Mauritania) (inrerprefar@r
fiurri J+ench): Mr..President, may I first of,aIl thank you
for your kind words’of welcome to the new members ofI; the
Cduncil, including Mauritania.
135, ,I should also like to congratulate you, on your
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month
136. I wish to express my thanks to all the representatives
who ,were so good as to offer a cordial welcome to my
deIegation. May I be allowed to thank our brothers of the
African group who unanimously supported our candidacy,
as well as all the other friendly States that voted in favour
of our election to membership in the Security Council.
137. My delegation attaches true value to the heavy
burden and the honour paid us by electing us to the
Council. We shall bring to our work not only our modest
contribution but also our sturdy faith in the United
Nations. In the course of our tenure we shall always act in
accordance with the spirit and letter of the Charter and of
the important resolutions of the General Assembly. We
shall always draw inspiration from the principles of justice,
peace and progress, which are deeply rooted in the
awareness of our national community and which everyone
agrees are all closely interrelated.

138. Taking ‘up the question on our agenda, I can be
extremely brief because in the General Assembly my
delegation warmly supported the draft resolution on the
inclusion of Chinese among the working languages of the
Council. I would recall that the Assembly adopted that
resolution without any opposition and I trust that the
Council will do likewise.
’
139. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
have now heard the, representatives of all members of the
Council. If no niember~wishes to,speak again, I shall take it
that the discussion’ .is concluded and that the Council is
ready to take a’ decision on the draft resolution in
document S/11192.
’ :
_’
140. If there is no request for. a vote, I shall consider that
the Council wishes to adopt the draft resolution without
vote.
:,
.’
The draft revolution was adopted 3

141. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The Security Council has just unanimously adopted the
draft resolution in document ‘S/I 1192, by which it has
decided to include Chinese as a working language of the
Security Council and, accordingly, to revise the relevant
provisions of chapters VIII and IX of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. The Chinese delegation
would like to express its appreciation to the entire
membership of the Security Council for the unanimous
support that it has given in this respect. We are convinced
that this action of the Security Council has terminated the
abnormal state of affairs that existed in the United Nations
for a prolonged period This action is entirely logical and in
accordance with the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations. We hope that through this action the inclusion of
Chinese as a working language in the Security Council will
enhance the efficiency of the Security Council in the
future.
The meetingrose at 12.5Op.m.
3 See resolution

345 (1974)

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNI.TED

NATIONS

Unit? I Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des Nations
depositaires
du monde
entier.
A : Nations
Unies. Sectiomdes
ICAfC IIOIIYYHTB

Bamem

KHH~~KHO&$

Mara3nne

Cexqw%

no npofiarxe

COMO

CONSEGUIR

DES

NATIONS

Unies sont en vente danales
Informez-vous
sup&s de votre
ventes, New York ou Geneve.
OPrAH&AUHH

06’bel(mnennbrx
ao acex pafionax

Ham&

’

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
*&ales

LES PUBLICATIONS

H3~AHSia

M3AaHm
Onrannsanmn
anxax
H arenrcraax

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

nm

UNIES
et les agences
ou adressex-vous

OKbEAHHEHHhIX

HAqHH

HansR
HOTHO rynsrb
a xnn&~x
mar-amepa. Haaonnre
cnpaaxn
06 HMaHHax
B
no appecy:
Op~Hn.?.anHR
06%ennxennbrx

numnTe

HsAanuR,

librairies
libraire
.

Hblo-EfOpX

PUBLICACIONES

nm

DE &AS

3Kenesa.

NACIONRS

UNItiAS

Las publics&ones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estsn en venta en librerfas
y easaad&tribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su fibrero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

’
