UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

;II,.,p., If 1 , :,,., ;
L,,I ,+ :__
,>Cb“.

;

,:>

.~

th

MEETING:

NEW

26 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2489)

. . , , . . . . , . . , , . . , .. . . , . . . . . . , , . . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . ..I.....,,...,L.,.,,,....,....,,.....L....l...

1

The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (5’16067) . . -

1

kYPV.2489

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2489th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Abdullah SALAH

26 October

(Jordan).

propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Ftgueiredo (Angola), Mr. Jacobs
(Antigua and Barbuda), Mr. MuiKiz (Argentina), Mr, Moseley
(Barbados), Mr. Gumucio Granier (Bolivia), Mr. Baron
(Dominica), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr, Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Richardson (Jamaica), Mr.
Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr, dos Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. St, Aimee
‘(Saint Lucia), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Hoang Bich Son (Viet Nam)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2489)
1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16067).

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 4.55 pm.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Arabic):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/16077, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Guyana and Nicaragua. I have been asked to
announce that Zimbabwe has joined in sponsoring this
draft resolution.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

‘I’he situation in Grenada:
Letter dated 25 October 1983 from the Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the
President of the Secnrity Council (S/16067)

4. The first speaker is the Prime Minister and Minister
for External Affairs of the Commonwealth of Dominica
and Chairperson of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, Miss Eugenia Charles. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome to her and invite her to make
her statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken by the Council at its 2487th
meeting, I invite the representative of Grenada to take a
place at the Council table, and I invite the representatives of
Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico and Venezuela to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

5. Miss CHARLES (Dominica): I wish most sincerely to
thank you, Mr. President, and the other members for granting me this opportunity to address the Council, The matter
before the Council is one of great importance to us in our
part of the world, but we know that you, Mr. President,
have a great deal of experience dealing with these matters
and we are quite sure that you will bring your wisdom and
patience to bear so that the matter may be brought to a final
conclusion, taking into consideration all the points that will
be made and understanding the degree of anxiety in the
minds of those of us who belong to the eastern Caribbean
States.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacobs (Grenada),
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Roa Kourf (Cuba), Mr.
Al-As&al
(Democratic Yemen), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab
Jamahiripa), Mr. Muioz Ledo (Mexico) and Mr. Martini
Urdaneta (Venezuela) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Dominica, Ethiopia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Jamaica, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Saint Lucia, Seychelles, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Viet Nam, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I

6. The member Governments of the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)--Antigua and Barbuda,
Dominica, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, and Montserrat-met
at
Bridgetown, Barbados, on Friday, 21 October 1983, to
consider and evaluate the situation in Grenada arising out
1

sive strike in order to remove this dangerous threat to peace
and security to their sub-region and to establish a situation
of normalcy in Grenada. These Governments are Barbados, Jamaica and the United States of America. Barbados
and Jamaica are members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM),
and Barbados is linked to some of the OECS
member Governments in a sub-regional security agreement.

of the overthrow and subsequent killing of the Prime Minister, together with some of his cabinet colleagues and a
number of other citizens. The member States were deeply
concerned that this situation would continue to worsen,
that there would be further loss of life, personal injury and
a general deterioration of public order as the military
group in control attempted to secure its position.
7. Member Governments considered that the subsequent
imposition of a draconian 96hour curfew by the military
group in control was intended to allow them to suppress
further the population of Grenada, which had shown by
numerous demonstrations their hostility to this group. The
member Governments noted that the present rtgime in
Grenada had demonstrated by its brutality and ruthlessness that it would stop at nothing to achieve its ends and to
secure its power.

12. It is the intention of the member Governments of the
OECS that, once the threat has been removed, they will
invite the Governor-General of Grenada to assume executive authority of the country under the provisions of. the
Grenada Constitution of 1973 and to appoint a broadbased interim Government to administer the country
pending the holding of general elections. It is anticipated
that general elections could be held six months after normalcy has been restored.

8. Member Governments have also been greatly concerned that the extensive military buildup in Grenada over
the last few years had created a situation of disproportionate military strength between Grenada and the OECS
countries. This military might in the hands of the present
group has posed a serious threat to the security of the
OECS countries and other neighbouring States. The
member States were deeply concerned that military forces
and supplies were likely to be introduced shortly to consolidate the position of the rCgime and that the country could
be used as a staging-post for acts of aggression against
them, and they further noted that the capability of the
Grenada armed forces is already at a level of sophistication and size far beyond the internal needs of that country.
Furthermore, the member States of the OECS have no
means of defence against such forces, Member Governments considered it of the utmost urgency that immediate
steps should be taken to remove these threats.

13. It has been agreed that, while these arrangements are
being put in place, the presence of former Prime Minister
Eric Gairy and other undesirable political elements would
complicate the situation and that they would therefore not
be welcome in Grenada.
14. It is further intended that arrangements should be
made to establish effective police and peace-keeping forces
in order to restore and maintain law and order in the
country. We have already begun talks with persons in the
Commonwealth to see if they would take part in the peacekeeping force, and as soon as there are sufficient of them
agreeable to doing so we would ensure the immediate withdrawal of all forces, even Caribbean forces which have
taken part in the action. After normalcy has been restored,
non-Caribbean
forces will withdraw
from Grenada.
Member Governments of the OECS wish to solicit the
diplomatic support of all friendly countries for this
initiative.

9. I shall share with you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council something which 1 was not in a
position to make public before. The Governor-General
in
fact had requested assistance. Earlier, the GovernorGeneral was in a position where we were not able, for
security reasons, to make rel’ercncc to this. Now that we
have word that he is completely safe, we feel it is fair to
share this with the Council.

15. Mr. UMBA di LUTETE (Zaire) (interpretation from
French): It is not without emotion that, in the name of my
delegation, I address the Council on the question under
discussion. There is always emotion and indignation over
the death of men, of innocent people, over the violation of
the elementary principles on which international relations
are based, and over the violation of international law.

10. Under the provisions of article 8 of the Treaty Establishing the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, contrning defence and security in the sub-region, member
overnments of OECS decided to take appropriate
tion, since such a situation would further undermine
Ilitical, social and economic stability and would have
tremely dangerous consequences for the preservation of
ace and security in the OECS sub-region as a whole.
:aring in mind the relative lack of military resources in
: possession of the other OECS countries, the member
?vernments have sought assistance for this purpose from
Idly countries within the region and subsequently from
‘4.

16. Non-aggression and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States is one of the principles of international law. That is why Zaire, my country, has always
condemned aggression and coups, whatever their origin.
Therefore, when similar problems have come before the
Council or other forums, problems such as that of the
aggression against Chad and that of the South Korean civil
aircraft, Zaire has not failed to condemn those acts. Unfortunately, we must note that the Council has remained
strangely silent. As I said in my statement to the Council
on Monday [2483rd meeting], by its passivity and even its
division the Council sometimes rewards force and violations of the Charter.

Governments have responded to the OECS
vernments’ request to form a multinational
purpose of undertaking a pre-emptive defen-

17. The time has come for the Council to assure us that
henceforth it will not fail to condemn interference in the
internal affairs of States, thus putting an end to its present
2

policy. In other words, we must always abide by principles,
and not look at the individual involved. Whatever happens,
Zaire cannot support acts of aggressionand violations of
the Charter, wherever they may come from.
18, That is why my delegation is happy, though also
surprised,that those who yesterday refused,on the basisof
fallacious Pretexts, to condemn past aggressionare today
askingthe Council to condemn acts which we deploreand
disapprove of today. In order to protest this ambivalence
on the part of certain States and the Council, my delegation, while disapproving of the use of force-1 repeat,
wherever it may come from-will reject aggressionon all
sides,by those States which violate the Charter and those
which have divided the world between themselvesinto
exclusive zones of influence and which, despite various
charadeswhich cannot deceiveus,cometo understandings
in the corridors.
19, The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Arabic): The
next speaker is the representativeof Viet Nam. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
20. Mr. HOANG BICH SON (Viet Nam) (interpretation
from Fiench): First, Sir, I congratulate you on your
assumptionof the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and on all the efforts you have made to serve
the cause of peace and stability throughout the world, I
thank all membersof the Council for giving me this opportunity to state Viet Nam’s position on the burning issue
which is before the Council.
21. The whole world is examining with extreme disquiet
the situation in Central America and the Caribbean, a
situation fraught with dangeroustensionslikely to kindle
an explosion becauseof the hostileand aggressiveactivities
of the United States against Nicaragua, Cuba, Grenada
and the people of El Salvador. International opinion
learned with indescribable dismay and indignation the
newsof the invasion of Grenada by considerableUnited
Statesmilitary forces. It is obviously an extremely serious
violation of the independence and sovereignty
of a
Member State of the United States.
22. This action is all the more serious becauseit was
undertaken in breach of the fundamental principlesof the
Charter by a permanent member of the Security Council,
one which hasopenly abusedits absolutemilitary superiority to subjugate and conquer a country a thousand times
smaller and weaker than the United States. This action is
even more dangerousfor the peaceand security of peoples
in Central America, the Caribbean and throughout the
world because it was decided upon
in cold blood,
unknown to important allies of the IJnited Statesin the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and even despitetheir
opposition. The responsibility l’or this action, t’ull ol’potential for grave consequences,restssquarely on the shoulders
of the present United States Administration, whoserecklesstendencies are wcil known to all.
23. It should also be noted that the invasion to which
Grenada hasjust fallen victim isnot an isolatedand fortuitious act, but had been very carefully prepared for some

time by the United States. It will be recalledthat in the
course of this year the representativeof Grenada had
already had occasion to alert membersof the Security
Council to preparationsfor a possibleinvasionof his country. The landing operationin Grenadaisclearlyan integral
part of a scenario, now made reality, carefully prepared
long beforehand.
24. No one would think of denying that this act is
extremely serious,in the light of the presentstateofcxpjosive tension throughout the world. But in an attempt to
justify it the invaders have usedthe pretext of protecting
American nationals in Grenada and restoringdemocracy
to Grenada. However, the pretext of protectingits nationals smackstoo much of the old colonialistgunboat diplomacy of past centuries to need further condemnation
today. AS for the allegationof defendingdemocracy in
Grenada, or even protecting the security of neighbouring
countries,it is so patently hypocritical andfallaciousthat it
is not worth spendingtime on. Is it not more correct to
emphasizethat-as hasbeenrightly shownby the opinion
Of peace-loving and justice-lovingpeoplethroughout the
world, including even in the United States-this action is
the
mult
of an extremely irresponsibleand recklessattitude on the part of the American Administration, which
has deliberately flouted the principlesof the non-useof
force in international relationsand non-interferencein the
internal affairs of States,thus insolentlythreateningpeopleswith its international policeman’snightstick, giving a
perfect demonstration of the law of the jungle and of
depredation in international relations?How hollow and
ridiculous their fine words soundthereforein connection
with the so-calleddefenceof democracy,humanrightsand
order in the civilized world! Would it not be better repeatedly to pillory their brutal and arrogantconquerors’mentality deliberately trampling on the peoples’independence
and freedom and on their aspirationsto socialjusticeand
to peaceand security in the world?
25. There is therefore absolutely no political, legal or
moral argument that can justify such massivemilitary
intervention against independentand sovereign Grenada.
26. The community of Statesmustspeakwith one forceful voice in condemningthis armed intervention against
Grenada. The American Administration hasstatedthat it
would not get involved in another Viet Nam. But it
appearsnow that the United Stateshasindeedembarked
upon the courseof a secondViet Nam. So if a timely stop
is not put to the recklessness
of the presentleadersof the
United States, the world will shortly be threatenedwith a
third, fourth and even severalViet Nams. The independence,freedom, peaceand stability of smallcountriesand
peoplesin various parts of the world-in Latin America,
the Caribbean, the Middle East, southern Africa and
elsewhere-are from now on very seriouslythreatened.
27. Viet Nam, which wasa victim of one of the longest
and bloodiest wars imposedby those very People who
have just invaded Grenada, is fully awareof the warlike
and brutal nature of the aggressors
and empathizes deeply
with the people of Grenada, currently undergoingone of
the hardesttrials of their history, and declaresits unfailing

35, Mr, NATORF (Poland): The Council is deliberating
in a situation of extremeemergency.An assaultforce from
the United Statesdisembarkedon the tiny islandof Grenada and started hostilities yesterday before dawn. As we
are informed, mainly by the newsmedia,armedclasheson
the islandcontinue, bringing lossof life and serioussufferings to the population, as well asendangeringpeaceand
security in the area.

militant solidarity with the heroic struggle of the people of
Grenada to defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial independence of their country.
28. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam vigorously condemns the aggression visited upon Grenada and energetically demands the immediate cessation of the armed
intervention and the immediate withdrawal of the invading
troops from Grenada so that the people of Grenada can
enjoy their right to decide on their own future, in complete
freedom, without any interference or foreign threat.

36. The Grenada adventure involving United States
Marines, army troops and sophisticatedweaponry, ostensibly was launched to protect and evacuate United States
citizens on the island. However, the fallaciousarguments
raised by the American Administration lack any justification and are totally unacceptable. The representative of
Grenada, speaking earlier today before the Council
[2487th meetitzg],gave us a clear picture of the real causes
of the aggressionagainsthis country. He presenteduswith
convincing proof that Grenada posed no threat to its
neighboursor to the safety of the United Statescitizens.
The telex that his Government sent to the American
authorities proved that the Grenadian Government
wanted to continue peaceful relations and co-operation
with the United States.

29. It is in this spirit that my delegation declares its full
support for the draft resolution submitted by Guyana and
Nicaragua [S/I60771 for the Council’s consideration.
30. Peace and justice will emerge victorious, as will, we
are sure, the just cause of Grenada.
3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&ion fram Arabic): The
next speakeris the representativeofNigeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
32. Mr. FAFOWORA (Nigeria): I shall be very brief.
Nigeria is deeply concernedabout the military invasion of‘
Grenada by forces from the United Statesand someeastern Caribbean States.As a non-alignedState and one that
is fully committed to the principle of non-intervention in
the internal affairs of States, we are obligedto state that
the invasion is deplorable and wholly unjustified. It reprcsentsa violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the principle of the non-useof force in relations among
States. We in Nigeria have consistentlydenounced,in this
chamber and elsewhere,the frequentresortto force by the
big Powersto topple from powerGovernmentswhich they
do not like, We havedone so in all casesof foreign military
intervention and in all regionsof the world. We do so
becauseof our basic commitment to and respect for the
Charter and international law, which abjure the use of
force against States in order to bring about desired
changesin their political and economicsystems.Respect
for the principle of the Charter and for international law,
particularly those laws applicable to relations among
States, is indispensablefor the maintenanceof international peace and security. It is the very foundation of
peaceful relations among States.

37. No argumentsof the kind raisedby the United States
regarding the situation on the islandcould justify invasion
or aggression.There wasno military attack on the United
States or the other intervening countrieswhich would justify a defensivemilitary action. On the contrary, there is
evidencethat it wasan operation well planned in advance
and that the participation in it of someCaribbeannations
was nothing but an effort to create the semblanceof a
collective action.
38. From the very outset the United StatesAdministration was unwilling to accept the processof progressive
change under way in Grenada since 1979and had threatenedthe legitimateGovernment of that sovereigncountry.
As a result, a sovereign nation, a State Member of the
United Nations and a member of the Movement of NonAligned Countries,fell victim to cold-bloodedaggression.
39. Two curious documents were circulated among the
membersof the Security Council, the content of which is
aimed at justifying the invasion. The first one contains a
statementon the Grenada situation from the OECS Secretariat. It is a rare occasionto read a statement in which
violation of basicnormsof international law and the Charter of the United Nations is presentedas restoration of
peace and order. Certainly some of the quotations, like
“pre-emptive defensivestrike”, will remain in the infamous dictionary of hypocrisy. In this letter, however, the
true intentions, not of its signatoriesbut those of the real
force behind the action, were exposed.At the sametime
one has to admit that the cleverly worded letter of the
representativeof the United Statesto the United Nations
avoided exposing itself so clearly to the world. But it
would be unwisefor anybody to think that it ispossibleto
fool everybody all the time. Under any regionalagreement
there can be no way to justify such action as the one
against Grenada.

33. What are the militarily weak Statesof the world to
think of this invasion, which also toucheson their own
territorial iniegrity and national security?What are we in
Africa to make.of this? It shouldbe understandablewhy
we should have someapprehensionsabout the resort to
force against Grenada in circumstanceswhich, we are
:ompeIled to say, cannot be justified on either legal or
-oral grounds.
conclusion, I should like to expressthe sympathy
vernment and people of Nigeriafor the people of
1 this, their hour of trial. It is our hope and
that there will be a speedywithdrawal of all
:s from Grenada, so as to allow the return of
that island.
4

40.
lesz
by
see
An
sut
ma
pet
da
tat
sta
im
all
PC
an

41
G
ac
of
U
se
01
SC
Iv
is
Cl
4
a
a
f
S
i!
i
t
I
1
1

One cannot disregard the wider context of this reckless act of imperialist policy, which wasput in doubt even
by closest United States allies. This use of force has to be
Seen as a Part of a chain of threats and pressureson Latin
Americc?l~ and Caribbean nations in order to make them
subsmhlt
to the interests of the United States.It is a clear
manift‘station
not only of hostility to the emancipationof
peoples but of arrogance, such as that soundedin yesterday’s
personal tirade against the Nicaraguan representative
by the United States representative in her first
staternetlt
today before dawn. It takes no great political
imagination
to understand that particularly in the present,
already
very tense international situation, such a policy
poses an extremely serious threat to international peace
and security.
40.

46. Many delegationshave spoken in this debate, but
they have commencedfrom a position in which Grenada,
a Member State of the United Nations, is invaded by
troops from neighbouringStates,and they have therefore
attempted to throw the cloak of United Nations resPectability around the shouldersof the rigime in Grenada, We
would ask you to consider,before attempting to ;,cccPt
these Premises,on what authority are foreign troops at
present in Grenada.
47. Let US begin with the troops of the Cuban Government. Who invited them to Grenada?Are they properly
there at the requestof a legitimategovernment of Grenada? YOU know the answer to that question, It ;, a
resounding“no”. The Bishop rtgime wasillegitimate. It
had come to power asa resultof a coup.It had refusedto
hold elections,in spite of strong pressurefrom its CARICOM colleaguesthat the rCgimeshouldseekto tegitimize
itself by holding elections,so as to be establishedbY the
people of Grenada. They declinedto do so. Instead, they
concentrated on building up a military force until that
force had becomestrong enough to destroy its political
leadersand to place the whole country under siege,

The United States military action is seenby my
41.
Government
as an outright act of aggression
againstGrenada and brutal and open intervention in the internal affairs
of RI-I independent State. The armed intervention of the
United
States is yet another manifestationof the policy of
seeki~lg a position of strength, a breach of universally recogrlized rules of international behaviour and a violation of
sovereignty
and independence of a small non-aligned
Mecnber State of the United Nations. As such, this policy
is dangerous to the Organisation and to the international
community
as a whole.

48. We next heard about Grenada’sproblemswhen differencesamongstthe ruling cliquesin the country beganto
emerge. We heard rumours that Maurice Bishop and
many of his associates
weredisposedto return the country
to someform of legitimacyand, accordingly,to establisha
democratic government in Grenada.

Poland resolutely condemns the act of aggression
42.
against Grenada and demandsthe immediatecessationof
armed intervention and the withdrawal of foreign troops
from that country. The moral censorsin Washington,who
so willingly were issuing to so many countriesof the world,
ipcluding my own, the certificates of morality or immoraicivilized and non-civilized behaviour, according to
iv,
their whim, have now brutally tampled the sovereigntyof a
practically
defenceless nation in the most immoral and
uncivilized
manner.

49. What was the result?Mr. Bishop was placed under
housearrest. Having been releasedby his followers, who
challengedthe authority of the new military rigime, he was
wounded, re-arrestedand executed.Not only was he executed, but four of his ministers,two trade union leaders
and other civilians of the country were also executed.
50. But that was not all. A new rigime under someone
whose namewe understandto be Austin had placed tbc
whole Grenadian population under a stateof siege.ThcY
declareda curfew and madeit known that any Grenadian
citizen who was found outsideof his home after certain
hours of the day would be shot on sight. This is a very,
very seriousstate of affairs to be foisted on the peopleof
the country by peopleclaimingto be the Government of
that country.

43.

It is necessary that the armed intervention in Grenada bc properly condemned, that the necessarystepsbe
taken immociiateiy to withdraw foreign troops from the
island, and that the people of Grenada be allowed to exercise their right to self-determination. Although we would
Iikc to see the draft resolution on the issueformulated in
stronger terms tllan the draft before us, we believethat its
spcudy adoption is the least the Council can and should
do.

51. Jamaica
is a democracy.For over 40 years or more,
we have regularly changedour Government through the
use of the ballot box-not with soldiersand bullets. We
are membersof the CARICOM organization asindeedwc
are members of the Organization of American States
(OAS), But we are aware of the fact that the countries
which have askedusto take action are not all membersof
the OAS. They have their own organization, the OECS.
They are al] democracies.They have forsworn
the use of
armedforcesin their internationalrelations.Countrieslike
Dominica have no army; othershave a few Policemento
keep law and order. That is all.

PRESIDENT (inlerpretation
from Arabic): The
next spcakcr is the representativeof Jamaica.I invite him
to take a PIXC
at the Council table and to make his

44.

TII~

~tntctllcnt.

Mr. RICHARDSON (Jamaica): Jamaica is obliged
to request a hearing in this debatebecauseJamaicais one
of‘ the countries which has respondedto the appealof the
ZlLttllority of the OECS to act and to removea threat which
the caster11Caribbean States saw as overhanging their
future security, from developments within the rigime in
Gr-ena&. I anI therefore very grateful to the membersof
the Security Council for having afforded me the oPPortunity to bc heard in this debate.

45.

52, you have already heard that the OECS has bee11
increasinglyconcernedabout the stateof affairs in Grcn5

ada, that for years they have witnessed with grave concern
the accumulation of troops in Grenada-an
accumulation
which seemed, in their view, to go far beyond the requirements of internal security. When they found that these
troops had taken charge of the country and had disposed
of its titular head and his associates, they were entitled to
be concerned. Any members of this Organization who
found themselves with such absence of security in circumstances such as these would have been concerned. It was a
responsibility
placed upon their Governments
to take
action to secuie the future of their countries.

that the Cuban troops now engaged in the country dre
foreign troops. By whom were they invited? By whom are
they now author&d
to resist this so-called invasion?
58. The Jamaican delegation recognizes that the Security
Council has ultimate authority in these matters. We
accordingly urge the Council not to call for the withdrawal
of troops until the safety and territorial integrity of the
people of Grenada have been secured.
59. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretution from Arabic): I
invite the representative of Bolivia to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

53. The OECS has a charter. Under article 8 of that
charter, members are required to take action in a collective
manner when they recognize that their security is
threatened.

60. Mr. GUMUCIO
GRANIER (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to
you for having given us the opportunity to take part in this
meeting which is considered a matter of concern to my
country, which respects international law and staunchly
supports peace and collective security. At the beginning of
my statement I should like to express our satisfaction at
seeing you presiding over the Council. We should also like
to thank the representative of Guyana and his delegation
for the skillful manner in which he presided over the Council’s deliberations earlier.

54. The authority of the OECS met in Barbados on Friday, 21 October, to evaluate the situation in Grenada arising from the overthrow of the Government of Maurice
Bishop. The authority was aware that the overthrow of the
Bishop administration took place with the knowledge and
connivance of forces unfriendly to the OECS. The authority also took note of the current conditions, the serious
violation of human rights and the bloodshed that had
occurred, and the consequent unprecedented threat to the
peace and security of the region which was created by the
vacuum of authority in Grenada,

61. It is with dismay that Bolivia became aware of the
latest developments in Grenada, In this connection, my
Government
issued the following statement on 25
October:

55. The OECS Chairperson was deeply concerned that
military forces and supplies were likely soon to be introduced to consolidate the position of the rCgime and that
the country could be used as a staging post for acts of
aggression against surrounding States. The Chairperson,
accordingly, wrote to the Right Honourable
Edward
Seaga, Prime Minister of Jamaica, transmitting the request
for assistance under article 8 of the Treaty, to provide
transport, logistic support and additional military personnel so as to assist the OECS forces to stabilize this serious
situation within the eastern Caribbean,

“In the light of the serious events in Grenada, the
Republic of Bolivia reiterates its unshakeable adherence
to the principles of non-interference and of respect for
self-determination,
which are the bases of its foreign
policy. Therefore, in expressing anxiety over the situation prevailing in Grenada, it demands that a halt be
put to the armed intervention in the territory of the
sister country and that the occupying troops be withdrawn immediately. In keeping with the norms which
govern the regional system, Bolivia demands compliance with the tenets of the charter of the OAS.”

56. The Jamaican troops are part of a multinational
peace-keeping force intended to remove the threat to peace
and security in the area and, at the same time, to restore
normalcy to the island of Grenada. The Jamaican troops
are not there to protect Jamaican citizens; they are not
there to determine what form of government the people of
Grenada should decide to have. We are there to assist the
people of Grenada to free themselves from a military dictatorship and to establish conditions within which it might
be possible for the will of the people to be dispIayed in free
and fair elections. The Jamaican troops will leave Grenada
as soon as it is clear that such conditions have been
established,

62. Bolivia has always condemnedall forms of outside
interference aimed at undermining the principles of the
self-determination of peoples, the territorial integrity and
the political and economic independenceof States,As far
as the countries of Latin America are concerned,the only
valid instruments to preserve our sovereignty and settle
our disputes are to be found in international law, as
expressedin the Charter of the United Nations and the
charter of the OAS.

57. Grenada, as a Member of the United Nations, is
-“titled to the protection of the Security Council against
invasion of its territory. It is being suggested that for70~s should immediately leave Grenada. If one
what those who use these expressions have in
clear that they refer to American troops, JamaiBarbadian troops and elements from Antigua
stern Caribbean States. No one seems to think

63. The position of Bolivia is backed by a national consensusexpressedin a resolution passedby the Chamberof
Deputies and adopted unanimously on 25 October, which
repudiates armed intervention, supports initiatives for a
solution in the framework of international organizations
to preserve the sovereignty and integrity of the Republicof
Grenada, and demands the withdrawal of the troops
which have intervened in that country.
6

64. On behalf of Bahia I express the sincere wish that
the events,m. Grenada may find a solution as speedily as
possible WIthIn the framework of international law, which
this Council is called upon to preserve, by adopting an
appropriate resolution that will ensure the immediate restoration of peace in Grenada.

72. The Council has been convened in an emergency
meetingto anatySe the situation createdby the invasionof
Grenada bY a military force made up of troops
of the
United Statesand someCaribbeanStates.It is clear that
this act constitutesa violation of international Jawand of
the Charter of the United Nations,which prohibit the use
of force in hkt’tdOtlal
relationsand interferencein the
internal affairs of other States,

65. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from chinese): The Chinesedelegation has listenedattentively to
the statements made by various delegationson the armed
invasion of Grenada by the United States.

73. The invasion of Grenada representsaggression
againsta Member State of the United Nations. This act,
which is grave in itself, is even more dangerousin ‘the
66. On 25 October United Statesarmed forces number- context of the existingtensionin the region,The policy of
ing nearly 2,000 flagrantly invaded Grenada. By this act
confrontation and intervention in the internal affairs of
the United States has committed undisguisedaggression sovereigncountriesQf our continent is reachingalarljling
against a small island State with a population of merely
proportions, and we should like to expressour profound
100,~ and has wantonly trampIed underfoot the indeconcern at this fact.
pendenceand territorial integrity of a sovereignState and
intervened in its internal affairs, thereby undermining the
74. Argentina deplores the tragic internal events that
peace and stability of the Caribbean region and threatenhave recently taken placein Grenadaand the invasionof
ing international peace and security,
that country, and we support restorationof its full sovereignty as well as withdrawal of the invading forces,
67. This is an outright act of hegemonismin grossviolation of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms 75. I would recall that throughout its history my country
hasalwayssupportedanddefendedmoststronglythe pringoverning international relations. The United Statesis a
super-Power, whereasGrenada is a weak and smalldevel- ciples that preservethe territorial integrity, independence
and security of the membersof the internationalcommuoping country. The equality of all States,big or small,is a
nity. In stating theseviews I am merely reiterating the
fundamental principle governing modern international
doctrine supported by some of the most outstanding
relations. All States should coexist peacefully in accordance with the principle of mutual respectfor eachother’s Argentinian statesmen,such as Carlos Calve, Roque
sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggres- Sfienz Pefia, Honorio Pueyrred6n and Carlos Saavedra
Lamas, who pointed out that the sovereigntyof States
sion and mutual non-interference in each other’s internal
consistsin absoluteright, full internal autonomyandcomaffairs. Situations in which the strong overpower the weak
plete external independence.
Internationalcoexistenceand
and the big bully the small must not be tolerated.
the maintenanceof international peaceand security are
basedon respectfor the different positionsof States,with68. The United States armed invasion of Grenada on
out which we should be led into chaosand irreversible
whatever pretext is absolutely inadmissible.If the present
confrontation.
invasion of Grenada cannot be checked effectively, incidents of the same nature will happen to other States.
76. The principle of non-intervention is explicitly enWhat, then, will be the guarantee of the sovereignty and
shrinedin Article 2, paragraph7 of the Charter.Moreover,
independence of small countries?
it is most firmly supported by the Movement of NonAligned Countriesand hasbeenreiteratedin the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interferencein the Internal Affairs of States,’in the drafting of
which my delegationtook an active part. No one must
attempt to changeby force the situation of a Sovereign
State by occupying its territory militari]Y.

69. We are extremely concerned over the situation in
Grenada and continue closely to follow its development.
The Chinese Government consistently maintainsthat the
affairs of a country should be handled exclusively by the
people of that country, free from al] outside interference.
The Chinese Government strongly condemnsthe United
States invasion of Grenada and demandsthe immediate
and total withdrawal of roreign troops from that country.

77. Guyana and Nicaragua,countriesof our regionand
membersof the Council, have presentedthe draft reso]ution in documentS/16077.My Government, which hopes
that the Council will respondappropriatelyto theeventsin
Grenada, believesthat the draft resolution contains the
necessaryand basicelementsfor a speedyand satisfactory
solution of the presentsituation in Grenadaand therefore
firmly supports it.

70. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Arabic): The
next speaker is Ihe representativeof Argentina. 1invite him
to take :\ place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
71. Mr. MUfiIZ (Argentina) (interpretationfrom Spunis/z): Mr, President,I thank you and the Council for having
responded to our request to participate in the debateon a
serious question concerning the international community
as a whole and more specifically our own region.

78, The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom ArQbfC):The
next speaker
is the representativeof Seychelles.1 invite her
to take a place at the Council table and to make her
statement.
7

85. Mr. IBRAHIM (Ethiopia): Exactly a week ago today
the Foreign Minister of Ethiopia extended the felicitations
of the Ethiopian delegation to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of October. Permit me to add my own personal
congratulations today and to wish you every success in
your difficult task.

79. Ms. GONTHIER
(Seychelles): It gives me pleasure
to extend to you, Sir, the sincerest congratulations of my
delegation on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council. I should like also to congratulate Mr. Sinclair
on discharging the duties of the presidency so well last
month.
80. Mr. President, I have the honour of addressing you
and the Council today on a situation of grave concern not
only to the island Republic of Seychelles but to every
Member of the United Nations. The Government of Seychelles condemns the military invasion of Grenada by the
United States of America. It further states that this invasion constitutes a flagrant violation of international law
and the principle of non-interference in other countries’
internal affairs, embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations.

86. Once again the Marines have struck, this time in
Grenada, to subdue a small, weak and developing country.
This time again their declared objectives are the protection
of the lives of American citizens and the restoration of
democracy, in this case in Grenada. History has not failed
to record the many but similar crimes committed in the
name of these seemingly lofty goals, while the peoples of
the world, too, have never failed to recognize the true
objectives of these destructive missions. Today the Marines
symbolize the imperial ambitions of the United States of
America and provoke bitter memories of shattered hopes
and frustrated aspirations of the masses of the third world.

81. While Seychelles recognizes the unquestionable right
of any country to call on partners of its own choice for
assistance, it feels that no foreign Power or any country
should intervene by force and impose its will on another
country if not requested to do so. The Government of
Seychelles believes that such military action will further
escalate the already worsening situation in the region. This
action of the United States can be characterized as that of
a “bully”, because a precedent has been established whereby similar actions could be used against other small developing islands on the grounds that United States citizens or
interests were at stake.

87. The invasion and occupation of Grenada by the
United Stales of America is both illegal and immoral.
Neither the Charter of the United Nations nor the charter
of the Organization of American States, to which both
Grenada and the United States formally subscribe, sanetion such an action. Indeed, the provisions of both charters
explicitly prohibit the invasion and occupation of an independent and sovereign State. Furthermore, Ethiopia does
not believe that the Treaty Establishing the Organization
of Eastern Caribbean States, whose provision regarding
collective self-defence applies only in cases of external
aggression, does or can form the legal basis for such adventures. In the conspicuous absence of external aggression,
the action taken by the United States in tandem with sonle
parties to that treaty therefore cannot but constitute clear
and direct intervention in the internal affairs of Grenada.

82. Having discussed the legal principles involved in this
tragic case, we should like to pay attention to the human
aspects involved as well. We wish to pay a tribute to the
memory of Maurice, Jacqueline, Unison, Kendrick and
other brave Grenadians whose islander vision, honesty
and dedication to building a nation free of corruption, a
society based on equality of opportunity, good health,
decent housing and justice for all, will continue despite
mainlander attempts to view and treat decent, young,
dynamic and honest leadership with hostility, destabilization and destruction. The once clear blue water that surrounds Grenada has been polluted, and an idealistic young
Government intent upon remedying centuries of poverty
and exploitation was destroyed last week,

X8. Ethiopia therefore strongly condemns this wanton
aggression and intervention and calls upon the United
States to withdraw immediately and unconditionally all its
forces from that sister country of Grenada.
89. The legal obfuscations and the complicity of a few
Caribbean States notwithstanding, the invasion of Grenada is but the latest manifestation of the policy of domination and force followed by the present United States
Administration. As far as Washington is concerned, the
entire developing world is or should be the sphere of inff uence of the United States and should meekly accept domination by the United States. By this twisted logic, any
country that attempts to chart an independent course of
national development becomes a target for covert subversion and overt military actions by the United States and/or
its regional surrogates.

83. In closing, I shouId like to tell the Council a story that
jumped out at me like a hand grenade when I was reading a
history book recently. When the first European, Christopher Colymbus, discovered Grenada in 1498, it was inha>ited by the Carib Indians. None survived colonial times. In
he first landing of mainlanders, hundreds of Carib Indians
lmped to their deaths from a cliff, now called Caribe’s
ap. It is our fear that the present-day islanders may suffer
6 same fate as the Carib Indians if they cannot get the
‘nlander to look beyond its own vision. To the Grena1people, we offer our prayers and sympathy.

90. One of the many countries which is now targeted for
similar military invasion is Nicaragua. Because of the geographical proximity of Nicaragua to the United States, and
the advanced stage of military preparations against that
country, we feel it our duty to warn the Council of the
imminent and grave danger facing the people and Govesnmerit of Nicaragua. Though the people of Nicaragua will

PRESIDENT
(interprerution from Arabic): The
. is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him
Ice at the Council table and to make his

8

valiantly resist any and all acts of aggression, the international community also has a duty to act promptly to avert
the serious threat to world peace and security that could
result from any violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Nicaragua.

96. That moral bankruptcy can be seen, first, through the
nature of the protagonists in this tragedy. The fact that.a
permanent member of the Security Council has indulged In
such an armed invasion against a people which is Perhaps
numerically small but at the same time great because Of Its
devotion to its national dignity, in itself implies a condemnation which brooks no appeal. The fact that, in addition*
that invasion has won the political support
and the token
participation of States in that region represents
something
which is to be condemned for the present and which rePreV
sents for the future a very grave danger, including a danger
to those States, because such a negation of the sOvereiWty
of States, we believe, necessarily has inherent in it certain
suicidal tendencies.

91. At this grave moment, Ethiopia expresses its support
for and solidarity with the people of Grenada. Our
thoughts and sympathy go to the many that have fallen
while defending the freedom and independence of their
motherland, The temporary setback notwithstanding,
the
people of Grenada will ultimately triumph.
92. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

97. This moral bankruptcy can also be seen in the u&elievable inconsistency of the pretexts put forward.
A pretext
such as the protection of citizens in a particular
Co~~nW’
such as Grenada is particularly inadmissible
in current
international law. None can be more aware than the host
country of the constituting conference
and then of the
Headquarters of the United Nations of the strength of the
principle of the non-use of force or threat of force against
the political independence or territorial
integrity
of any
State. None can be better aware than a permanent member
of the Security Council of the very rigorous
rules which
have to be applied in making exceptions,
such as self’defence, to this cardinal principle of the Charter. None CZIII
be more aware than the States which have recently come to
international sovereignty and whose human and material
means are very limited of the vital need to strengthen
the
effectiveness of the principle of non-intervention
and noninterference in affairs which fall within
the exclusive
national purview of each State. A pretext with immeasurable negative consequences, the goal of re-establishing
“order” or even “democracy” presents a frontal attack on
that principle of non-intervention and non-interference
and
opens the way to breaches of the peace of varying kinds
which are completely uncontrollable. An equally dangerous
and intolerable pretext, the so-called threat posed by the
domestic situation of Grenada for the entire region, ethos
the doctrine of preventive war which, the Council has seen,
is accompanied by tragic consequences in southern Africa
and particularly in the Middle East.

93. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) (interpretation
from
French): First, I should like to read a declaration made by
a spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria:
“The serious developments which occurred in the
island of Grenada are of deep concern to Algeria. The
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
has met in this connection with the United States
Ambassador to Algeria, In this context, Algeria recalls
that non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as
well as strict respect for the right of peoples freely to
exercise their choice, are inviolable principles. Their violation is unacceptable, particularly when, in addition, it
takes the form of armed intervention.
“Algeria considers that this military operation is particularly serious, since it complicates a regional situation which is already difficult. It increases tension in
that area and steps up confrontation to the detriment of
dialogue and of the search for a negotiated solution,
without which there can be no sound international
relations.
“The immediate and unconditional cessation of this
intervention is a necessary requirement which the international community should work toward without
delay, to permit the people of Grenada to exercise in a
sovereign manner their right to choose their own political, economic and social systems and freely to decide on
how their problems should be resolved.”
94. In their variety and complexity, all matters which
come before the Security Council fundamentally imply the
need for strict respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of the norms of international law.

98. At a time when peoples and States in various parts of
the world have discovered the promises
inherent
in the
idea of good-neighbourliness, at a time when the tendency
towards regional groupings has increased for the pul-p(x~
of seeking harmony and prosperity together, it is p;lrticularly distressing that a constituting treaty of a subrc&ional
organization has thus been promoted
to the rank 01’ ;I,,
instrument for unjustifiable attacks
against the political
independence and territorial integrity
of one of its cc),+
tracting parties.

95. Although subject, like all the others, to the principles
and norms which should rule the international behaviour
of States lest there be anarchy, the tragic situation which
we have at present none the less has certain characteristics
which point an accussing finger at what can be called, I
think, a moral failure of the authority of law and the reign
of justice which the Charter was intended to promote.

99. Immediately, as soon as We learned
that
SL~C]J ;I
cd instrument had been invoked, our desire to carry oL1t a
Complete
eXaIIIinatiOn
of the Situation
prompted
I1s tn Bo
through the Treaty Series published by the Unite‘1 Nations
in order to discover the conventional
basis uncicrlying
this
juridical monstrosity which has been prcscntcd
tn L,s iIs
being in accordance with the aims of the Uniiccl Nations.
1,
jlJridi-

9

was impossible to find this document in the Treaty Series,
and apparently it has in fact not been registered with the
Secretariat of the United Nations. The text was finally
made available to us through other channels. There is a
remarkable error in invoking this unregistered treaty
before a body of the United Nations when it is in contravention of the very letter of paragraph 2 of Article 102 of
the Charter; it is even more irregular to present to the
Security Council a typical violation of the principle of
puctn sunt sewunda as an illustration of the application in
good faith of a legal subregional instrument. If we read
paragraph 4 of article 8 of that treaty, it indicates quite
clearly in effect that the concern which prompted those
States parties was simply to provide collective defence
against external aggression. Now it is quite obvious that
there was no outside aggression and the Government of
Grenada did not invoke that treaty, nor did it request any
assistance.
100. The continuing flagrant violation of the Charter
which we have witnessed has become more serious in view
of the political plans of the authors of the invasion with
respect to Grenada-plans
repeated here today-which
amount to nothing less than placing the entire people of
that sovereign State Member of the United Nations under
trusteeship.

demned the invasion of Grenada by the United States of
America. That invasion constitutes yet another act of
aggression
in the chain of American acts of aggression
against
the peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean.
We consider that military action by the United States to be
a flagrant
violation of the inalienable right of the people of
Grenada to self-determination and the structuring of its
society
free from any outside intervention. There is no
doubt that this blatant act of aggreSSiOn
stems from an
imperialist policy based on supremacy and domination,
which are the essential goals of imperialism, whose acts are
incompatible with the rules of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
105. The events that took place in Grenada shortly
before the American military intervention are the internal
affairs of the people of Grenada. Neither the United States
nor anyone else has the right to intervene in order to try to
shape the destiny of Grenada. There is no justification,
either in morality or in law, that can be cited by the United
States as a reason for its aggression.
106. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic calls
upon the Security Council urgently to condemn that
aggression. It also calls for the immediate withdrawal of’
United States forces from the island, Sor compensation to
be paid for the losses sustained and for a fact-finding mission. The Syrian Arab Republic is ready, in co-operation
with non-aligned countries, to mobilize all the necessary
political and moral forces in order to protect the sover‘eignty of a fraternal people whose noble positions within
the framework of the United Nations and the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries cannot be forgotten,

101. In dwelling on some of these fundamental legal considerations, I have not lost sight of the actual chronology
of events, or of the disturbing indications that the aggression was coldly premeditated. The news media have issued
numerous reports on the movements of the United States
naval forces since Thursday, 20 October, prior to the
actual meeting of the States members of the OECS.

107. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic calls
upon the Security Council to adopt without any modifications the draft resolution sponsored by Guyana and Nicaragua, especially since it is based on the internationally
recognized principles to which we have committed ourselves in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations and a number of other international instruments,
foremost among which are the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,2 the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States’ and the resolution, which is SO strongly
disliked by the United States, on the definition of
aggression’

102. The overt invasion of Grenada by foreign armed
forces cannot claim any legality or legitimacy. It is unjustifiable on every count and should therefore be duly condemned by the Security Council as an act of unprovoked
armed aggression. With the same firmness, the Council
must, in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, require
the immediate and unconditional evacuation of the forces
of aggression and foreign occupation. Bowing respectfully
to the memory of the innocent lives sacrificed as a result of
this invasion, and commending the heroic resistance of the
people of Grenada, which is clinging to its right to live, I
shall have performed an act of moral tribute which Algeria
was duty bound to pay to the friendly and sorely tried
people of Grenada. I do so as a sincere friend of the other
peoples and States of the region and as a member of an
international community, whose unassailable values and
most elementary principles have been organically affected
by this act of armed aggression,

108. If the United Nations-in
particular, the Security
Council---is to keep whatever is left of its credibility, it
must reaffirm, in the context of the invasion of Grenada
the right of that peace-loving and non-aligned island td
decide its own destiny, its own political, social and economic system, in order to enable it to conduct its international relations without foreign interference and remaining
aloof from sabotage, coercion or intimidation in any form,

103. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
104. Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpre..
ration from Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic is participating in this debate in order to join its
‘>oice to the numerous voices which have strongly con-

109. The Syrian Arab Republic takes this opportunity to
declare its deep admiration for the valour of the people of
Grenada in the face of the act of aggression perpetrated by
10

the United States against a small island with a small population, but people have proven that freedom is more valuable than life under the yoke of imperialist supremacy based
on the might of arms.
_-...
110. Yesterday [24877/r meet&g] we listened attentively to
the statement by the representative of Grenada in the
Council. We hope that the United States delegation has
learnt some lessons from that statement-a statement that
expressed very clearly all the feelings that weak peoples
experience when they fight treachery, malice and foreign
control, He said:
“Are we to return to the period of the 1950s and 196Os?
Are we to allow size and power to determine whether or
not a country has the right to pursue its policies as it has
chosen? Have we reached such a stage in the world
today that no country can be allowed to pursue its
policies without the dictates of another country, much
bigger, thousands of times the size of our country, trying to tell us what we must do?
“All of us must ask ourselves this, all of us, because
the United States is one of the biggest countries in the
world, and Grenada is one of the smallest, and many of
the countries represented by those present in the
chamber tonight, though bigger than Grenada, are
much smaller than the United States. If today the
United States can invade Grenada and impose a
Government to its liking, international law has CO!lapsed and the world will return to anarchy.“* [aid.,
paras. 104 and 105.J
Those words must be remembered by all because they
express the reality of an international community which is
no longer governed by the purposes and principles of the
Charter but, rather, by the law of the jungle.
111. We are surprised that the United States, which has
fomented discord in all parts of the world where it can
reach, destroying, killing, bombarding and occupying, and
deploying its military naval, air and ground forces in places thousands of miles away from its territory, is doing SO
on a misleading slogan, namely “establishing democracy”.
However, by resorting to such pretexts the United States is
deceiving no one but the American people, which finds
itself thrust into dilemmas and situations that have nothing
to do with its vital interests, As a result of the policies
pursued by the United States Administration, the individual American is a victim sacrificed on the altar of the
betrayal by his Government of other peoples. The American people was forced into aggression against the people of
Vict Nam. What was the result? The destruction of Viet
Nam, the killing of dozens of thousands of American
young men. Today Americans are forced into wars and
operations that serve the interests of successive United
States Administrations to give candidates a better chance
in elections, as though the destiny of the world must be
linked to the whims of American candidates and the pressures of various lobbies; as if the American people-as if
all of us-had to pay with the blood of our children the
* Quoted

in French

by the speaker.

price of electoral campaigns for posts in the United States
Administration.
If we view United States elections as one
of the constant factors for determining United States foreign policy, then the world is bound to face local wars
every four years.
112. We wonder why the Arabs and the people in Central America are being killed. Why are the crimes perpetrated by Israel, with the support and overt blessingof the
United States, to be condoned?Who is to profit from that?
There is no real profit. There are lossesinflicted upon the
international community as a whole. Those who reap profits are the parties to the industrial-military alliance in the
United States.
113. The future’of this world, of its countries large and
small, should not be mortgaged’to American interests-to
selfish, narrow interests which have nothing to do with
those of our struggling people, who aim at nothing but to
attain economic and social progress and to consolidate
their independenceand maintain their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
114. Yesterday we heard the statement made by the
representative of Nicaragua, who warned us of the consequencesof American military intervention in the Statesof
Central America. We are confident that the United States
is planning to carry out its plots and schemesagainstNicaragua and other States. Those schemesand acts of intervention are a source of shame for the whole world, in
particular becausethey are being perpetrated under the
guise of “democracy,” whose quality, degree, goals and
value are determined in accordance with the fluctuations
of financial markets in a world controlled by monopolistic
companies and transnational corporations which have
more power and influence than a lot of independentStates.
115. The Monroe Doctrine was nothing but a meansto
legitimize the absolute right claimed by the United States
to extend its political, military and economic domination
and hegemony over Latin America, with no competition,
through aggression and intervention which the United
States has tried to prove it can unilaterally carry out, without the support of colonialist European States. In other
words the United States refuses multilateralism even in
colonialism.
116. The American invasion of Grenada came as no surprise to anyone, for ever since Grenada chose a popular,
progressive regime pursuing progressivepolicies internally
and externally, the United States did not ceasemaking it
known publicly that it was trying to topple that regimeby
any meansat its disposal.My delegation hasalways had in
mind the American military option, on the basisof our
firm belief that imperialism is bound to resort to aggression to change whatever is not compatible with its imperialist objectives in extending its hegemony over any part
of the third world. That is particularly so becausesuccessive American Administrations have always consideredthe
Caribbean and Central American regions their exclusive
spheresof influence, regarding them as regions that were
created to serve the interests of American investmentsand
American military strategy.
11

take a place at the Council
statement.

117. There is a major contradiction between the aspirations of peoples to self-determination and the free choice
of their own systems, on the one hand, and American
interests on the other, Those interests are always
satisfied
by exploitation carried out through interference in the
internal and external affairs of other States-in particular,
States geographically located in regions considered by the
United States to be its spheres of influence.

table and to make his

123. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (interpretation&*om Spanis]?): I have asked to speak again because it is necessary to
make the following statement.
124. The cowardly,
treacherous and base aggression
launched yesterday by the imperialist Government of the
United States against the heroic people of Grenada seems
to have to run its course, or is about to end, to the shame
of all honest men everywhere.
The right to selfdetermination and independence of a fraternal Caribbean
country, one of the smallest in our hemisphere and certainly on the planet, has been mercilessly trampled underfoot by a State that boasts of possessing the greatest might
in the world, by a permanent member of this Councii,
whose primary obligation is to defend the peace and security of all countries, large or small.

118. The invasion by the American navy of the island of
Grenada is yet another Iink in the chain of American intcrfcrence aimed at creating rtSgimes that acquiesce completely in American selfish interests or at toppling rCgimes
which have chosen the path of self-determination, and
have done so in a manner consistent with the wishes 01‘the
workers, peasants and intellectuals of those countries.
119. Only yesterday the representative of Nicaragua
reminded us of the policies pursued by the United Statesits blatant interference in the affairs of the American continent in contemporary history-and
we thank him for
that, as his statement helps us to analyse the action taken
against the island of Grenada in the light of the inevitable
identity of imperialist thought and action, The United
States has never concealed the fact that its gunboat policy
is a natural extension of its world ambitions. Therefore, it
justifies that policy and regards it as a commonplace, natural one, stemming from its national interests.

125. This fact, albeit monstrous, is in no way a surprise
to us Cubans, who have prior knowledge of the ferocity
and cowardly fury of which are capable the heirs of Jim
Crow, Theodore Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman and of the
fascistic, racist and criminal ideology represented by the
John Birch Society, the magazine Commentary and the
intimate circle of collaborators of the present President of
the United States, Ronald Reagan.

120. For historic reasons, the United States has always
beficved in the stupid theory that it is infallible, that everything that is done by American democracy is right and that
everything that is done by developing countries to achieve
progress is wrong. Therefore, the use of force is Icgitimatc,
as long as it serves the interests of the American rCgime.
American logic makes United States policy a nightmare
for our peoples, which aspire to peace and stability and to
progress in all lields. Most of us arc devcfoping peoples,
trying to build our countries with rcsourccs different from
those of the American society. Our societies also have different origins. The major problem facing the world today
is that the United States is trying to impose its values on
the world, and in particular the third world, thus depriving
the peoples of that world of tfle right to build their COUIItries in accordance with their focal circumstances, based on
their cultural values, geographic and economic situation
and national priorities.

126. As I pointed out in my statement yesterday [2487rh
meeting], the history of our America-indeed,
the history
of contemporary
mankind-is
rife with Yankee “feats”
similar to this, which with Wagnerian fanfare the martyrdom of the people of Grenada is touted as a magnificent
victory over a mythological Hydra by a bold knight waving the banner of “freedom” and “democracy”.
127. There is no cruder evidence of the poverty of the
ideology and the political symbolism of the new Yankee
Nazis than this disgraceful episode. Paraphrasing the
words of the great Spanish poet Antonio Machaclo, future
generations in America will forever recall, with the indignation of the just, that “the crime was in Grenada, in our
Grenada”.
128. I shall not waste the valuable time of* the Councilor my own, for that matter-refuting
the base ties of those
who will go down in history as wretched butterflies pierced
by the just pin of the peoples, as accomplices and Iackeys
of Yankee imperialism in the martyrdom of the people of
Grenada. Eunuchs still with a cofonizer mentality, they
conceal their national impotence behind their new masters,
hoping for the miserable crumbs they beg for in the retinue
of treason. However, they will be called to account before
Mother America.

121. We pin great hopes on this Council’s ability to face
the grave situation created by the American invasion, The
situation is grave for the whole world, where great distances no longer exist because of the technological revolution,
a revolution that augurs welt for a better life but at the
same time threatens the extinction of fife on earth. We
hold the United States primarily responsible f’or the creation of turbulence in this world of ours. We tell the United
States that the policy of’ lbrce pursued by its current
Administration
in an unprecedented manner will redound
on those who carry it out. History is full of examples,

129. I do, however, wish to refer to the double-faced,
wretched and twisted behaviour of the true architect of the
invasion of Grenada, the imperialist Government of the
United States.

122. The PRESIDENT (interprerationS,-om Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
12

States accepts the Cuban proposal of 22 October to
respect the safety of persons on both sides.

130. At 2100 hours, Cuban time, on Saturday, 22 October 1983, through the office in charge of United States
interests in the SwissEmbassy in Havana, my Government
sent the United States Government the following message:

“Civilian representatives currently in Grenada with
the United States armed forces have received instructions to keep in touch with the Cuban ambassador in
Grenada in order to guarantee all due consideration
and security to Cuban personnel in the island and to
provide the necessary means to the Grenadian authorities to facilitate their prompt evacuation, The armed
forces of the United States stands ready to guarantee
such an evacuation in ships of third parties as soon as
possible.

“The American side is aware of the events in Crenada; it is also aware of our position with respect to those
events and our intention not to interfere in the internal
affairs of that country. We know that you are worried
about the many American residents there. Cuba is also
worried about the hundreds of advisers working there
in various undertakings and by the news that United
States naval forces are approaching Grenada.
“According to our information, no American or
other foreigner has had any problems, nor have our
OWII people there. It is advisable for us to keep in touch
on this question, to co-operate to ensure that any difficulty
that may arise and any measure regarding the
security of these persons may be resolved favourably,
without violence and without interventions in the
country.”
131. On 25 October, at 8.30 a.m., Cuban time, that is to
say, three days after our note was handed over to the head
of the United States interests section, Mr. John Ferch, the
Government of that country made the following reply to
our message:

“Furthermore, immediate attention will be given”--1
repeat: immediate attention will be given-“to
any
opinion which Cuba communicates to the StateDepartment through the Cuban interests section in Washington or the office of United States interests in Havana.”
132. When this note of the United States Government
arrived, one and a half hours earlier-l repeat: one and a
half hours earlier-that
country’s troops had already
started attacking Cuban personnel, and three hours earlier
disembarkment had begun.
133. At 5 p.m. on 25 October, while intense fighting was
going on, the United States Government, through Mr.
Ferch, sent the following message:

“The United States interests section in the Swiss
Embassy presents its greetings to the Ministry of External Relations of the Republic of Cuba and has the
honour to inform the Ministry that the Organisation of
Eastern Caribbean States, impelled by profound concern at the anarchy, the bloodshed and the disregard for
life on the island of Grenada, has requested the Government of the United States to help the armed forces of its
member States to restore security in Grenada.

“The actions of United States troops in Grenada are
not aimed at Cuban personnel residing there.
“The United States is ready to co-operate with the
Cuban authorities for their personnel to leave for Cuba.
“The United States is aware”-1 repeat: “the United
States is aware”- “that the armed Cuban personnel
have neither the weapons nor the munitions reserves for
prolonged action, and, thus, to maintain a belligerent
stance would lead to a useless loss of life.

“In reply to this request, and taking into account the
need to safeguard the lives of hundreds of American
citizens who are in Grenada at this time, the Government of the United States has acceded to that request.

“The United States does not wish to make it appear
as if the armed Cuban personnel had surrendered.

*‘Therefore, armed forces of the States members of
the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, with the
support of the United States, Barbados and Jamaica,
have entered Grenada for the purpose of restoring
order and public safety.

“Finally, it regrets that armed clashes have occurred
between men of both countries and believes that these
have happened because of the confusion and blunders
arising out of the presence of Cubans in areas close to
the operations of the multinational troops.”

“The Government of the United States is aware that
there are military and civilian personnel in Grenada
from the Republic of Cuba and has taken into full
account the message on this subject handed over on the
night of 22 October by the Ministry of External Relations to the chief of the United States interests section in
Havana. I wish to assure the Government of the Republic of Cuba that every effort is being made and will
continue to be made to guarantee the safety of those
persons pending the restoration of order. Those persons
will be granted safe conduct from Grenada as soon as
conditions permit. The Government of the United

134. At 8.30 p.m. yesterday, Cuban time, my country’s
Ministry of Foreign Relations gave Mr. Ferch the following reply to the note I have just read out:
“Cuba has done everything in its power to avoid
intervention, and in our note Saturday we explained
that no United States or other foreign citizen, according
to our information, is in danger. At the same time, we
expressed our readiness to co-operate so that problems
could be resolved without violence or intervention.
3

“Intervention
is totally unjustifiable.
Cuba has
refrained from any interference whatsoever in the internal affairs of the country, in spite of our friendship with
and sympathy for Bishop.
“The repty to our constructive note delivered on Saturday, 22 October, at 9 p.m. arrived on Tuesday, 25
October, at 8.30 a.m., when one and a half hours earlier
our personnel and installations at the airport were being
attacked by United States troops.
“Cuba has no soldiers in Grenada; there are only
civilian construction
workers and advisers, with the
exception of a few dozen military advisers who were
working with the army and with the security services
before Bishop’s death. Our personnel had instructions
to fight only if attacked and not to be the first to open
fire. Furthermore,
they have been instructed not to
hinder any action, in the area of the road close to the
American university, for the evacuation of American
citizens. Clearly, if the aim was to occupy Cuban installations, there would be clashes.
“Our personnel has suffered an unknown
dead and wounded in today’s clashes.

number of

“The attack by United States troops occurred by surprise and without any kind of prior warning.
“Although the Cuban personnel who can still resist
are numerically, technically and militarily at a total disadvantage, their morale is high and they are determined
to continue defending themselves if these attacks
continue.
“If the intention is really to avoid further bloodshed,
there must be an end to attacks against the Cuban and
Grenadian personnel still in combat and a willingness
to find a dignified way of putting an end to the battle, a
battle which in no way does honour to the United States
acting against small forces which, although they could
not resist militarily against the overwhelming superiority of the United States forces, losing the battle and even
sacrificing their lives, are in a position to inflict a costly
moral defeat on the United States, the most ,powerful
country in the world, which is enmeshed in a war
against one of the world’s smallest States.
“The Cuban in charge has been given instructions to
receive any person in authority who may wish to contact him and listen to his views and transmit them to
Cuba.”

ried out intensive attacks against Cuban positions,
destroying almost entirely the main building remaining in
Cuban hands and causing many casualties. The survivors-according
to information given the people by our
Government-continued
to fight.
136. At 9 this morning, 26 October, the Cuban ambassador in Grenada related that the note of President Fidel
Castro to the United States Government was read out to
the Cuban personnel in combat and that our comrades
responded that, in keeping with the worthy traditions of
our people and following the personal example of our
Commander in Chief, they would fight to the last man and
the last bullet and that, their morale higher than ever, they
would cry out: “Our homeland or death-we
slx~ll triumph!” The truth is that after 24 hours of heroic resistance
a handful of Cubans continued to wage an historic battle
against the naval, air and land forces of the United States.
137. At 9.55 a.m., Cuban time, the Cuban Embassy in
Grenada made it known that the most recent enemy attack
on our positions had been conducted using all means: fighter aircraft, helicopters, medium- and large-calibre
artillery, and mortars. In the end a group of six comrades
continued to fight, embracing our flag.
13X. At 11.17 a.m., the Cuban ambassador sent this communication: there is no further Cuban resistence. The tighters of the last redoubt did not give in, and sacriliced
tliemselves for their homeland. The contingent of Cuban
construction workers and advisers in Grenada, without
question, had a patriotic and revolutionary spirit which
raises them to the height of those who forged lhc freedom
and dignity of our America.
139. Our revolutionary
Government and our Commander in Chief, aware of the special circumstances in
which this courageous group of comrades found themselves after the death of Maurice Bishop and his close
associates in the Grenadian Party and Government-for
all of whom we felt great friendship and respect, as people
along with whom we were confronting the same imperialist enemy- did not hesitate to point out the duty which
falls to all of us as a result of the profound sense of responsibility and revolutionary solidarity among peoples which
we have learned from Fidel personally. Thus, when the
Yankee ships were approaching Grenada, the Cuban revolution, out of the most elementary respect for its own lofty
values, could not order the withdrawal of our personnel
from that sisterisland. In keepingwith our principles they
were instructed to defend themselvesif attacked, nothing
more.

Finally, the Cuban note concludes by stating that:
“We cannot fail to bear in mind the fact that some
Grenadian units are also fighting and that the way in
which Cubans are treated must not differ from the treatment accorded to them.”
135. The reply to the Cuban message was given early this
morning, when United States military aircraft and helicopter gunships, together with artillery and mortar fire, car-

140. The Cuban construction workers and advisers in
Grenada and their heroic chief, Colonel Tortol6, calmly
and decisively accepted Fidel’s instructions. Their tremendous resistencein the face of forces which were vastly
superior numerically, technically and militarily demonstrated once again the deep-rooted revolutionary and
patriotic convictions of our peopleand their determination
to defend the honour of the homeland and the revolution
wherever we may be surprisedin battle.
14

14 I. Today the forces of imperialism and reaction have
martyred Grenada. Tomorrow they could attempt the
same in another country of our America or of another
continent. This morning United States radio and television
broadcast the news that United States armed forces were in
a state of aiert at the naval base illegally occupied on
Cuban territory, at Guantanamo. We alert this Council
and world public opinion to that fact, lest the Yankee
ruling circles, intoxicated by their tremendous victory over
tiny Grenada, should decide to perpetrate an act of provocation against Cuba, as they attempted to do in the 1960s.
If attacked, the Cuban people, our glorious revolutionary
armed forces and our territorial militias will be able to
defend the soil of our homeland with the same courage,
tenacity and heroism displayed by our comrades who fell
in combat in Grenada,

147. In the present situation, we are thinking of the
people of Grenada and their future. Everything must be
done to allow them, without any further delay, to regain
the right to decide their fate, independently and in full
sovereignty.
148. The PRESIDENT (interpretatian from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Antigua and Barbuda.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
149. Mr. JACOBS (Antigua and Barbuda): I wish, Sir,
to congratulate you on your assumption of the important
office of President of the Security Council for the month of
October. Your dip,lomatic skills, outstanding abilities and
the lofty ideals and principles which you hold, will, I am
sure, guide the deliberations of ,this body.

142, Grenada could turn out to be for the Yankee imperialists in Latin America and the Caribbean what Moncada was for the Batista tyranny in Cuba. Eternal glory to
the heroes of Grenada! Our homeland or death-we shall
triumph!

150. Before I begin my statement, I wish to draw attention to a statement made by the representative of Cuba
yesterday before the General Assembly.4 He accused the
OECS countries of being Iackeys for the imperialist United
States of America.

143. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL (France) (interpretation j?om French): France maintains relations of
esteem and friendship with Grenada, Linked to the European Community by the Lomt Convention, Grenada had
gradually developed co-operative relations with my country in the economic and cultural spheres, The visit by Mr.
Maurice Bishop to Paris in September 1982 bore witness at
the highest possible level to the desire of both our Governments further to strengthen those ties.

151. In my right of defence in this forum, I wish to state
that my country, Antigua and Barbuda, is a small island, a
member of that group of States that is militarily weak and
economically vulnerable, In this world, which has become
progressively more susceptible to the menace of power,
small countries such as mine are discovering with increasing frequency that the principles of justice and equality of
universal peace and development for which this body was
created are discarded daily.

144. This explains the attention with which France followed the events that led on 19 October to the tragic death
of Mr. Bishop and of several of his associates.My Government immediately expressed its sadnessand concern at the
disturbances once again affecting Grenada. That concern
increased at the news of the foreign armed intervention in
the island,

152. My delegation deeply resents the arrogance which
leads some countries to believe that they have a God-given
right to make decisions for the rest of us, especially when
we are small and militarily weak. My delegation resents the
term “lackeys” used by the representative of Cuba to described the OECS countries, which agreed amongst themselves to take concerted action to free their brothers in
Grenada from the tyranny of guns.

145. France is devoted to respect for the principles of
non-use of force in international relations and of nonintervention in the internal affairs of States and deeply
deplores this armed intervention, As recalled by the President of the French Republic, Mr. Franqois Mitterand,
“Law is indivisible. International society is based on
principles-in
particular on the right of peoples to selfdetermination-which
hold the same value everywhere.”

153. When these belligerent countries speak about lackeys, I must state unequivocally that the communist satellites, the lackeys and puppets of totalitarianism, must
remember that their sole purpose is to impose the will of
their imperialist masters on others. When we speak of lackeys and puppets, we speak of those who dared not and
could not condemn the Soviet Union for the invasion of
Afghanistan and the subsequent mass annihilation of
Afghan nationals. When we speak of puppets, WCspeak of
those who dared not and never could condemn the Soviet
butchers for blasting the Korean air liner from the skies.
We speak of those who oppress and suppress their people
at the will of their masters. We speak of those who ban a
free press and turn their backs on constitutional government supported by the will of the electorate.

146. The justifications put forward, relating to the internal situation of Grenada, do not seem to us to be admissible. They do not meet the conditions under which an
intervention of this nature and magnitude could be considered. International law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations, authorizes intervention only in two eventualities: in response to a request from the legitimate
authorities of the country, or upon a decision taken by the
Security Council. I must add that France has never
accepted certain interpretations of the Charter whereby
other organs could authorize armed intervention without
the approval of the Security Council.

154. In this regard, my country, though small, is free. We
make our own decisions. We speak boldly when we must.
We condemn those who are wrong. We support the cause
15

of justice and we uphold the principles of the Charter
the United Nations.

of

155. In 1979 there was a bloodless coup in Grenada, a
member State of the OECS. Following the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, the
OECS member States worked harmoniously with their
brothers and sisters in Grenada.
156. A few days ago, Mr. Maurice Bishop, leader of the
People’s Revolutionary Movement in Grenada, was placed
under house arrest because he sought
to reintroduce COI+
stitutional rule with a parliamentary system and restore to
the people the right to elect their own government. Backed
by Cuban and communist troops, a few madmen seized
power and foisted on the backs of our black brothers and
sisters a revolutionary junta with Cubans and Russians as
advisers. When the people gathered in large numbers and
removed Mr. Bishop from house detention, the crowd was
dispersed with shells and bullets. Mr. Bishop and four of
his cabinet ministers were lined up against a wall and shot
to death. The rule of law was replaced by the rule of the
gun.
157. This state of affairs constituted a serious threat to
the security and peaceof the region. The OECS and its
CARICOM partners met in urgent sessionand agreedto
assist their black brothers and sisters in Grenada. The
Caribbean countries invited the United States, whosecitizens were threatened, to assist in the operation.
158. The OECS will ensurethat an interim government
is establishedin Grenada to carry out the people’smandate for free elections.When this is done and the constitutional rights of our brothers have been restored, OUI
assistancewill no longer be required and our help will be
withdrawn.
159. The OECS countries will band together with any: one who respectsthe human rights and constitutional privileges of the people to keep peace and prosperity in the
region. We seek no quarrel. We seek no guns. We seek
only the economic well-being and the democratic rights of
our people.
160. The PRESIDENT (intelpretationfronz Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make, his statement.
161. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): I did not take the iloor to compare the size of the
land or population or the military power of the invading
country, namely the United States, with that of the victim
country, namely Grenada. I have no intention of going
into the disgustinglegalisticexcuse which the invading forces have formulated for themselvesto justify their aggression. I should like to post a very simple question. Why?
Just why did they do it? What allegedly dangerousconsequence did they prevent by invading a country like Grenada, so small in population, but so great in value? My
delegation wishes to express its profound regret at the

mockery that a permanent member of the Security Council
blatantly makes of the Council.
162. I wish to share the views of those previous speakers
who asked the Council to condemn this act of the Administration of the United States. We regret that, in spite ofall
this mockery, the same members of the Security Council
hypocritically pretend to take the Council seriously by
occupying their seats, We regret that they enter every
housewithout the permissionof the household.The signature of the international body at the bottom of the documents recognizing the membershipof Saint Christopher
and Nevis has not yet dried. On the one hand, we are
bringing in new members-new innocent people-to this
United Nations; and on the other hand, we are committing
an act of aggressionagainsta small country like Grenada.
163. What can we call this unpredictable act? Why this
discrepancy? On the one hand, we present the United
Nations as a placeof refugeand, on the other hand, from
the seat of the Security Council of the same United
Nations we invade the country of another member. Why’?
164. The act of aggressionperpetrated against Grcllad;b
by the United StatesAdministration is indeed an examplr
of many similar actswhich demonstratethe ugly nature 01
imperialism, My delegationhas no doubt that the Amwican people, like the future history of the United States, is
and wil1 always be ashamedof the blatant and rcproachable act of aggressioncommitted against Grenada by the
present United States Administration. However, this
aggressionshould be a lessonto those countries whose
Administrations have chosen to remain puppets of the
United Statesto wake up and reconsidertheir attitude ;md
finally to realize that it is not so wise of them to remain
servile dependentsof the United States.
165. My delegation strongly urges the Council to COIIdemn the act of aggression
committed by the United States
against Grenada and to spareno effort to make the United
States withdraw its troops immediately from Grenada.
The United StatesAdministration must appologize to the
people of Grenada and must be held accountable for the
unnecessarybloodshedand destruction that it has perpctrated, and still is savagely perpetrating, against those
good, innocent people.
166. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Arabic): T%e
next speakeristhe representativeof the Lao People’sDc~Iocratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
167. Mr, VONGSAY (Lao People’sDemocratic Republic) (interpretation from &e&z): Sit, my delegation, while
thanking you for having allowed us to speak before the
Council, would like to expressits pleasureat your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for tIlis
month. We would alsolike to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, for the able and competent way he discharged his duties as President in
September.
16

168. The event we have been witnessing since yesterday
morning-that
is, the invasion of Grenada, a member of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and a Member
of this Organization, by a big Power which is a permanent
member of the Security Council-could
be fraught with
consequences for other small States, The presumptuous
way in which the leaders of this action tried to justify their
unseemly action cannot fail to disgust any person of common sense and to alarm peace-loving and justice-loving
peoples who cherish social progress,

With regard to the charter of the Organization of American States, the Members of that organization that have
spoken in the Council since yesterday have all said there is
no provision authorizing such an intervention. By virtue of
what charter does the United States Government want to
assure its defence? No doubt the charter of imperialism
and the charter of the Pentagon.
174. It is clear that this gunboat diplomacy endangers the
stability of the non-aligned countries, in particular the
small ones, merely because their Governments’ policies are
not to the liking of the Washington authorities. That is
why the Lao Government and people, while reaffirming
their unswerving solidarity with the Grenadian people,
which is now heroically resisting barbaric aggression, vehemently condemn this invasion, which has caused the death
of so many innocent people, and we call upon the Security
Council to take appropriate steps to secure the immediate
withdrawal of the troops of aggression from that country.

169. 1~ order to justify its inadmissible intervention, the
United States Government has unhesitatingly adduced reasons totally inconsistent with each other when confronted
with the actual situation: safety of United States citizens, a
threat to the maintenance of peace and security in the
eastern Caribbean, defence of democracy and so forth.
170. Protection of United States citizens? Against whom
and against what? At no time were their lives in danger.
The Chancellor of the St, George’s School of Medicine
himself said that the Government of Grenada had assured
him of the security of his students, Last night, speaking in
this Chamber [2487th meeting], the representative of Grenada confirmed that.

175. Mr, SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Pakistan is deeply
concerned at the tragic turn of events in the eastern Caribbean region, where Grenada, a member of the OECS, was
overwhelmed yesterday by a combined force contributed
by a number of countries of the region and the United
States. Attempts have been made to justify the strike
against Grenada as a pre-emptive defensive action by
neighbouring States on the basis of the threat perceived by
them in Grenada’s acquisition of disproportionate military
capability with foreign help. These States also claim that
they were appalled at the intolerable State of affairs inside
Grenada.

17 1, To guarantee the maintenance of peace and security
in the eastern Caribbean? Of course, we deplore the death
of Mr. Maurice Bishop and some of his ministers. But how
can the domestic affairs of Grenada be a threat to its
neighbours? Did the assassination of President Kennedy or
the attempted assassination of President Reagan when he
came to power threaten the security of the neighbours of
the United States and the security of the region? Who gave
the United States the right to set itself up as an international policeman?

176. We cannot accept any of these reasons as valid for
the external intervention that has taken place in Grenada.
Pakistan has always upheld the principle of non-use of
force and non-intervention and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States-a principle which flows from the
Charter of the United Nations, Accordingly Pakistan has
consistently condemned violations of these principles, no
matter by whom and no matter where they have occurred.

172, To assist the Grenadian people to defend democracy? If the American people prefers its form of democracy, that is its business aid there is no reason for its
Government to seek to impose;It on other peoples, particularly not at gunpoint, Similarly, if the Grenadian people
has decided to choose a social sy’stemthat seems appropriate to it, that is its business; even a coalminer is master in
his own house, This emanates from, the right of peoples to
self-determination, Furthermore, with all its difficulties,
the Grenadian people has at no time asked the United
States to come to its assistance.

177. Powerful States seizing opportunities for interference in the internal affairs of small neighbouring countries
in pursuit of their own national interests and regional and
global strategic objectives is not an uncommon experience
in our contemporary world, Such actions aggravate the
very situations which external intervention seeks to redress,
not to speak of the immense tragedy which is inflicted on the
countries which are the objects of such intervention.

173. But the height of ridiculousness is that the Gownment of the United States is claiming that it undertook this
“glorious” action to defend the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the charter of the
Organization of American States, We are all familiar with
the tenets of the Charter, in particular Article 2, paragraph
4, which states:

178. Four years ago, when the Soviet Union took a similar action in neighbouring Afghanistan, Pakistan firmly
opposed that action and reminded the inlernational community of its damaging consequences for regional stability
and world peace and security. We regarded it as a dangerous precedent and a threat to all nations, particularly those
which lived in the shadow of great Powers. Consistent with
our position, which is rooted in our fundamental perceptions of international relations and our concern for peace
and stability, we cannot condone the military intervention
in Grenada, and we join in the demand for the immediate
withdrawal of all foreign forces from that country.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in
any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations”,
17

NOTES

179. The events in Grenada once again serve as a
reminder that peace and security in our world are indivisible and that the principles of non-use of force and nonintervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States cannot be espoused or affirmed on a selective basis.

1 General Assembly resolution 36/103, annex.
2 General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV).
1 General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex,
4 See Officiai

Records

Plenary Meet&x,

The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

of the Generaf

Assembly,

Thiriy-e-eighth

Session,

Volume II, 35th meeting, paras. 4-9,

.

NOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS I’IJBLICATIONS
United Nations publications
maybeobfained
frombookstores
anddistributors
throughout
the
world,Consult yourbookstore
or writeto: United Nations, Sales Se&on, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT SE PROCURER LIB PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNLES
Les publications dcs Nations Units sent en vente dans les librairies et les agencesdbpositaircs
du monde cntier. Inform%-vous aup& & votre libraire ou adressez-vous k : Nations Uniw,
Section des vcntes, New York ou Gen&vc.
KAK IIOJlYWITb

M3&AHHR

OPI’AIW3A~kIM

OI%~HHbIX

HAIJm

I13MlfHR
OpKiHH3WiH
06WlHHeHHblX
Ha& MOXHO KYllWTb B KlfSVXHbIX MaI+a3HHaX
H arewrcmax
80 BceX ptiOHaX mpa. H~BOAHTC cnpamw 06 ii3mumnX B Bauehi WHXCHOM
hfara3Hxe
HJIH rrmm-e
no anpccy: Opram3amx
O6aenHHeHHbrx
H~I.L&, CeKwtR no
nponame
H3RaHH#, kibko-ROpK
WI )KeHeea.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES IJNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas csti en venta en librerlas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas pafles de! mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

iv United

Nations,

New York

00400

90-60205-May

1992---2.04;
