S/PV.9112

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9112th meeting

Monday, 22 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Geng Shuang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Promote common security through dialogue and cooperation
Letter dated 12 August 2022 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/617)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-46800 (E)
*2246800*

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

The theme of today’s debate was set as “Promote
common security through dialogue and cooperation”
in the hope that all parties will, through calm and
rational dialogue, give in-depth consideration to such
international security-related questions as “what kind
of international security do we really need?”; “how can
we, in the current circumstances, emerge from conflicts
and turmoil and avoid a larger-scale security disaster?”;
and “what role can the United Nations play?”. I look
forward to all of us focusing on today’s theme and
contributing our insights with a forward-looking vision
and a responsible attitude.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Promote common security through dialogue
and cooperation
Letter dated 12 August 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/617)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Gustavo
Zlauvinen, President of the tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/617, which contains the text of
a letter dated 12 August 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
As indicated in the letter, the Security Council was
established to achieve common security for all, and the
maintenance of international peace and security also
features regularly on the agenda of the United Nations.
In recent years, this regular topic has become more and
more urgent, and the security dilemma increasingly
difficult to solve. Security challenges such as political
instability, military conflicts, terrorist threats, the
coronavirus disease pandemic, natural disasters and
energy and food crises are complex and intertwined,
and the world is far from peaceful. It seems that every
country is striving for its own security, only to see an
increasing sense of insecurity among all countries.
In the face of this new situation, it is necessary for
the Council to revisit its original mission in order to
better respond to the expectations of all parties and
fulfil its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. That is of vital importance in the
current context.
2/25

22/08/2022

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
convening the Security Council on such an essential
topic. Our collective security demands that we seize
every moment to forge a common understanding of the
threats and challenges before us and, most important,
to shape united responses to them.
As the focus of this briefing makes clear, the
path to peace is forged by dialogue and cooperation.
I just returned from Ukraine, Türkiye and Moldova,
and I look forward to speaking further about that
visit on Wednesday. There, I saw the Black Sea Grain
Initiative — an initiative to get grain and other vital
food supplies moving again through Ukrainian
ports — in action. In parallel, we have an agreement to
facilitate unimpeded access to global markets for food
and fertilizers originating from the Russian Federation.
That comprehensive plan is crucial for the world’s most
vulnerable people and countries, who are desperately
counting on those food supplies. Above all, it is a
concrete example of how dialogue and cooperation can
deliver hope, even in the midst of conflict.
The same commitment to dialogue and results must
be applied to the critical situation at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. I reaffirm that the United Nations
in Ukraine has the logistics and security capacities
to support an International Atomic Energy Agency
mission from Kyiv to Zaporizhzhya. We continue the
relentless search for peace in Ukraine and across the
globe in line with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
The Security Council represents a vital part
of the process of peace and prevention through
resolutions to ease conflicts, support reconciliation
and provide humanitarian assistance and support to
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

millions of people in need. However, today’s collective
security system is being tested like never before.
Our world is riven by geopolitical divides, conflicts
and instability, from military coups to inter-State
conflicts, invasions and wars that stretch on year after
year. Lingering differences between the world’s great
Powers — including in the Council — continue to limit
our ability to respond collectively.
Humanitarian assistance is stretched to breaking
point. Human rights and the rule of law are under
assault. Trust is in short supply. Many of the systems
established decades ago are now facing challenges that
were unimaginable for our predecessors, including
cyberwarfare, terrorism and lethal autonomous
weapons. The nuclear risk has risen to its highest point
in decades.
The tools that have kept us from catastrophic world
war are more important than ever, but they must be fit
for today’s rapidly deteriorating international peace
and security environment. We need to reforge a global
consensus around the cooperation required to ensure
collective security, including the work of the United
Nations. That is also the driving force behind my
proposal for a New Agenda for Peace, as contained in
the report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Through it, we are exploring the diplomatic toolbox
of the Charter of the United Nations to end conflicts,
especially the Chapter VI provisions on negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration and
judicial settlement.
We are also placing a focus on prevention and
peacebuilding. That includes strengthening our
foresight of future threats and anticipating flashpoints
and long-standing conditions that could explode into
violence. It includes exploring new and expanded roles
for regional actors and groups, particularly as crossborder threats to peace and security emerge. It includes
putting human rights first in political and financial
investments that can address the root causes of conflict,
from social protection and education to programming
to end violence and discrimination and to increase
women’s participation across civic and political life. It
includes the capacity to establish new social contracts
that build and strengthen the bonds of trust between
people who inhabit the same borders, as well as in the
Governments and institutions representing them, so
that all people can lend their hands to building peace.
It includes joint efforts to gather countries around the

S/PV.9112

need to reduce the risks stemming from cyberwarfare
and lethal autonomous weapons.
And it includes accelerating efforts to eliminate
the nuclear threat once and for all. The tenth Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which meets
this month, must demonstrate that progress is possible.
I renew my call on all States parties to demonstrate
flexibility and a willingness to compromise across
all negotiations. Countries with nuclear weapons
must commit to the principle of no first use of those
weapons. They must also assure States that do not have
nuclear weapons that they will not use or threaten to
use nuclear weapons against them and that they will
be transparent throughout. Nuclear sabre-rattling must
stop. We need all States to recommit to a world free of
nuclear weapons and to spare no effort when coming
to the negotiating table to ease tensions and end the
nuclear arms race once and for all.
(spoke in French)
The future of humankind is today in our hands. At
this juncture of maximum risk to our world, it is time
to renew our commitment to the Charter of the United
Nations and the ideals it represents. The best way to
fulfil the Charter’s promise to save future generations
from the scourge of war is to replace division with
dialogue and diplomacy, to negotiate and compromise
and to be accountable for the future.
The Council and our Organization represent the
nations of the world and humankind’s best hope for
building a better and more peaceful future. As we
develop our New Agenda for Peace, let us prove that
we have learned the lessons of the past. Let us reiterate
our commitment to the eternal instruments of peace,
namely, dialogue, diplomacy and mutual trust.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his thoughts,
suggestions and insights.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zlauvinen.
Mr. Zlauvinen: Allow me to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to speak today on such
an important topic.
For the past three weeks, just across the hallway,
the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) have been engaged in an
in-depth discussion on how to strengthen that essential

22-468003/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

instrument of our common security. I am aware that
not all members of the Security Council are parties to
the NPT; nevertheless, it is my hope that all Council
members can appreciate the important role played by
the Treaty as a contribution to the betterment of the
international security environment.
Since its entry into force in 1970, the NPT has proven
to be a bulwark of international peace and security and
a key facilitator of the benefits of nuclear energy and
nuclear applications. Over its 52-year history, the Treaty
has proven itself remarkably resilient and adaptable. Its
near-universal membership speaks for itself. The States
parties’ current engagement on discussions speaks
volumes about the Conference’s status as the de facto
multilateral negotiating forum on all things related to
nuclear weapons.
As a consequence of the geopolitical turmoil that
has rocked our world since February of this year, the
NPT faces a raft of challenges, the diversity and scope
of which are unlike anything that has come before.
Still, throughout the past three weeks, I have witnessed
State parties come together resolved to strengthen the
global regime that spans the three pillars of the Treaty,
namely, nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
As far as priorities are concerned, the implementation
of the Treaty’s provisions is front and centre for many, if
not most, of the States parties. Ensuring the fulfilment
of the Treaty’s core commitments and obligations
is seen as being essential to the Treaty’s enduring
success. For many, that is especially the case for nuclear
disarmament commitments, including those made at
prior Review Conferences, such as the unequivocal
undertaking to eliminate nuclear arsenals.
There are few issues more vital to our common
security than preventing the use of nuclear weapons and,
as many believe, the only way to completely eliminate
the risk of nuclear weapons being used again is to
completely eliminate those weapons. That is the crux
of the issue that the NPT States parties are grappling
with — how to reinforce the seven-decades-old norm
on the non-use of nuclear weapons and take urgently
needed steps towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
In my view, whether or not the States parties can
make progress and strengthen the implementation of all
three pillars of the NPT depends on reaching agreement
on several key areas.
4/25

22/08/2022

First, given the current global conditions and
recent events, it should be no surprise that concerns
have only grown regarding the need for urgent action
on the first pillar of the Treaty — nuclear disarmament.
Such measures are needed to reverse dangerous
trends, increase confidence and ensure that mistakes
or miscalculations do not lead to escalation and
catastrophe. In addition, the current global security
environment has revived the narrative that nuclear
weapons provide the ultimate security guarantee. That
is an extremely damaging narrative and dangerous for
non-proliferation, especially when coupled with other
challenges to non-proliferation, such as hedging and
emerging technology that can lower barriers to the
acquisition of nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles.
Secondly, with regard to near-term measures to
reduce the risk of nuclear weapons, the norm against
the use of nuclear weapons is one of the most important
achievements of the post-Second World War era, but it
is increasingly threatened. On one hand, the heightened
nuclear risk has strengthened calls for immediate risk
reduction measures and, on the other, been taken
by many as further evidence of the urgent need to
accelerate nuclear disarmament. It has also brought
back to the fore questions about how to strengthen
security assurances — a long-standing concern of
non-nuclear weapon States that will now be front and
centre of our minds.
As I said, risk reduction remains a priority for many,
especially at the intersection between nuclear weapons
and new domains in cyberspace and outer space and
with new technologies, from artificial intelligence
to hypersonic weapons. However, many others have
argued that risk reduction is not enough. They believe
that circumstances demand immediate action on
irreversible and verifiable nuclear disarmament. There
is every likelihood that such action will include calls for
strong language on the humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons, as well as new agreements to reduce
the global number of nuclear weapons and arsenals.
Thirdly, how do we support the resolution of the
regional proliferation crisis, especially in Asia and the
Middle East? There is broad agreement on the need
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime against an
array of emerging challenges. Assisting in resolving
regional proliferation challenges therefore remains a
high priority for States parties. From the Middle East to
North-East Asia, the introduction of nuclear weapons
into any regional conflict will amplify the danger by
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

an order of magnitude. States parties are all too aware
that failure to address those cases weakens the entire
non-proliferation regime.
Fourthly, how do we broaden access to the benefits
of the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology?
The NPT has proven to be a facilitator of the peaceful
uses of nuclear science and technology, whose benefits
continue to grow. That nexus between development
and security adds a new dimension to the Treaty.
It is one that reflects its continuous centrality in the
international system. As the role of nuclear technology
becomes ever-more prominent in several areas, from
agriculture to medicine, ensuring the widest possible
reach of those benefits becomes increasingly important,
especially as a catalyst for fulfilling the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Fifthly and finally, how do we ensure the safety
and security of nuclear power plants in conflict zones?
Recent events have focused attention on those issues, as
the world has been forced to confront, for the first time,
the challenges posed by nuclear safety and security in a
zone of armed conflict.
The Review Conference is a unique opportunity
to strengthen an instrument of common security
in a forum of dialogue and cooperation. It is not an
opportunity that should be squandered. When we talk
about the need to find common ground, we forget that
the NPT is common ground. Protecting it, keeping it fit
for purpose and making sure that it can continue its role
as a bastion of international peace and security is and
must be a priority for all.
For more than 50 years, the NPT has proven itself
to be an essential and adaptable element of every State
party’s security. That is why, and despite the current
circumstances, I have made every effort — during this
year’s Review Conference and before that, and I will
continue to do so until we reach the end of the process this
Friday — to promote dialogue and cooperation among
States parties as the main foundation of negotiations.
I believe it is essential to stress the importance of
focusing on the elements that unite us and not on those
that divide us. We need flexibility and political will to
negotiate in good faith to support an outcome of the
Review Conference that ensures that the NPT remains
fit for purpose in these turbulent and troubling times
and, in turn, further strengthens our common security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Zlauvinen for his briefing.

S/PV.9112

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): First of
all, I would like to thank China for organizing today’s
important meeting and to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen for
their invaluable briefings.
A press item covering the 1945 San Francisco
Conference reported that the delegates had signed
“a charter written for a world of power, tempered by
a little reason”. The architects of the United Nations
needed only to look around them for insight into the
ruin wrought by unrestrained power. The story of
short-sighted ideological and hegemonic pursuits had
echoed across human history, each time with greater
dissonance. In an act of necessary but extraordinary
ambition, they committed to building something better.
They envisioned an international order in which
people express their right to self-determination
through equally sovereign States that resolve their
differences with dialogue and without the threat of
wars of aggression. They sought to temper power by
binding together in common security and prosperity
those who may wield it and those who may suffer it.
Since then, with pragmatism, creativity and leadership
and despite many challenges to those lofty ideals, the
system has held. That achievement in itself should give
us some comfort in this moment of rising polarization
and fragmentation.
As the bold vision of an open, cooperative and
inclusive world order is vindicated by the scale of our
global challenges, we cannot entertain abandoning it,
whether through revisionism or retrenchment. Instead,
the United Arab Emirates firmly believes that this must
be a moment of renewal for the international system.
Our cooperation is necessary if we are indeed to
address the world’s most urgent threats, and the crises
on the Council’s agenda will not relent in their demands
for our collective efforts.
As we grow ever-more reliant on each other, our
first and only truly global multilateral system is still
our last best hope. However, it cannot remain frozen in
time. It must adapt to a world with more countries, an
increasingly diverse set of influential actors, a shifting
balance of power, an expanding role for regional
institutions and the growing risk of tensions among
major Powers. It is to the credit of this inclusive system

22-468005/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

that it now relies on a much wider circle of members
and stakeholders than it did at its creation.
They include 80 countries that secured
independence during decolonization, as well as the
engagement of private-sector and philanthropic actors
and local and global networks of youth, women and civil
society. But, in order to fully reap the benefits of that
progress, institutional responsibility must also expand.
For example, the multilateral system has long been
divided between the so-called norm-makers and -takers.
However, wider ownership of the system could ensure
greater investment in its success. Countries historically
limited to merely norm-taking have the capacity to play
a more active role in setting and upholding the agenda.
Collectively, we must fashion a more inclusive
system of norm-setting and decision-making to allow
for the views of all to shape our inextricably bound
future. As others have said, in doing so, we must be
pragmatic, incremental and results-oriented. We
should prioritize the common challenges that genuinely
concern all of us and that can be resolved only if we
work together — climate change, pandemics, food and
water insecurity, poverty, gender inequality, energy
supply, terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.
We should actively seek out our partnerships,
especially with those with whom we may not always
agree. We cannot sacrifice crucial agreement for
complete agreement. Broadening responsibility
also means systematically empowering regional
organizations to solve regional problems. They are
often better placed to find sustainable solutions, as they
bring with them a nuanced understanding and greater
willingness to compromise. And the Council should
creatively and intentionally leverage the tools at its
disposal to support such organizations and reinforce
their efforts with the financial support needed for those
changes, not only paying it lip service.
More than anything, this is a time and a place for
determined leadership. The issues on our agenda are
not zero-sum games. In the long term, cooperation
leads to better outcomes for all, but self-interest begets
self-interest. That must inform the efforts to reverse
its corrosive effects. We need leadership that can
overcome the binary approach to coalition-building.
The us-versus-them lens may clarify current divides,
but at the risk of obscuring the urgency of longerterm challenges.
6/25

22/08/2022

We all have a stake in the preservation and success
of the multilateral system, but the stakes are clearly
not equal for some, including those caught up in the
geostrategic crossfire. What is at stake is their very
survival. Cognizant of that fact, the most effective of
our predecessors in these chairs tried to manage their
differences and disagreements in a way that enables
the United Nations to remain responsive to those who
need it the most. The world looks to this Chamber to
summon that spirit once again and, in the process,
usher in the necessary renewal of an open, cooperative
and inclusive world order.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to thank
China for convening this briefing, and the SecretaryGeneral for his important remarks. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Gustavo Zlauvinen for his
insightful intervention.
While it is important to clarify that the decisions
concerning the review process of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) review
process are the exclusive and collective competence of
the States parties to the Treaty, the fact that, for the first
time, the President of an ongoing Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty is briefing the Security Council
in an official meeting is a positive sign. It shows that
the organ that bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security is
attentive to the main multilateral discussions taking
place beyond the walls of this Chamber. Ambassador
Zlauvinen can rest assured of Brazil`s full support
for his efforts to reach a balanced, meaningful and
consensual outcome document for the Conference.
Brazil is convinced that we are in the best hands to lead
the way.
We need to take certain steps for achieving a safer
and a more peaceful world.
First, we need to overcome once and for all the
false narrative that nuclear weapons make the world a
safer place. In reality, such weapons spawn an elusive
and precarious security. Their mere existence invites
further proliferation, undermines global stability and
compromises international security, putting the whole
world at existential risk. The substantial increase in
nuclear tensions since the beginning of this year is a
powerful demonstration of that fact.
As we kick-start the final week of NPT Review
Conference, we cannot lose sight of our common
objective of achieving a world without nuclear weapons.
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nuclear disarmament is not a concession on the part of
nuclear-weapon Sates. It is an unequivocal commitment
and a binding obligation in accordance with article VI
of the NPT. While nuclear risk reduction measures
are important and necessary, they are by no means a
panacea for our atomic malady, let alone a substitute for
nuclear disarmament. We must always keep in mind the
fragile balance among the three pillars that allowed for
the adoption of the NPT. That balance is the only way
to ensure that the Treaty can remain relevant.
Secondly, prevention is better than cure, as
conventional wisdom reminds us. The international
community should make more frequent use of
preventive diplomacy and mediation. It should focus
more on Chapter VI rather than Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. It should condemn the
abusive use of Article 51. The law of action and reaction
is especially applicable to the use of force, which tends
to generate further use of force in a chain reaction.
Insisting on the peaceful settlement of disputes is the
only way to get out of that vicious circle.
Thirdly, there can be no stability where the rule of law
does not prevail. Respect for international law is crucial
for peaceful international relations. International law is
the language that we must speak when differences arise
among us. International humanitarian law protects us
from further damage when conflict regrettably breaks
out. By protecting individual rights and thus saving
lives, international human rights law and international
refugee law may avoid trauma and resentment, which
are among the root causes of conflict, and they are key
to any reconciliation process.
Fourthly, it is of paramount importance to
acknowledge the strong and reinforcing relationship
between peace and economic and social development.
There can be no development without peace, and no
lasting peace without development. The New Agenda
for Peace will be successful only if its foundations
are based on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. A strong economic
foundation and robust productive capacities are the
path to job and wealth creation, solid fiscal revenues,
debt sustainability, political and social stability and,
ultimately, peace.
Strengthening
international
cooperation,
investing in productive capacities and combating
poverty and hunger must remain at the heart of our
deliberations within the Organization. In addition,

S/PV.9112

we must not forget that developing countries are
manifestly underrepresented in peace and security
decisions. There is a pressing need to move forward
the discussions on the Council´s reform, and we invite
all Member States to constructively engage in the
intergovernmental negotiations.
Fifthly, durable peace requires comprehensive
approaches, which could benefit significantly from
the support of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The PBC is well suited to work as a platform to
promote greater coordination among relevant partners
of a particular country at risk of lapsing or relapsing
into conflict. Additionally, it can mobilize regional
organizations and international financial institutions
and foster South-South and triangular cooperation
arrangements in support of national peacebuilding
initiatives. The Commission can also support the
implementation of peacebuilding activities by
peacekeeping operations and help mobilize political
support to promote reconciliation, the women and
peace and security agenda, institution-building and
other nationally defined peacebuilding priorities.
This briefing brings about a timely discussion.
We look around and we see war, conflict, terrorism,
pandemic and poverty. The fear of nuclear devastation
looms at our doors, and that fear is currently heightened.
As the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute pointed out, inter-State conflict has been on
the rise. Wars and ill-devised sanctions regimes disrupt
supply chains, spread scarcity, raise inflation, result in
food insecurity and ultimately affect those most in need
in a disproportionate way.
There are myriad factors that we can point to as
causes of international instability and insecurity.
As the Security Council has recognized, sustainable
peace can be achieved only by promoting security and
development. We need comprehensive approaches that
integrate political, security, development, human rights
and rule-of-law activities and address the underlying
causes of each conflict.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank China for the initiative to hold this
meeting, which gives us an opportunity to address the
importance of promoting the key principles of dialogue
and cooperation in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for defining the scope for this discussion in

22-468007/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

the current context. I would also like to thank President
Gustavo Zlauvinen for his enlightening briefing.
We are at a turning point in the international system
and a historic inflection point. The world is recovering
with great difficulty from a pandemic that has
exacerbated its individual and systemic vulnerabilities
and is facing a multidimensional crisis that challenges
the current international order. The international
context is marked by the emergence of new poles of
influence, which seek to reconfigure the balance and
approaches of national and international governance.
The increasingly multipolar world is consolidating in
terms of geopolitical competition among a number of
major actors.
Clearly, the future of the world is becoming more
politically and ideologically diverse. The emerging
international order seems to make space for a
diversity of values and requires permanent dialogue
to achieve a comprehensive consensus as we approach
these competing issues within the Security Council
and beyond.
In the face of rivalries between Powers, in the
face of the risk of the use of or proliferation of nuclear
weapons, in the face of a devastating pandemic, climate
insecurity and the development of cyberspace, which are
emerging as new threats, it would be dangerously naive
to rely on relationships of force or unilateral posturing.
The effectiveness of international action is difficult
to guarantee in bloc confrontations based on the Cold
War model. The interdependence of global issues and
the interconnection of national economies, financial
markets and supply chains require that we work
together, engage in dialogue, listen to each other and
to reach agreements in order to respond appropriately,
effectively and, above all, collectively to the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
We are helplessly witnessing the harsh reality
that the disagreements of great Powers over hierarchy,
ideology and their strategic interests are fertile ground
for major conflicts, wars of choice, proxy wars and
wars over resources that destabilize fragile States,
especially in Africa. The Security Council is the ideal
framework for promoting dialogue at the international
level for addressing the most complex challenges and
for stabilizing geopolitical and ideological competition.
My country, which has never experienced war or
armed conflict, will continue to work to promote greater
8/25

22/08/2022

diplomatic inclusiveness and genuine and lasting
dialogue in order to mitigate and manage the inevitable
geopolitical and ideological differences, rifts and
competing interests that sometimes give the impression
that the Security Council is a formal and bureaucratic
forum that is often paralysed by disputes among its
permanent members exercising their veto power.
Our pursuit and impetus for sustained dialogue
must ensure that we mobilize the necessary efforts
to find a way out of emerging crises, while ensuring
that urgent issues do not draw international attention
away from the important operational challenges
that are undermining the security and dignity of the
world’s peoples.
The alternatives to sustained dialogue and
multilateralism lack credibility within the current
international order. Dialogue among nations and within
international institutions is the key to fostering greater
international stability through ongoing consultations
and negotiations to manage emerging conflicts.
The benefits of dialogue include advancing
coordination among poles of influence, maintaining
international stability and promoting a rules-based
order. It represents a pragmatic middle ground,
the circumvention of which leads to risky or
dangerous alternatives.
Cooperation of course implies acting together,
consulting with each other regularly, in times of peace
as in times of war, and easing our differences. That
means we must consider or take into account each
other’s expectations and ease tensions with a view to
seeking a peaceful settlement of disputes.
My country will always favour dialogue over
breakdown, cooperation over isolation and political
and diplomatic solutions over the use of force and
confrontation. That vision of diplomacy guides our
international involvement and remains at the heart of
our narrative in the search for lasting solutions to the
multifaceted crises plaguing the world.
We are firmly convinced that regional and
subregional organizations are key players for initiating
dialogue to prevent conflicts and in the effective and
sustainable response to international crises. That is the
essence of our desire to provide African solutions to
African problems, as endorsed by the African Union
and its members. Of course, we remain clear on the
need to find collective solutions to the crises we are
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

facing around the world, because their consequences
often have a direct or indirect impact on the future of
each of our countries and threaten the values we share
and defend within the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
solemn appeal to every member of the Security Council
and, beyond that, to every member of the international
community to build bridges of dialogue and to break
down the walls that divide us and undermine the
aspirations of humankind.
We must urgently reconcile ourselves with
our calling to together ensure international peace
and security for the peoples of the world. That is
what we committed to when we signed the United
Nations Charter.
We must tirelessly and without further delay
cooperate and dialogue within the Security Council
with frankness and determination, commensurate with
the commitments undertaken and the responsibilities
assumed for the maintenance of security and peace in
the world.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I join others
in thanking the Secretary-General and Mr. Zlauvinen
for their briefings.
As you said in your opening remarks, Mr. President,
the continuous deterioration of our security
environment and the return of strategic and military
competition are challenging our international system
built on the rule of law, dialogue and cooperation. The
Security Council is the keystone of this system. It is
the Council’s responsibility to use the full extent of
the prerogatives entrusted to it by the United Nations
Charter to preserve it.
We fully support the call of the President-designate
of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
to preserve the centrality and primacy of the Treaty as
the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
architecture and our strategic stability. It is a bulwark
in an unprecedented international context marked by
Russian aggression against Ukraine, in violation of its
security guarantees, and by the persistence of crises
of proliferation.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, some States are openly favouring bellicose
postures. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine

S/PV.9112

demonstrates its contempt for the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, which
are at the heart of our international system. Today, the
situation at the Zaporizhzhya power plant threatens
the whole of Europe. We support the ongoing dialogue
between the parties and the International Atomic Energy
Agency to allow an inspection mission to be sent while
respecting the sovereignty of Ukraine. In this regard,
we commend the Secretary-General’s efforts, which
have opened the way to a positive perspective.
Secondly, in addition to open warfare between
States, the persistence of internal conflicts and the
scourge of terrorism are having a lasting effect on
civilian populations, particularly women and children.
The crises are intensified by climate change, whose
impacts on security, particularly in the Sahel, are no
longer in question. As they weaken States, these crises
can allow militias or mercenaries to prosper and further
destabilize conflict zones.
There is a third worrisome trend: cyberspace and
outer space are becoming fields of strategic rivalry and
even armed conflict. The manipulation of information
to deceive our citizens and undermine our democracies
is amplified by hyperconnectivity. Several States seek
to destabilize political systems and increase their own
influence, while others lock up information to avoid
dissent. This is an area in which we must go beyond our
usual practices. We must reflect on the contours of a
renewed dialogue to refine our common understanding
of these new fields, strengthen international governance
and define rules of responsible behaviour by closely
involving civil society and businesses. France will
continue to be fully committed to ensuring that these
spaces remain open, secure, stable and peaceful.
In conclusion, allow me to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call to preserve the promise of the United
Nations Charter. For France, this means promoting
effective multilateralism that respects human rights,
fundamental freedoms and democratic principles.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, President
of the tenth Review of the Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, for their briefings.
I commend you and your delegation, Mr. President,
for the choice of topic for today’s briefing. We embrace
the discussion, believing that the survival of our species
is dependent on the establishment of security based on

22-468009/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

dialogue and cooperation, not the combative threat of
mutual and worldwide nuclear annihilation.
Unfortunately, the international community
is facing an increasingly dangerous confrontation
between the great Powers. In the past, we have regretted
the increasing irrelevance of multilateralism. We do
so again, knowing that, without it, humankind will
suffer grievously, as our greatest hopes are crushed by
multiple interlocking crises.

22/08/2022

and security. We propose to our friends and partners
today that aiding this ambition or, at a minimum, not
impeding it, is in their fundamental interest.
Without stronger contributions to our common
security by all regions and our multilateral instruments,
destructive cold and hot wars and other major harms lie
in our immediate future. Many efforts are required, but
I will mention only a few that I urge Council members
to prioritize in their analysis.

As you know, Mr. President, we have an agreement
that, if embraced in deed as much as in word, offers us
a hopeful basis for collective security. That agreement
is the Charter of the United Nations, which we must
not allow to go the way of the failed Covenant of the
League of Nations. However, present trends holding, it
may well meet this unfortunate end due to the paralysis
caused by the increasing conflict between defensive
and offensive alliances of major Powers.

First, we need to renew our ambition to undertake
overdue reforms of the United Nations, and particularly
the Security Council. African seats, in line with the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, offer
the greatest hope for a balanced Council. The African
Union and other regional organizations also need to
undertake every effort to strengthen their peace and
security architecture so as to reinforce the impact of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.

The effects are already devastating when it comes
to the ongoing war in Europe and its worldwide
consequences. Unless dialogue is started to halt the war
in Ukraine, the continuation of the logic that led to it
will lead to ruin for all of us.

Secondly, the United Nations needs to assume
greater responsibility for all peace operations against
threats to international peace and security. In particular,
adequate and predictable financing, including through
assessed contributions for Security Council-mandated
African Union-led peace operations, needs to be
provided. There must also be adequate predictable and
sustained financing for peacebuilding. In this regard,
we urge members to agree on an ambitious draft
resolution on financing for peacebuilding by the end of
the seventy-sixth session.

We are at a fork in the road. Will the world’s
Powers choose to embrace the guiding vision of the
United Nations, or will they turn it into one more arena
of their conflict and sap its will and means to protect
international peace and security?
The rest of the world, and Africa specifically,
must not wait passively to be swept into the centre of
the storms that are being generated by this historic
confrontation. It must not lead to us suffering the
agony of proxy wars or out-of-control climate change
and pandemics.
The 1982 Palme Commission held out the hope that
citizens and civil society would take a more active role
in advocating disarmament and security. Our argument
today is that regions, and specifically Africa, have an
important role to play. The future map of survival, as
The New York Times dubbed the Palme Commission,
will need to have Africa as both its subject and as a
critical actor for its success.
The world needs a prosperous, secure and united
Africa to successfully navigate today’s major challenges,
such as global insecurity and climate change. Africa’s
Agenda 2063 can therefore be a cornerstone for the
emergence of a balancing pillar for international peace
10/25

Thirdly, it is an unfortunate legacy that the regions
leading in the development of nuclear weapons are also
the most advanced in the development of militarized
artificial intelligence. The United Nations and regional
organizations must have a stronger voice in ensuring
that this technology is developed ethically and in line
with the principles of the United Nations Charter.
Fourthly, common security is not attainable without
development. In particular, there must be renewed
energy shown by industrialized countries to meet and
exceed commitments for climate-change adaptation
and mitigation. The twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, to be held in Egypt, will be a key
test in that regard.
Finally, militant non-State actors and, in particular,
terrorists, can fatally undermine our common security.
We call for stronger efforts by the Council to predictably
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

and consistently use its full range of tools against all
terrorist entities and their collaborators.
Kenya will continue playing its part in promoting
dialogue and cooperation for the sake of common
security. We have played an essential part in the forging
of political solutions to multiple conflicts, and even to
head off State collapse in our region. At the moment we
are undertaking every diplomatic and political effort
to facilitate and assist the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to solve the crisis in its eastern region through
the Nairobi Conclave and the inter-Congolese dialogue.
We make those efforts alongside our neighbours and
partners in the firm belief that dialogue and cooperation,
not confrontation and conflict, are key to ensuring that
our citizens and all people live in peace, security and
shared prosperity.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Zlauvinen for their briefings and their steadfast
commitment to furthering multilateral diplomacy.
We live in a world where our greatest challenges are
shared, and global challenges require global solutions.
That is what makes multilateral institutions such as
the United Nations so valuable. The United Nations,
unlike any other institution, can galvanize the world
towards better ends. We can promote human rights,
protect innocent civilians, provide humanitarian relief
and save lives. We can strengthen sovereign equality,
promote human development, deter threats to peace and
security and work towards a more equal and just world.
But success requires good faith. It means not just
quoting the Charter of the United Nations, but actually
abiding by its principles in practice. And it requires us
to hold Member States accountable — vigorously and
consistently — when they violate the Charter and the
principles it stands for.
Unfortunately, one of the greatest threats to our
success in maintaining peace and security is from
within. At the top of the list is the full-scale invasion
by Russia, a permanent member of the Council, of its
sovereign neighbour and fellow United Nations Member
State, Ukraine.
Before Russia’s unprovoked invasion, the United
States, Ukraine and its neighbours, as well as other
Member States, undertook intensive diplomatic efforts
to dissuade Russia from choosing a path of force and
violence. We convened dialogues at high levels across a

S/PV.9112

range of international venues, including in the Council,
in order to voice concerns about the security situation
and to discuss potential measures to revitalize Europe’s
security architecture.
Russia, however, rejected dialogue, discarded
established views of sovereign equality, discarded the
concept of the indivisibility of security and launched
a horrific war. Russia has justified its actions by
attempting to redefine basic concepts like sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the indivisibility of security.
It has done so by asserting that it is Moscow’s
prerogative to dictate the political and security choices
of its neighbours.
Russia is fond of saying that the security of one
State cannot come at the expense of others. But Russia’s
tortured full-throated messaging on the supposed
threats it faces from it its neighbours omits the fact
that all nations have the right to choose their security
alliances. Russia’s interpretation of indivisible security
does not justify one country’s attempted annexation of
another. That goes against not only the principles, but
the explicit words of the United Nations Charter and its
allowances for mutual self-defence arrangements.
Russia’s selfish desire to invade its neighbour and
steal its land has had implications for us all. It has
exacerbated global food insecurity, has launched a new
refugee crisis, has led to the deaths of tens of thousands
of Ukrainians and Russians and has degraded the
bedrock principles that have prevented new world wars.
The greatest mistakes of the twentieth century
came from the age of empires, when countries and
people were not free to make their own sovereign
determinations about their societies, economies,
partnerships and alliances. We cannot make those
mistakes again. That is why we enshrine those lessons
in documents like the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. By protecting
and promoting human rights, we protect what bonds us
together — our shared humanity.
That is why States cannot excuse their human rights
violations under the guise of domestic internal affairs.
Universal rights are and must be just that — universal.
The language in the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights could not
be clearer.
And finally, we came away from the twentieth
century in agreement that existential threats like nuclear

22-4680011/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

proliferation needed to be monitored together, that we
should use institutions and mechanisms established
by the United Nations Charter, like the Security
Council and General Assembly, to address those shared
challenges to peace and security.
That is the message that President Biden and
Secretary Blinken delivered just a few weeks ago at the
onset of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The United States will continue to support the
NPT, which remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. At the Review Conference, we
are seeking a consensus final document that preserves
the integrity of that essential treaty and strengthens
its implementation across all three of the treaty pillars
in order to accomplish concrete and practical ways to
move forward.
It is also important that the Review Conference
acknowledge the manner in which Russia’s war and
irresponsible actions in Ukraine seriously undermine
the NPT’s main purposes. That is why we believe that
resuming mutually beneficial inspections under the
New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty is a key part of
our cooperation that must continue.
We are ready to negotiate expeditiously a framework
to replace New Start in pursuit of further bilateral
strategic nuclear arms reductions with Russia. We are
prepared to work with all countries on risk reduction and
strategic stability efforts. We will continue to support
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty. And we are eager to begin working with
partners to restart negotiations this year on the longdelayed fissile material cut-off treaty.
Those global challenges require global solutions.
They require good faith and adherence to established
norms and international law. They require commitment
and perseverance, which too often are in short supply.
But we have to persist because our collective security
hangs in the balance.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Zlauvinen for their important briefings today.
Dialogue and cooperation are essential components
in settling disputes and building peace and security, and
we have seen some significant positive examples of that
in the Security Council in recent months. In Yemen,
sustained efforts, including by Council members and
12/25

22/08/2022

regional actors, have brought us to a fragile truce. In
Somalia, cooperation within the Council and with
the African Union led to the establishment of a new
mission, the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia. However, dialogue can ensure our collective
security only if it is matched and underpinned by
States upholding the international system that keeps
us all safe. That must start with the Charter of the
United Nations, as the guarantor of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
Today there is no contest as to the gravest threat to
the system of common security enshrined in the United
Nations. Russia, a permanent member of the Council,
has torn up the Charter and trampled on the rules that
underpin international peace and security, undermining
the entire system that we are all here to uphold. In order
to ensure everyone’s security and uphold the system we
rely on, we must hold to account States that transgress
the universally accepted norms of sovereignty and
territorial integrity. If we accepted that a big country
can simply invade a smaller neighbour, we would be
returning to dark days of human suffering, as well as
wider international instability and conflict. That is
why we call again for the Russian Federation to stop
its illegal invasion of Ukraine and withdraw its forces.
With the global system challenged, we must do
everything we can to prevent nuclear escalation. The
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) remains the cornerstone of the global security
architecture in that area and the only route to our
shared goal of complete nuclear disarmament. The
joint statement on that subject in January from leaders
of the permanent five members of the Council was an
important signal of a willingness to work together to
reduce risks and build confidence. In that context, we
thank Mr. Zlauvinen for his tireless work as President
of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The United Kingdom remains unwaveringly committed
to its aims and to working with other States to ensure
the implementation of the NPT and other treaties. We
therefore echo the Secretary-General’s concern about
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in southern
Ukraine. He has our support in his efforts to de-escalate
the situation. We also underline the importance of
sending a mission of International Atomic Energy
Agency experts to address nuclear safety and security,
as well as safeguarding concerns, in a manner that
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

respects Ukraine’s full sovereignty over its territory
and infrastructure.
The Charter and the international security
architecture that we have collectively built are crucial
for all of our countries. Let us defend them together
so that our world can enable all sovereign States to
ensure the safety of their people and the integrity of
their territory.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Ambassador Zlauvinen
for their informative briefings. I also thank China for
convening this very timely meeting.
The world is currently facing a multitude of
immediate challenges that are unfolding in new
and mutually reinforcing ways, from pandemics to
climate-related conflicts, cybercrime, food insecurity
and growing numbers of refugees. Conflicts have
become increasingly protracted, with devastating
effects on civilians and civilian infrastructure. A
lack of protection fuels conflicts and is a threat to
international peace and security. No State, no matter
how powerful, can resolve all of those challenges alone.
Multilateralism must be at the heart of how we seek to
deal with our global challenges.
We need to take a more active role in preventing
crises. We therefore very much appreciate that the
Secretary-General made prevention a priority in his
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), emphasizing
the need to ensure that financing is adequate,
predictable and sustained. In searching for ways to
facilitate early responses, we also need to improve
the Security Council’s situational awareness. In that
regard, there is a key role for the Secretariat and United
Nations briefers to play in using their interactions with
the Council to bring emerging issues to its attention
and sound the alarm. Working together with regional
organizations such as the African Union is essential to
enabling the Council to understand and tackle emerging
security threats, including the rise of non-State actors in
conflict. If we are to achieve sustainable peace, Norway
also strongly believes that we need to talk to all actors
involved in any conflict, and the full and meaningful
inclusion of women is crucial in that regard.
Great Power rivalry is putting pressure on
the multilateral disarmament architecture. New
weapon systems are being developed and deployed.
Proliferation challenges are increasing. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has

S/PV.9112

helped to safeguard global security for more than
half a century. It is the cornerstone of our efforts to
rid the world of nuclear weapons. It is essential that
we seize the opportunity during the ongoing tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reaffirm our
commitment to the Treaty. We also strongly advocate
ensuring the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We must persist in our efforts
to prepare the ground for future binding arms-control
and disarmament agreements. We stress the importance
of using the gender lens in that work as well. Women
and women’s organizations are central actors in policy
and advocacy on non-proliferation and disarmament.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly prohibits
aggression and the acquisition of territory by force.
Russia must immediately withdraw its forces from
Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders and
cease all threats and military action. The recent
shelling of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant is
especially worrying.
Let me conclude by bringing up a concern that we
share with many others around this table. The world
is currently facing unprecedented levels of acute food
insecurity. Rising food prices are driving hunger in
South Sudan, Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan and other
places. That is affecting livelihoods and multiplying
the risks of further conflicts and instability. Russia’s
war on Ukraine has worsened the situation further,
with serious global impact. Norway commends the
Secretary-General for his contribution to the initiative
on the safe transportation of grain from Ukrainian
ports through the Black Sea. It is an important step and
could help to ease global food insecurity.
The challenges we are facing require a holistic and
inclusive response. They affect all of us. Our efforts for
collective security must be coordinated across all three
pillars of the work of the United Nations — peace and
security, human rights and development.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Chinese delegation for organizing today’s
important meeting to promote common security
through dialogue and cooperation.
We also thank the Secretary-General for
the depth and clarity of his statement, as well as
Ambassador Gustavo Zlauvinen, President of the
tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty

22-4680013/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, for his
insightful briefing.
Seven decades after the adoption of the Charter of
the United Nations, the world is witnessing increasing
strains on the structures of the global order — not only
because there are new and emerging global threats
that require effective national action to resolve, but
also because, distanced in time from the brutal images
of the wars of the past, countries are beginning to
consider, ever more readily, the threat and use of
force as an instrument for pursuing policies in the
international arena.
For many smaller countries, while there is an
awareness that the rules-based order has not always been
fair, the affirmation of the order is nonetheless firm, as
it remains a key necessity in upholding the stability of
the modern international system. Most of us are only
too well aware of the acute risks of Hobbesian imagery
if the international system of governance we have built
in the post-war era were to be fragilely maintained.
Therefore, as we reflect on the prevailing risks to
the global system from threats such as the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, nuclear conflict and
its use by terrorist groups, terrorism itself, violent
conflict, pandemics, climate change, cyberattacks,
disinformation, migration crises and food and energy
insecurity, we must resolve to walk our respective
commitments to the Charter, as well as to the other
commitments that we have made. Those commitments
include, more recently, the Declaration for the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations.
When considering how we can promote common
security through dialogue and cooperation, Ghana
seeks to share five main points.
First, as an overarching requirement, we must
collectively work towards the strengthening of
multilateralism in ways that ensure it serves the needs of
all, and not the wishes of a powerful or influential few.
The dialogue required for sustaining multilateralism
must therefore change, and the outcomes of decisions
must reflect the common aspirations of all Member
States and be based, inter alia, on principles such as
solidarity. In our view, a strong multilateral system
that upholds fairness and justice remains necessary in
pursuing the common goal of maintaining global peace
and security.
14/25

22/08/2022

Secondly, there have been far too many derogations
in the obligations of some Member States in relation
to their own declarations when they joined the United
Nations and agreed to uphold the purposes and
principles of its Charter. When that has happened
with more powerful States, the Organization has been
constrained from acting.
We therefore believe that, in the present
circumstances, it may be necessary to initiate a
consensual process for Member States to formally
recommit to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, especially its key purpose,
namely, to ensure international peace and security
based on the pacific settlement of disputes; the non-use
of force in international relations, except under very
limited and defined conditions; the development of
friendly relations; and the pursuit of international
cooperation in resolving international problems.
Thirdly, while the development of friendly relations
among Member States was envisaged as one of the key
tools in advancing a pacific world order, we are only
too aware of past actions that have been carried out by
some States that undermine the territorial integrity and
political independence of other States. Such actions
create mistrust and weaken the common security we
all seek.
It is important to recognize that, while more
powerful States may have extensive security concerns,
those concerns cannot, by any stretch, be subordinated
to the domestic interests of other States, no matter
how small they may be. That is the requirement of
the principle of the sovereign equality of States — a
principle that must be safeguarded in practice if we seek
a more stable world. We therefore encourage deliberate
diplomatic actions, consistent with the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, to build mutual
trust, including by emphasizing dialogue in order to
objectively assess the strategic intentions of countries
and obtain a clearer understanding of national policy
objectives and strategies. That is critical when it comes
to dealing with misjudgments and avoiding unhealthy
competition, especially among major Powers.
Fourthly, amid prevailing geopolitical rivalries,
elevated risks related to the deliberate or accidental
use of nuclear weapons are a strong concern that the
nuclear-weapon States should cooperate to resolve.
While nuclear non-proliferation is an important
agenda that we must continue to work on — whether
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9112

on the Korean peninsula, in the Middle East or
elsewhere — the fundamental concern is that the idea of
nuclear weapons itself is objectionable to humankind,
and we should therefore work assiduously towards
achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world. That demand
requires us to strengthen dialogue and cooperation so
that the successes achieved so far can be built upon. I
refer to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which has helped to manage non-proliferation
for 53 years — although challenges remain — and the
25-year moratorium on nuclear testing.

Hardly anyone can be satisfied with the international
situation in which we find ourselves today. The
international security system is experiencing a profound
crisis whereby almost all of the institutions it was based
on have deteriorated and the level of trust between key
international players has dropped to a critically low
level. Today, more than ever before, it is important to
understand why that has happened. However, for at
least the past 200 years, Western countries have blamed
Russia as their sole explanation and universal solution
when it comes to such problems.

Finally, there are many conflict situations,
especially in parts of the African continent, where small
arms and light weapons in the hands of terrorist and
violent extremist groups have, in effect, been wielded
as weapons of mass destruction. Such security threats
of our time cannot be left to regional and national actors
to manage alone. The burden must be shared equitably,
and renewed efforts and investments should be made
in interventions that would accelerate progress towards
the realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development Sustainable Development Goals.

But let us look at the facts. In the late 1980s, the
international community had reason to hope that
the Cold War, with its arms race and the threat of a
major confrontation between the super-Powers, was
over. Back in May, many experts seriously argued
that bloc confrontation was also a thing of the past.
That happened, first and foremost, because the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and then Russia,
radically changed course, reacting to the promises and
assurances of the countries of the West. Back then, we
were assured that NATO would not seek to gain any
unilateral advantage from the changed situation in
Europe or create new dividing lines throughout it. We
were promised an equal partnership based on trust,
transparency and the mutual consideration of security
concerns, which also included a promise not to expand
NATO to the East.

In conclusion, Ghana believes that the common
security we all yearn for is possible and can be achieved.
We therefore look forward to the further engagement
of Member States on the Our Common Agenda report
(A/75/982), in particular as it relates to the New Agenda
for Peace.
While recognizing the importance of regional
arrangements in advancing collective security, we also
underscore the crucial role of the United Nations in
promoting dialogue and cooperation for our common
security and believe that the equal platform provided by
the United Nations enables States to develop common
understandings on the application of international
law and norms, rules and principles for responsible
State behaviour. We must guard that multilateral
platform jealously.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the President of the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Mr. Gustavo
Zlauvinen, for their briefings. We are grateful to our
Chinese colleagues for convening today’s Security
Council meeting and for choosing a highly relevant
topic devoted to issues of collective security.

From records of conversations and the memoirs
of Western politicians, it became clear that we simply
were shamelessly deceived — and are still being
deceived — and that neither the United States nor its
allies have intended to fulfil any of those promises.
No form of equal partnership was even considered.
Moreover, the countries of the West, taking advantage
of the economic and political challenges we faced
during the transition period, declared Russia the loser
in the Cold War. In their understanding, the loser
cannot lay claim to anything. The members of NATO
almost instantly forgot their promises not to build up
their military presence in Europe and not to move their
military infrastructure closer to Russia’s borders.
For 30 years, we have been patiently trying to
reach an agreement with NATO on the principles of
equal and indivisible security in the Euro-Atlantic
region. However, our proposals have been consistently
met either with cynical lies or attempts at pressure and
blackmail. At the same time, NATO has continued to
expand relentlessly, bringing its military infrastructure

22-4680015/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

closer to our borders, including by deploying missile
defence systems and offensive weapons, all of which
has created a genuine threat to our country’s national
security. Our President warned about it in 2007 at the
Munich Security Conference, when he urged NATO
to abandon its dangerous path of confrontation.
Regrettably, those warnings went unheard and unheeded
by the West. On the contrary, in 2008 the United States
and its NATO allies pressured the authorities in power
in Georgia at the time into a crude military venture
against South Ossetia and Russia’s peacekeepers that
had disastrous results for Georgia.
At the same time, the United States deliberately
dismantled key elements of the global arms-control
system that had maintained the strategic balance and
prevented armed confrontation for decades. As long
ago as 2001, Washington announced its unilateral
withdrawal from the Treaty between the United States
of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems,
on the invented pretext that it was outdated and did
not correspond to contemporary reality. In 2019, the
United States also unilaterally withdrew from the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,
which the Secretary-General had once described as
an invaluable tool that could prevent nuclear war. In
order to avoid another spiral into confrontation, we
proposed a mutual moratorium on the deployment of
such missiles to the United States and NATO. We even
undertook a unilateral obligation not to be the first to
deploy systems banned by the INF Treaty in regions
where similar American-made products would not be
deployed. But our moratorium proposal was rejected by
the United States and its NATO allies. In that context, it
is telling that the United States is still refusing to ratify
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Concerning the Euro-Atlantic space itself, for
years we have been doing everything in our power to
maintain the viability of the conventional arms-control
regime. Russia was an initiator of the negotiations on
adapting the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe (CFE), and we ratified the agreement on the
adaptation of the treaty that would have enabled it to
take the new strategic realities in Europe into account.
But the United States and its allies in NATO, which
by the mid-2000s was expanding at full speed, refused
to ratify the agreement, while the NATO newbies of
the 2000s — Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovenia,
Albania and Croatia — refused to accede to the CFE
16/25

22/08/2022

on principle, all of which stripped the Treaty of any
political or military meaning. In 2020, the United
States essentially signed the death warrant of yet
another cornerstone confidence-building agreement in
the Euro-Atlantic region by withdrawing unilaterally
from the Open Skies Treaty. I want to stress that the
dismantling each of those arms-control instruments
was the result of deliberate actions by the United
States, which has essentially brought down the existing
architecture in this area, brick by brick.
In December of last year we made a last attempt
to save the European security system from its death
agonies under the Western countries’ blows. Russia
submitted a set of proposals to the United States and
NATO on confidence-building and security measures
in the Euro-Atlantic region. We made a proposal to
the United States to conclude an agreement on legally
binding mutual security assurances that would take
into account the concerns of both sides in this area
and restore Russia-NATO relations to their 1997 state,
when the Russian-NATO Founding Act on Mutual
Relations, Cooperation and Security was signed. A
similar proposal was made to NATO. They are public
documents that anyone can access.
Our proposals were based on the principle of
common and indivisible security, which assumes that
States should not strengthen their own security at the
expense of others. That is a fundamental principle
of civilized international relations. It is reflected in
several foundational documents of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
including the Istanbul Charter for European Security of
1999, it was reaffirmed in the Astana Commemorative
Declaration of the 2010 OSCE Summit and it underlies
the agreements between Russia and NATO. But our
American colleagues did not want to reaffirm the
principle, insisting on the sanctity of the NATO
open-door policy. As a result, all of our proposals for
security assurances were rejected by the United States
and NATO. They simply refused to discuss them on
their merits, and for the umpteenth time in history
chose escalation over a diplomatic settlement. The
result is that a crisis has broken out in the European
region — one with a global reach and that we can say
without exaggeration will have historic consequences.
In our view, the reason why the West has been
collectively and purposely destroying the system
of European security for all these years is that the
proven system of checks and balances — the balance
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

of interests — has ceased to respond to the West’s
aspirations to hegemony. What has emerged is the
temptation to bend the whole world to its dictates and
force it to live and work according to Western countries’
models. But collective security is incompatible with
coercion and hegemony and the desire to undermine
any alternative sovereign paths of development and
to keep countries and peoples in the grip of a colonial
order. That involves any means available — crude
interference in States’ internal affairs, coups d’état,
threats, blackmail, economic coercion and incitement
to conflict. In the past few years we have also seen dirty
information campaigns, based on lies and a presumption
of one’s own innocence. In this context, truth and facts
have no part to play, since leading Western media
and public relations agencies are working to tarnish
their opponents.
As with Georgia in its time, Ukraine has been
sacrificed to the confrontation with Russia, in which
the West has set up an anti-popular, anti-constitutional
and Russophobic regime in the country. Today the
United States and its allies are pumping heavy weapons
into Kyiv and doing everything they can to prolong
the conflict in Ukraine — a conflict that began in
2014 when the Maidan regime bombed and shelled the
inhabitants of the south-eastern regions of the country,
ensuring that the Ukrainian people were destined to be
mere cannon fodder.
And yet in the face of their own declared values,
the Western countries have cynically turned a blind eye
to the spread of neo-Nazi ideology, the mass murder
of Donbas residents and violations of international
humanitarian law by the Ukrainian armed forces
and nationalist battalions. In recent weeks Ukraine’s
Western patrons have essentially been assisting Kyiv in
its attempts at nuclear blackmail, while ignoring the fact
that it is the Ukrainian forces that have been firing on
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. At the Security
Council meeting convened by the Russian Federation
last week on the topic (see S/PV.9109), not a single
Western delegation found the resolve to call a spade a
spade and urge Kyiv to stop the dangerous actions that
could lead to a nuclear catastrophe on the European
continent. We have requested another emergency
meeting on the Ukrainian armed forces’ continuing
provocations regarding the Zaporizhzhya plant.
The United States and its allies have been acting
in exactly the same reckless and provocative manner
in Asia and Africa. They have noticeably intensified

S/PV.9112

their destructive policy in the Asia-Pacific region
recently with attempts to impose a bloc mindset on
its States, form aggressive military-political alliances
such as AUKUS, the trilateral security pact between
Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States,
drive a wedge between countries that have their own
effective mechanisms for resolving contentious issues
and problems and force them to abandon the concept of
Asian neutrality that helped them to protect their own
interests during the Cold War. The reckless American
scheme regarding Taiwan is part of the same deal. In
our view, this carefully planned provocation is an open
demonstration of disrespect for the sovereignty of other
countries and the United States’ own international
obligations. We have been forced to conclude that the
Asia-Pacific region has become part of a purposeful,
conscious United States strategy aimed at destabilizing
the situation in regions of the world where there are
States pursuing their own independent policies.
The tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
currently being held in New York. It is meant to bring
the international community together to implement the
Treaty’s provisions. But here too the Western countries
are politicizing the work on the final document by
putting their geopolitical interests in punishing Russia
above the collective demand that we strengthen
global security. Within the context of the collective
West’s de facto sabotage of the global security
architecture, Russia continues do everything possible
to keep afloat at least its critical, vital elements.
In February 2021, at our initiative, the new Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty between Russia and the United
States was extended for five years. And we took the
initiative to reaffirm the principle that there can be no
winners in a nuclear war — and that such a war must
never be unleashed — in the joint statement of the
leaders of the five nuclear-weapon States adopted on
3 January. It also emphasized the need to prevent not only
a nuclear confrontation but any military confrontation
between nuclear-weapon States. It is imperative that
all the signatories to the statement demonstrate their
commitment to its provisions through their actions.
In principle, we remain open to cooperating to
reduce tensions, stop the arms race and minimize
strategic risks. However, that also requires our Western
colleagues’ commitment. So far we have seen no such
interest on their part. Reducing tensions in the world
and overcoming threats and risks in the political and

22-4680017/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

military arena will be possible only by strengthening
the multipolar system, based on international law, the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
sovereign equality of States. That is the only real and
effective alternative to hegemony and might-is-right.
We are ready to participate actively in collaborating
with like-minded partners to build a truly democratic
world, in which the rights of all nations and their
security interests and cultural and civilizational
diversity will be guaranteed. That is important, despite
the fierce opposition of the United States and its allies.
The outlines of a new world order are taking shape
before our eyes today. A growing number of countries
are choosing a path of sovereign political, economic
and civilizational development while rejecting the
formulas and templates imposed by Western countries.
The West, however, is ready to do anything to preserve
its hegemony. For the sake of that desire, Ukraine was
sacrificed and turned into a firing range for a proxy
war with Russia until the last Ukrainian falls. We hope
that the West’s actions in Ukraine have opened the eyes
of many around the world to the true underlying cause
of the crises gripping our planet. What is happening to
Ukraine now, and indeed what NATO has been doing
on the European continent for the past 30 years, is a
lesson for the whole world. Does anyone think that the
United States and its allies will behave differently in
other regions? History tells us otherwise. Therefore ask
not for whom the bell tolls today. It tolls for you.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank the Chinese presidency
for organizing this very timely debate. I would also
like thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Zlauvinen for their thought-provoking statements.
The United Nations was born from the trauma of the
Second World War and a desire to ensure that we would
never again go down the path of isolation, nationalism,
global division and conflict. Multilateralism has long
been central to Ireland’s foreign policy. We believe
that the rules-based international order, with the
United Nations at its core, remains essential if we are
to achieve the promise of the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security
and respect the sovereignty of States. Unfortunately, we
are seeing an increase in global and regional instability,
exacerbated this year by Russia’s unjustified and illegal
military aggression against Ukraine.
No country can tackle the root causes of conflict
and complex global challenges alone. Addressing
18/25

22/08/2022

climate change, inequality, poverty, cybercrime and
terrorism requires effective collective effort if we are
ever to achieve sustainable peace. But the basic global
consensus, embodied in key regional and international
institutions, is being eroded. We must push back against
such attempts, while undertaking the institutional
reforms that are necessary to maximize the continued
legitimacy, relevance and effectiveness of multilateral
bodies. In order to collectively address those complex
and interconnected challenges we must have a holistic
and inclusive response, coordinated across all three
pillars of the work of the United Nations — peace and
security, human rights and development. I would like
to highlight three areas where we see opportunities for
cooperation in order to support peace.
First, we must move away from a default position
of responding after a crisis has happened and be more
proactive with regard to prevention. Ireland joins the
call outlined in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), to
which the Secretary-General referred earlier, to enhance
our support for the Peacebuilding Commission and
ensure that peacebuilding is adequately and sustainably
financed. The Peacebuilding Commission continues
to advance its civil-society engagement, increasing
its advice to the Security Council, and as part of the
wider United Nations peacebuilding architecture has
contributed to discussions on peacebuilding financing.
Ireland calls on others to support the entirety of the
Commission’s work and engage constructively in the
upcoming negotiations in the General Assembly.
Secondly, we must recognize that disarmament
and effective arms control are more vital than ever.
During the Cold War era, the world too frequently
stood on the brink of nuclear catastrophe. But today we
are faced with an elevated nuclear risk. As we heard
from the Secretary-General, by adopting the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
the international community took a decisive step back
from that abyss. As the cornerstone of the international
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation architecture,
the NPT reminds us that even in the most dangerous
times, progress is achievable. As we meet today, the
tenth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is under
way, under the leadership of Ambassador Zlauvinen.
It is our collective responsibility to bring urgency and
action to nuclear disarmament, address proliferation
challenges and agree on how we can move forward
together in order to honour and implement our existing
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

commitments. Our shared objective of a world without
nuclear weapons demands that we act with courage
and vision.
Lastly, we must ensure that our approach to peace
and security takes a human rights-based approach that
is inclusive, particularly of the most vulnerable. It is
vital that we pay heed to women, young people, human
rights defenders and civil society in this Chamber.
It is essential that they can speak freely about the
stark realities of conflict without fear of reprisals
or intimidation. Support for local peacebuilders,
particularly women and youth, is key to finding local
sustainable solutions to conflict. By implementing the
international frameworks that we have collectively
agreed to — be they the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
NPT, the peace and security agenda, the Paris Climate
Change Agreement or the Sustainable Development
Goals — we can shape and build the world that was
imagined when the United Nations was born.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and his valuable remarks.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Gustavo
Zlauvinen for his statement.
The United Nations was established in 1945 with
the noble objective of saving succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. As our most universal and
representative international organization, the United
Nations has been credited with keeping the peace
over the past 77 years. At the same time, as we enter
the third decade of this millennium, we need to ask
ourselves whether the United Nations has lived up to its
expectations. The requirements and challenges of our
present and future are vastly different from those of the
past. The world today is very different from the world
of 1945. Is the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, which is the foremost organ tasked with the
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security, able to remain relevant?
We are all agreed that the world today is beset with
multiple challenges — terrorism, radicalism, threats
and challenges from new and emerging technologies,
climate change, pandemics, intensifying geopolitical
competition and many others. Each one directly affects
the lives of all of us. An armed conflict in one part of
the world has cascading effects on the people of another.
We have seen the effects of the Ukraine conflict on
other developing countries, particularly through the

S/PV.9112

supply of food grains, fertilizer and fuel. At the same
time, the impact of the crisis in Afghanistan is being felt
throughout the region. We can indeed appreciate that the
United Nations has been at the forefront of dealing with
those and many other such challenges. Such efforts,
however, have been partial or intermittent at best, as
we have invariably stopped short of providing effective
and durable solutions. It is clear that the challenges the
world is confronted with today cannot be dealt with
through outdated systems and governing structures.
One of the guiding questions posed by the Council
presidency for today’s meeting is what constitutes
common security. We are firm in our commitment to
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. The underlying principles of
common security include upholding the rules-based
international order — underpinned by international
law and premised on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all Member States — resolving
international disputes through peaceful negotiations
and ensuring free and open access to the global
commons for all. Any coercive or unilateral action that
seeks to change the status quo by force is an affront
to common security. Furthermore, common security
is possible only when countries respect each other’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity in the same way
they would expect their own sovereignty to be respected.
It is feasible only when all countries stand together
against common threats such as terrorism, refrain from
applying double standards while preaching otherwise
and respect agreements signed with others, bilaterally
or multilaterally, without taking unilateral measures to
nullify the very arrangements to which they are party.
Today’s meeting is therefore an opportune moment
to engage in a serious discussion about India’s call
for reformed multilateralism, at the core of which lies
reform of the Security Council — a body founded in
the aftermath of the Second World War that continues
to reflect in its decision-making, 77 years later, the
fundamentally flawed premise of “to the victors go
the spoils” — and that continues to be confronted with
a crisis of confidence and credibility. As my Prime
Minister said in the General Assembly’s general debate
in 2020,
“[r]eform in the responses, in the processes,
and in the very character of the United Nations is
the need of the hour.” (A/75/PV.12, annex I)

22-4680019/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

How can we aspire to common security when the
common good of the global South continues to be denied
representation in the Council’s decision-making? In
that regard, the most urgent thing for us to do is make
the Security Council more representative of developing
countries so as to reflect current geopolitical realities.
How can we explain away the fact that the African
continent does not have permanent representation on
the Council even though the majority of the issues
the Council deals with concern that region? How can
we aspire to common security in Africa when the
Council denies it representation on a permanent basis?
A truly representative Security Council is the most
pressing need of the hour. Without that, there is a real
danger that the United Nations could be superseded by
other plurilateral and multilateral groupings that are
more representative, transparent and democratic and
therefore more effective.
As a founding member of the United Nations,
India has consistently demonstrated its commitment to
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter.
My country has been a leading advocate in addressing
the concerns and aspirations of developing countries
and for the creation of a more equitable international
economic and political order. As one of the largest
contributors of troops to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we have contributed immensely to
maintaining international peace and security and have
done so proudly, while the number of lives we have
sacrificed in that noble endeavour is the highest of all
troop-contributing countries. We have also worked
to foster global socioeconomic development through
transparent, viable, sustainable and demand-driven
partnership programmes. The Council will recall
that when the coronavirus disease pandemic hit the
world, we extended our hand of friendship to others by
delivering vaccines, pharmaceuticals and other medical
equipment to more than 150 countries around the world.
India has been playing its part by being a trusted
and reliable partner for all, based on our ancient Indian
ethos that sees the world as one great family. However,
the question remains: are multilateral organizations,
especially the Security Council, ready to deal with
the new world order and new challenges? In my
country, which now represents more than one sixth of
humankind, we believe that until we reform, perform
and transform multilateral governance structures, we
will continue to be found wanting.
20/25

22/08/2022

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency for organizing this meeting, a
timely opportunity to consider the ways in which
dialogue and cooperation — our daily bread and
butter — can contribute to maintaining world peace
and security, especially when the world is in turmoil.
We are grateful for and welcome the remarks made
by Secretary-General Guterres and by Mr. Zlauvinen,
President of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. We and many others here today share their
concern that peace and security are under threat and
that we will face a bleak future if those threats are not
properly recognized and addressed.
Dialogue and cooperation represent a common
and strong aspiration for people around the world.
We believe that such a noble aspiration is not built in
a void but rather, first and foremost, on the basis of
the norms and laws that we have agreed on together
since the establishment of our Organization. Today the
world faces many serious challenges and a multitude of
threats in a shifting geopolitical environment. In many
countries, peace and security, stability and progress
and rights and freedoms are not part of citizens’
realities. Seizures of power through force, terrorism,
cyber attacks, climate change, transborder crime and
poverty continue to fuel violent and deadly conflicts
in many parts of the world. But it is the erosion of the
fundamental norms established with the creation of the
United Nations that constitutes a fundamental threat to
world peace and security today.
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations
speaks for itself. It prohibits the use or threat of use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. Yet there are those who still
defy it openly, blatantly, repeatedly and unforgivingly.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is in flagrant violation of
that obligation and everything we have invested over
decades. Its indefensible assault on a peaceful neighbour
has undermined the international order, which is rooted
in rules and respect. This war of choice therefore poses
some urgent questions for us all. Do rules matter? Does
sovereignty have any meaning? Do we want a rulesbased international order, or do we want chaos and
turmoil? What remains of dialogue and cooperation in
the face of an unprovoked invasion?
Our answers to those questions will define our
future and the future of multilateralism with the
United Nations at its core. Our common response will
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

determine whether we stand by international law or
yield to big Powers and their imperial appetites vis-à-vis
their neighbours, whether we stand by and contemplate
as might dictates right and whether we accept the
arrogance of my-way-or-the-highway. Mistakes made
in the past give no one, no State, licence to do the same,
now or in the future. Let us therefore not forget that
what is happening in Ukraine today does not concern
that country and its citizens alone. It concerns the entire
European continent and all of us.
We also recognize and support an expanded
notion of security. That entails an evolved, continued
and irreversible shift from mere classic State security
to human security, where the individual — the
human person — takes centre stage. But despite the
undeniable progress achieved over more than seven
decades, respect for human rights around the world
is in retrograde. Acts of violence and discrimination
occur on a daily basis, and we are witnessing more and
more human rights violations and abuses in all corners
of the world. When human rights are violated, dialogue
and cooperation suffer, development and progress stall
and peace and security come under threat. But when
human rights are respected, societies become stronger
and more resilient and stable, and countries develop
faster, which benefits dialogue and cooperation at the
regional and global levels.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) remains the bedrock of the nuclear
disarmament regime, as was rightly recalled by the
President of the tenth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. The core objectives of the NPT in its three
important pillars — to stop the spread of nuclear
weapons, achieve universal nuclear disarmament
and uphold the right to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy — are key to preventing the spread of nuclear
weapons. Russia’s actions, including its decision to
place its nuclear deterrent forces on high alert in
February and the continued sabre-rattling of a nuclear
threat from various voices and actors close to the
regime, go against cooperation, undermine trust and
threaten peace. In that regard, the occupation and
the militarization of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, which is being used by Russian forces as a
springboard to launch attacks, constitutes an imminent
threat, defying all International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards and safety protocols. We reiterate our call
on Russia to withdraw its military forces and for the

S/PV.9112

immediate establishment of a secure perimeter around
the power plant.
With a multilateral global order that is shaken to
the core, it is high time that we stopped sleepwalking
and brought dialogue and cooperation to the heart of
our collective action. We must come together and take
wise decisions for the benefit of us all. The pandemic
has tested our resilience, climate change threatens our
very survival and inaction will only put all of us right
up against the wall. As the Secretary-General reminded
us here today, the proposals in Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) represent a road map for reaffirming
multilateralism and restoring respect for rules and joint
efforts for development, with a United Nations fit for
future challenges and crises at the heart of our common
action. We strongly support the New Agenda for
Peace, with its heightened focus on reinforcing human
rights and freedoms and international law through a
comprehensive and integrated approach to peace and
security, including by addressing challenges related to
climate change. We will be able to do better and achieve
more by investing in prevention rather than always
addressing symptoms, and dialogue and cooperation
are crucial to that.
Challenges, crises and disputes between States,
whether at the regional or international level, will
not disappear. They have been and will be a part of
international life. But what can and should change
is the way we deal with them. If we opt for open,
frank and genuine dialogue while upholding the core
norms agreed by all, we can invest in fair solutions
and contribute to a peaceful, secure, and prosperous
world. Through dialogue, States build trust, and
through cooperation, they share mutually beneficial
experiences. We always stand stronger together than
alone. It is only through dialogue, cooperation and joint
efforts that we can recognize and act on the common
aspiration of all human beings to live a dignified life
that is free from fear, want and repression.
Let me conclude by stating what we have learned
from our very own past. Peace and security do not
come from an imposed vision, but rather from what
is achieved freely and jointly by acting together, as
friends, good neighbours and fair partners. Only then
do dialogue and cooperation acquire their true meaning
with shared benefits.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico thanks China for taking the initiative

22-4680021/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

to convene this meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the President of the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons for enriching
this debate with their briefings and reflections.
In a context where emerging challenges such as
climate change, pandemics and the food crisis are
exacerbating traditional security issues, it is clear that
unilateral approaches are not conducive to solving
problems, unlike multilateral cooperation. As a country
committed to effective multilateralism, Mexico has
always promoted dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
disputes in order to address conflicts early and prevent
their escalation. As a member of the Security Council
and in particular during our presidency in November
2021, my country has taken on the task of highlighting
the important role of preventive diplomacy. We cannot
simply manage conflicts; preventive diplomacy and
recourse to means for the peaceful settlement of
disputes are key to maintaining peace. In order to
conduct genuine and effective diplomacy, the United
Nations must strengthen coordination between its main
organs. Collaboration among all United Nations organs,
agencies, programmes and funds, including, of course,
the International Court of Justice and the Peacebuilding
Commission, is essential. However, the wide range of
resources and tools at the disposal of the United Nations
system has not been reflected in the results we have
seen in recent years.
Nuclear weapons continue to represent the worst
threat to the very survival of humankind. The so-called
deterrence doctrine is in itself a threat of the potential
use of nuclear weapons. The threat of the use of force
is prohibited by the Charter of the United Nations, so
we cannot normalize any threat, express or veiled, of
the use of nuclear weapons concealed by the doctrine
of deterrence.
The tenth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which is currently taking place, could be
an opportunity to make progress towards the goal of
achieving a world free of nuclear weapons. However,
we are deeply concerned about the slow progress and
above all the lack of political will — particularly
on the part of the nuclear-weapon States — to reach
agreements to achieve that goal. Nevertheless, there is
still time to reverse that trend, and in that context we
would like to point to the 1996 advisory opinion of the
22/25

22/08/2022

International Court of Justice with regard to article VI
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which states that
“[t]here exists an obligation to pursue in
good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under strict and effective international control.”
(A/51/218, annex, para. 105)
Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General’s view
that a more secure and peaceful world must be based
on international law, cooperation and solidarity, not the
incessant accumulation and modernization of arsenals.
That was precisely what led the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean to establish the first nuclearweapon-free zone in a densely populated area through
the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which led more recently to the
conclusion and entry into force of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. We would like to see
that same spirit of cooperation reflected in the talks to
return to full compliance with the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and thereby resolve the outstanding
issues on Iran’s nuclear programme.
Similarly, security on the Korean peninsula
remains a source of considerable concern. In recent
months, the Council has addressed the threat posed by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launch
of ballistic missiles. In the light of the paralysis in the
Council caused by a double veto, the General Assembly
debated the issue (see A/76/PV.77). It is clear that
we must resume a dialogue if we are to achieve the
complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
call on the States with considerable responsibility for
the issue to spare no effort in returning to a path of
dialogue and cooperation.
Mexico has also been unequivocal in its call for an
end to the war in Ukraine. The population has paid a
huge price as a result of the military intervention. We
again call for a cessation of hostilities and echo the
call of the Secretary-General for an immediate end to
military activities around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant and for parties not to target the plant or
its surroundings, which is a violation of international
humanitarian law. We encourage an agreement that
will enable the demilitarization of the zone so that
International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors can
conduct the necessary technical inspections and prevent
an accident with incalculable consequences.
The deadlock that we are experiencing on certain
issues is undermining the legitimacy of the collective
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

security mechanisms we have built. It also leads to
greater mistrust regarding the validity and effectiveness
of multilateralism. That perception will not change
unless we can demonstrate through action by the
international community, in particular the Council, that
we can find solutions to our common problems. It is
clear that the Council has frequently failed to fulfil its
mandate and has been thwarted by the will of some of its
permanent members. Together with France, Mexico has
promoted an initiative to refrain from using the veto in
cases of mass atrocities. Endorsing that initiative would
be a clear-cut action in favour of common security. We
encourage States that have not yet done so, particularly
the permanent members of the Council, to join that
initiative, which already has the support of 106 States.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I too thank Secretary-General Guterres and
Ambassador Zlauvinen for their briefings, which
convey fully their alertness to potential crises. They also
shared with us many considerations and suggestions
that will provide the Council with much valuable
inspiration for the next stage of its work. The members
of the Council discussed their respective views on the
theme of today’s meeting in depth. While our positions
may not be identical, we still have a broad consensus on
fundamental issues. We should translate that consensus
into common action, leverage the role that the Council
should play and do a better job of performing our duties.

S/PV.9112

put up a security fence on another’s doorstep. Security
is indivisible. That is the common-sense concept of
our time and the starting point for achieving shared
security. If anyone acts contrary to that, any security
effort, however mighty, will ultimately send things
in the opposite direction and become trapped in a
vicious circle.
Clearly, thanks to their various historical and
cultural backgrounds and stages of development,
countries are bound to have different views on security
issues and conflicts of interests. In dealing with such
differences and conflicting interests, what we should
do is find the highest common denominator through
dialogue and cooperation and settle disputes by peaceful
means. That is the only way to achieve common security.
While at times that path may take longer to reach the
goal, it is the right direction. Practices such as clinging
to a Cold War mentality and practicing the zero-sum
games of unilateralism, bloc confrontation and power
politics will not only make it difficult to guarantee one’s
own long-term security but will ultimately result in
escalating crises, to the detriment of common security.
In that regard, the problems triggered by several rounds
of NATO’s expansion to the East and the resultant
lessons are indeed profound.

The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
sets out the goal of the Organization — saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
has brought untold sorrow to mankind. Some 76 years
on, we still have a long way to go before we attain the goal
of common security. The baton of time has been passed
to us. We should show our historical responsibility and
make our contributions to common security. In that
regard, I would like to share a few points.

China has consistently adhered to the concept of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. President Xi Jinping has put forward the Global
Security Initiative, which is precisely the direction
we should take, along with China’s plan to promote
common security in view of the current challenges in
international security. The Initiative is open to all. We
are willing to work with the international community
and to use sincere, pragmatic dialogue and cooperation
to implement the Initiative with practical actions
in order to build together a balanced, effective and
sustainable international security architecture as part
of our contribution to saving succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.

First, we should firmly establish a security concept
that meets the needs of the times. That is a prerequisite
for realizing common security. It must be recognized
that in the era of globalization, all of us in the world
face the same security issues and threats. No one lives
in a vacuum and no country enjoys absolute security.
In realizing its own security, no country can ignore
the legitimate security concerns of other countries,
build its own security at the expense of another’s or

Secondly, we should earnestly respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
which are the foundations of common security. The
important principle of respect for national sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as set out in the Charter of
the United Nations, is a bedrock of contemporary
international law and international relations. If that
principle is ignored and abandoned, the whole system
of international law will be shaken to its core. The

22-4680023/25

S/PV.9112

Maintenance of international peace and security

world will return to the law of the jungle and common
security will be out of the question.
For that reason, we must take a stand. That means
consistently respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries, the development path and
social systems chosen by their peoples and their efforts
to safeguard the unity of their States and their national
solidarity. That is the golden rule of State-to-State
interactions. It is also the foundation for achieving
common security. Since it is a golden rule, it should be
universally applied and double standards should not be
adopted, let alone saying one thing while doing another
or reneging on one’s promises out of self-interest.
We already have many lessons in that regard. The
experiences in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq and other places
serve as a permanent warning to us that interfering in
other countries’ internal affairs under the banner of
counter-terrorism, democracy and human rights not
only results in huge losses, harm and suffering for the
countries concerned, but it also desecrates the shared
values of humankind, such as democracy, human
rights and freedom, and undermines efforts to achieve
common security, instead of helping them. China
always respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of other countries, upholds international fairness and
justice and supports the efforts of the international
community to achieve common security. At the same
time, we will take every measure necessary to firmly
safeguard our own sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Thirdly, we should strive to create a stable strategic
security environment, which is the cornerstone for
maintaining common security. Driven by the mentality
of so-called strategic competition among the great
Powers, the global strategic security environment
has continued to deteriorate. The international
non-proliferation regime, embodied by the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is facing the
most severe challenge since the end of the Cold War.
We echo the Secretary-General’s repeated calls that the
only way to deal with the nuclear threat is through the
elimination of nuclear weapons. The countries with the
largest nuclear arsenals should fulfil their special and
primary responsibilities by making further substantial
and substantive cuts to their nuclear arsenals in a
verifiable, irreversible and legally binding manner. That
will create the conditions necessary for other nuclearweapon States to join the nuclear disarmament process.
In January, the leaders of the five nuclear-weapon
States issued a joint statement, which stresses that a
24/25

22/08/2022

nuclear war cannot be won and should not be fought
and reiterates that they will not aim their nuclear
weapons at one another or any other country. That
solemn commitment is of profound importance in the
current situation. It will help strengthen mutual trust
among the major Powers, prevent a nuclear war and
avoid an arms race that would plunge the world into
darker catastrophes.
Since the very first day that it became a nuclearweapon State, China has advocated for the complete
prohibition and destruction of nuclear weapons, while
always strictly adhering to the policy of not being the
first to use nuclear weapons at any time or under any
circumstances. We have also unconditionally committed
to the non-use of or threat of use of nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon States and nuclearweapon-free zones. China is the only country among
the five nuclear-weapons States that has made such a
commitment. We urge other nuclear-weapons States
to adopt the same policy in order to jointly safeguard
global strategic stability and effectively reduce the risk
of nuclear war.
Fourthly, the United Nations is the most important
platform for maintaining common security. We should
support the United Nations in continuing its central role.
An effective global security governance system is the
sole norm for achieving common security. The Security
Council is at the core of the international collective
security mechanism and the most authoritative
and legitimate body of the multilateral security
system. It plays an irreplaceable role in safeguarding
common security.
We should uphold true multilateralism and
support an effective role for the United Nations and
the Security Council in proactively responding to the
needs of the times and the expectations of all parties.
Council members should promote mutual trust, reduce
confrontation, strengthen unity and cooperation and
safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the Security
Council. We should make greater efforts at promoting
the political settlement of disputes and create synergies
with the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General to
better meet the current challenges and safeguard our
common security.
We must increase our contribution in the area
of development, build a global partnership for
development, promote security with development,
ensure development with security and seek shared
22-46800

22/08/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

development and security. We must remain firmly
committed to equity and justice by enabling developing
countries, which make up the overwhelming majority
of the United Nations membership, in particular the
African countries, to enjoy equal rights and play a
greater role.
Secretary-General Guterres is formulating his New
Agenda for Peace. His considerations about that work,
on which he briefed us earlier, are well targeted and
provide important and extremely meaningful guidance
for the international community to effectively control
security risks and improve security governance.
China expects the New Agenda for Peace to inject
new impetus into efforts to achieve common security
by capturing the most important concerns of Member

S/PV.9112

States, reflecting our common aspirations and focusing
on shaping our common future.
China stands ready to work with all other countries
in using the United Nations as the core platform to
coordinate security in traditional and non-traditional
areas, jointly respond to regional disputes and global
issues, such as terrorism, climate change, cybersecurity
and biosecurity and, by joining hands in cooperation,
build our planet into a safer, better and more
peaceful world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

22-4680025/25
