V.

Resolutlons adopted on the reports of the Second Commlttee

costs of transport and distribution of the assistance to and
within the affected country;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to intensify their efforts
to mobilize additional voluntary resources to meet the
needs arising from disaster and emergency situations;
9. Appeals to Governments to make urgent voluntary
contributions, directly or channelled through the Trust
Fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator, to enable the Office to cover contingency expenses in connection with disaster relief operations;
1O. Recommends that, as the Co-ordinator phases out
bis responsibility for disaster relief co-ordination in a
given country, he should contribute to ensuring the necessary transition to the rehabilitation and reconstruction
phase by passing on relevant data to competent organs and
agencies of the United Nations system;
11. Emphasizes the essential need for the work of the
Office of the Co-ordinator to be placed and kept on a
sound financia! basis, and calls upon the international
community to respond positively and expeditiously to the
appeal of the Secretary-General for contributions to the
Trust Fund to meet the needs arising from natural disasters and other disaster situations;
12. Welcomes the decision ofthe Secretary-General by
which a working group was established to review the
emergency response of the United Nations system in relation to the emergency situation in Africa;
13. Stresses, in this regard, the need to take into account the experience gained by the United Nations in responding to the emergency situation in Africa and other
disaster situations, in strengthening the functioning and
capacity of the United Nations in the area of emergency
assistance;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the implementation ofthe present resolution, including
a comprehensive review and assessment of the existing
mechanisms and arrangements within the system for
disaster and emergency assistance and co-ordination, to
the General Assembly at its forty-second session, through
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1987.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/202.

Strengthened international economic cooperation aimed at resolving externa! debt
problems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 40/474 of 20June 1986, and the
questions listed therein,67
Recalling Trade and Development Board resolutions
165 (S-IX) of 11 March 197868 and 222 (XXI) of 27 September 1980, 69
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "International debt situation in mid-1986", 70

67 Ojjicial Records ofthe General Assembly. Fortieth Se.ssion. A1111exes.
agenda item 84. documents A/40/989/ Add.14. paras. 7. 11 and 12, and
A/40/989/ Add.3, para. 66.
68 /bid., Tlúrty-third Se.,sion. Supplcment No. /5 (A/33/15), vol.[,
part two, annex l.
69 //,id .. 71,irry-fifih Sl'\sion. Supplemcnt No. 15 (A/35/15), vol. 11,
annex l.
70 A/41/643.

153

Taking note of the statements made by Member States
under this agenda ítem, particularly in the meetings held
in the plenary and the Second Committee of the General
Assembly during its fortieth and forty-first sessions, 71
Recognizing that debt servicing problems constitute a
severe and continuing burden which restricts the economic and social development of many developing countries,
1. Agrees on the following elements and invites ali
those involved to take them into account in addressing the
problems of externa! indebtedness of developing countries,
with a view to reaching equitable, durable and mutually
agreed solutions, taking into account the particular circumstances of each country:
(a) Externa! indebtedness, viewed in an overall perspective, should be tackled within the framework of a
strengthened and improved strategy of co-operation of the
intemational community for sustained world economic
growth and development, particularly for developing
countries;
(b) Recognizing the competence of the multilateral financia! institutions, as well as that of the relevant specialized agencies, organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system within their respective mandates,
the interrelated issues of debt, money, finance, resource
flows, trade, commodities and development should be addressed in the context of their close interrelationship;
(e) In a spirit of common commitment and mutual cooperation, stronger growth and development in developing countries should be encouraged, involving the participation of ali countries concemed, particularly creditor
developed countries and debtor developing countries,
multilateral financia! institutions and international private
banks, in addressing the debt problems of developing
countries;
(d) A lasting solution to the debt problem also requires
simultaneous and complementary actions in the areas of
economic policy that are mutually supportive, and includes:
(i) Effective national adjustment processes and structural changes, pursued within national development
priorities and objectives, which should be growthoriented; due regard should be paid to the economic,
social and development needs of each country in the
application of conditionality;
(ii) Supportive policies that encompass, inter afia, the
dismantling of protectionism and expansion of intemational trade, increased financia) flows, lending
programmes by the international financial institutions and commercial banks in support of growthoriented measures, lower real interest rates, and improvements in commodity markets;
(iii) Coherent and co-ordinated policies on the part of
industrialized countries, including strengthened
multilateral surveillance, that promote a supportive
international economic environment conducive to
sustained and non-inflationary growth and adjustments addressing the imbalances in the world
economy, including the reduction of trade imbalances and the promotion of greater foreign exchange market stability;
71 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session.
Ple,wry Meetings, 119th and 133rd meetings; ibid., Second Committee,
31st, 41st, 45th and 52nd to 56th meetings; ibid., Second Committe<'.
Sessional Fascicle. corrigendum: ibid., Forty-first Session. Plcnary
Meeting.,, 100th meeting; and ibid., Second Committee, 10th to 13th,
15th, 16th and 36th meeting, and corrigendum.

154

General Auembly-Forty-ftrst Sesslon

(e) There is an important relationship between a country's mobilization and utilization of its resources, net inftow of development finance and capital and foreign exchange export earnings, and the possibility for the
servicing of its external debt; in this context, due account
should be taken of the investment and import requirements and the fundamental economic and social needs of a
country's population;
(j) Debt-restructuring arrangements and innovative
development-oriented financial agreements should continue to be worked out, wherever appropriate, on terms
and conditions that take into account the internal and externa} factors atfecting the economy of the country concerned;
(g) Special attention should be given to the implementation of specific relief measures in favour of the least developed countries such as, ínter alia, those contained in
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s
for the Least Developed Countries64 and Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX);
(h) Recognizes, in addition to the above elements, that
in dealing with Africa's extemal indebtedness, the magni-

tude and the servicing of its debt constitute a severe and
continuing burden which restricts its economic recovery
and long-term development; the international community,
particularly the donor developed countries, reaffirms its
agreement to adopt concrete measures, and reaffirms the
importance of increasing official development assistance
to Africa in support of adjustment etforts for development
of African countries, in accordance with the provisions of
the United Nations Programme of Action for African
Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;3°
2. Invites ali those involved to take into account, as appropriate, the above in addressing the problems of external indebtedness of sorne other countries with serious
debt-servicing problems;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session an updated
version of bis report on the international debt situation
and the indicators related to it, under the same agenda
ítem, taking into account the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986
