United Nations

A/RES/67/130

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 60

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2012
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/67/431)]

67/130. Question of New Caledonia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2012 relating to New
Caledonia, 1
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New
Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the
population, to promote political, economic and social development in the Territory,
including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with respect
to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful
progress to self-determination,
Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social
development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved in New
Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New Caledonia,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous
peoples on the situation of Kanak people in New Caledonia, submitted to the Human
Rights Council at its eighteenth session, held from 12 to 30 September and on
21 October 2011, 2 following his visit to the Territory in February 2011,
_______________
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 23 and corrigendum
(A/67/23 and Corr.1), chap. VIII.
2
A/HRC/18/35/Add.6, annex.

12-48640

*1248640*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/130

Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia
and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region,
Recalling, in this regard, the conclusions of the eighteenth Melanesian
Spearhead Group Leaders Summit, held in Suva on 31 March 2011, including the
recommendations for the annual monitoring and assessment of the Nouméa Accord, 3
Welcoming the exchange of letters between the Department of Political Affairs
of the Secretariat and the secretariat of the Melanesian Spearhead Group on the
sharing of information on New Caledonia,
Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the
1.
peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all
options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all sectors of the
population, according to the letter and the spirit of the Nouméa Accord,3 which is
based on the principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how
to control their destiny;
Welcomes the significant developments that have taken place in New
2.
Caledonia since the signing of the Nouméa Accord on 5 May 1998 by the
representatives of New Caledonia and the Government of France;
Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New
3.
Caledonia, to maintain, within the framework of the Nouméa Accord, their dialogue
in a spirit of harmony, and in this context welcomes again the unanimous agreement,
reached in Paris on 8 December 2008, on the transfer of powers to New Caledonia
in 2009;
Notes that during the meeting on 8 July 2011 of the follow-up committee
4.
overseeing the progress of the Nouméa Accord, held in the presence of the
signatories, members of Parliament, Presidents of the provinces and the President of
the Customary Senate, the parties acknowledged the progress in the transfer of
powers, particularly those related to civil and commercial law and civil status
regulations and the civil security sector, which will take effect in 2013 and 2014;
Also notes that, consequent to the decision taken by the follow-up
5.
committee on 24 June 2010, the steering committee on the institutional future of
New Caledonia was established and mandated to prepare the basic issues to be
decided by referendum, namely, the transfer of sovereign powers, access to full
international status and the organization of citizenship by nationality;
Welcomes, in that regard, the five agreements signed in October 2011 by
6.
the French authorities and the Government of New Caledonia to organize the
transfer of secondary education, with effect on 1 January 2012;
Recalls the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord aimed at taking
7.
more broadly into account the Kanak identity in the political and social organization
of New Caledonia, and notes that, in accordance with the Nouméa Accord, the new
anthem is used together with the French anthem and that, in 2010, the follow-up
committee recommended that the French flag and the Kanak flag should fly together
in New Caledonia;
Acknowledges those provisions of the Nouméa Accord relating to control
8.
of immigration and protection of local employment, and notes that unemployment

_______________
3

2

A/AC.109/2114, annex.

A/RES/67/130

remains high among Kanaks and that recruitment of foreign mine workers
continues;
9.
Notes the concerns expressed by a group of indigenous people in New
Caledonia regarding their underrepresentation in the governmental and social
structures of the Territory;
10. Also notes the concerns expressed by representatives of indigenous
people regarding incessant migratory flows and the impact of mining on the
environment;
11. Takes note of the observations and recommendations contained in the
report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples,2 made in the
light of relevant international standards, to assist with ongoing efforts to advance
the rights of the Kanak people in the context of the implementation of the Nouméa
Accord and the United Nations-supported decolonization process;
12. Also takes note of the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the
effect that New Caledonia may become a member or associate member of certain
international organizations, such as international organizations in the Pacific region,
the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the International Labour Organization, according to their
regulations;
13. Notes the agreement between the signatories to the Nouméa Accord that
the progress made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of
the United Nations;
14. Recalls the fact that the administering Power invited to New Caledonia,
at the time the new institutions were established, a mission of information which
comprised representatives of countries of the Pacific region;
15. Notes the continuing strengthening of ties between New Caledonia and
both the European Union and the European Development Fund in such areas as
economic and trade cooperation, the environment, climate change and financial
services;
16. Welcomes the actions taken by the administering Power to continue to
transmit to the Secretary-General information as required under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations;
17. Also welcomes all measures taken to strengthen and diversify the New
Caledonian economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures in
accordance with the spirit of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords;
18. Further welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the Matignon
and Nouméa Accords to greater progress in housing, employment, training,
education and health care in New Caledonia;
19. Notes the financial assistance rendered by the Government of France to
the Territory in areas such as health, education, payment of public-service salaries
and funding development schemes;
20. Also notes the visit to New Caledonia from 14 to 18 November 2011 of
the Melanesian Spearhead Group technical mission composed of senior officials,
pursuant to the recommendations of the Melanesian Spearhead Group Leaders
Summit of 31 March 2011 for the annual monitoring and assessment of the Nouméa
Accord, and the second visit, conducted from 13 to 18 August 2012, by the
Melanesian Spearhead Group high-level ministerial mission;
3

A/RES/67/130

21. Welcomes the continuous participation of the Kanaks through the Front
de libération nationale kanak socialiste at all the Melanesian Spearhead Group
Leaders Summit meetings since it became a full member of the Melanesian
Spearhead Group in 1990;
22. Acknowledges the contribution of the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre
to the protection of the indigenous Kanak culture of New Caledonia;
23. Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment
of New Caledonia, including the “Zonéco” operation designed to map and evaluate
marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia;
24. Welcomes the cooperation among Australia, France and New Zealand in
terms of surveillance of fishing zones, in accordance with the wishes expressed by
France during successive France-Oceania Summits;
25. Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples of
the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French and territorial
authorities to facilitate the further development of those links, including the
convention, signed on 26 January 2012, relating to the hosting of New Caledonian
delegates in the French diplomatic and consular missions in the Pacific region and
the easing of short-stay visa procedures for countries of the South Pacific;
26. Welcomes the participation of New Caledonia at the forty-second meeting
of the leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum, held in Auckland, New Zealand, on
7 and 8 September 2011, as an associate member, and notes the continuing desire of
the Territory to accede to full membership in the Forum;
27. Recalls the continuing high-level visits to New Caledonia by delegations
from countries of the Pacific region and high-level visits by delegations from New
Caledonia to countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum;
28. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of other States and Territories in the
region towards New Caledonia, its economic and political aspirations and its
increasing participation in regional and international affairs;
29. Also welcomes the organization by New Caledonia of the Pacific Games
from 27 August to 10 September 2011, in which 22 countries of the Pacific region
took part, thereby fostering regional integration;
30. Further welcomes the hosting of the fourth Melanesian Spearhead Group
Melanesian Arts Festival, from 12 to 24 September 2010, organized by the Front de
libération nationale kanak socialiste, the Kanak communities and New Caledonia;
31. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New
Caledonia as a result of the signing of the Nouméa Accord;
32. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of the
question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory of New Caledonia and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.
59th plenary meeting
18 December 2012

4
