A /76/PV.99

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

99th plenary meeting

Friday, 2 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gastorn
(Tanzania), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 132
Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a
zero-tolerance policy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/702)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.78)
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.78.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure, at the outset, to thank the President of
the General Assembly for having convened today’s
important meeting.
It is my honour to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.78, entitled “Sexual exploitation and abuse:
implementing a zero-tolerance policy”, which contains
technical amendments submitted under the silence
procedure with a view to adoption by consensus.
Egypt has sought to ensure that the draft resolution
be submitted today as part of our commitment to
supporting United Nations efforts to promote a zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. That
is in line with the Egyptian initiative to consolidate
this item on the General Assembly’s agenda, beginning
with the adoption of resolution 71/278 and continuing

with subsequent resolutions under this item, the latest
of which was resolution 75/321. Allow me to highlight
the most significant aspects of the draft resolution.
First, it adds to the momentum of previous resolutions
under this item adopted in recent years. It promotes
efforts to prevent and address sexual exploitation and
abuse from a comprehensive perspective that extends to
the entire United Nations system, both at Headquarters
and in the field, including agencies, funds, programmes,
peacekeeping missions and special political missions,
as well as non-United Nations forces authorized by the
Security Council.
Secondly, it adopts a balanced approach that
strongly condemns such abhorrent acts, regardless of
the perpetrators. It calls for taking urgent measures to
ensure justice and underscores the importance of the
role of the United Nations, especially peacekeeping
forces, which make great sacrifices to establish peace
and stability throughout the world.
Thirdly, it places sexual victims at the heart of
United Nations efforts and attention. Urgent support
and protection must be provided for victims, while
perpetrators of such acts must be held accountable.
It also calls on the Secretary-General to develop a
mechanism to monitor and follow up the support
provided to victims in the entire Organization.
Fourthly, comprehensive accountability must
be ensured at all levels, including at the level of the
leadership on the ground and at Headquarters, in order
to counter sexual abuse and exploitation.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58430 (E)

*2258430*

A/76/PV.99

Fifthly, it gives priority to prevention efforts to
counter such heinous acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse and calls for intensified cooperation between
Member States and the United Nations in the exchange
of expertise and best practices.
Sixthly and finally, it recognizes the repercussions
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has had
an impact on the capacity of the Organization to
conduct investigations. It calls on both the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to ensure synergy between
implemented policies and practices. It also calls on
the Secretary-General to include in his next report
information on the impact of the pandemic on the
efforts of the Organization in that regard.
My country’s delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/76/702), which
contains important information about the efforts
undertaken by the Secretariat to establish a zerotolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse
throughout the entire United Nations system. The report
also contains data on allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse at each of the United Nations missions
and special political missions, as well as the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in addition
to the implementing partners and non-United Nations
international troops. The data constitute indicators that
should be well understood so as to avoid a selective
perspective that focuses on limited categories and
ignores others.
Based on its responsibility as one of the major
troop-and police-contributing countries in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and given its
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy on acts
of sexual exploitation and abuse, Egypt has joined
the Secretary-General’s initiative for leaders and
voluntarily pledged to combat sexual exploitation and
abuse. Egypt has also adopted a number of national
protection measures designed to improve the selection
and training of Egyptian troops participating in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
Egypt’s role does not stop there. We also participate
actively in capacity-building in Africa and the Arab
region, through the training courses organized by the
Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding, in addition to
developing relevant training material. According to
United Nations reports, Egypt’s efforts are among the
2/27

02/09/2022

best efforts of Member States in the field of protection
and addressing crimes of sexual exploitation and abuse.
We urgently need both national and international
efforts to eliminate the scourge of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We are sure the Assembly would agree
with us about the importance of continuing to work
on implementing the provisions of the draft resolution
that we are about to adopt and of reiterating our
collective commitment to continuing the dialogue and
strengthening efforts to address sexual exploitation and
abuse. Comprehensive support should be provided to
the victims of such acts.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this important meeting and the Member States that
supported and participated in sponsoring the draft
resolution. I also call on the States that have not yet
done so to sponsor draft resolution A/76/L.78 in support
of its important principles and values.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.78,
entitled “United Nations action on sexual exploitation
and abuse”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/76/L.78
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/76/L.78: Argentina, Bangladesh, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Chile, Costa Rica, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia, Israel,
Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand,
the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.78?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/303).

A/76/L.78

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 132?
It was so decided.
22-58430

02/09/2022

Agenda item 133
International cooperation on access to justice for
survivors of sexual violence
Draft resolution (A/76/L.80)
Draft amendments (A/76/L.81, A/76/L.82,
A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. David Francis, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone,
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.80.
Mr. Francis (Sierra Leone): I should like to
commend and congratulate the President on his
stewardship of the General Assembly at its seventysixth session, during which a lot was achieved, including
today’s important consideration of agenda item 133.
At the general debate last September (see A/76/
PV.6), the President of the Republic of Sierra Leone,
His Excellency Mr. Julius Maada Bio, informed his
fellow Heads of State and Government and the global
community, particularly the survivors of sexual
violence, of his directive to the Permanent Mission of
Sierra Leone to the United Nations to sponsor a standalone resolution in the General Assembly on access to
justice for the survivors of sexual violence. President
Maada Bio also called for global solidarity on access to
justice and remedies for survivors of sexual violence.
On that note, I am pleased and honoured t­ o introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.80, entitled, “International
cooperation for access to justice, remedies and
assistance for survivors of sexual violence”, on behalf
of the main sponsors, Sierra Leone and Japan.
Moreover, we thank the 83 Member States that
have so far co-sponsored the draft resolution, namely,
Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana, Honduras,
Iceland, Israel, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia,

A/76/PV.99

New Zealand, Panama, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, San Marino, South Africa,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye, the United
Kingdom, the United States of America and my own
country, Sierra Leone.
The World Health Organization estimates that
35 per cent of women worldwide — about 1.3 billion
of the world’s population — are survivors of sexual
violence. Given the data and the absence of international
cooperation, sexual violence constitutes a grave threat
to justice and the fundamental rights of women, men
and children throughout the world. In every corner of
the globe, sexual assault survivors encounter inadequate
support and resources, which inhibits survivors’ ability
to hold perpetrators accountable and access empowering
health, legal and economic remedies.
Moreover, because of the shame and stigma
experienced after an assault, more than one third of
women affected by sexual violence have contemplated
suicide. To make matters worse, we know that sexual
violence increased dramatically during the global
coronavirus disease pandemic.
With regard to Sierra Leone’s domestic context,
President Julius Maada Bio has been at the forefront
of tackling this issue. In 2019, he declared a national
emergency against rape. His Government also pursued
the reform of the national law on sexual violence, and
the judiciary established a special court to ensure
criminal accountability, among other justice remedies.
Our demonstrable leadership in combating rape and
other forms of sexual violence is informed by our
own recent history and recognition of the devastating
impact that those horrendous acts have on the lives and
livelihoods of survivors.
We have acknowledged our limitations and
challenges in addressing the scourge those situations
create and are therefore convinced of the importance
of international cooperation in order to ensure access
to justice for survivors of sexual violence. We therefore
welcome the collaboration with the Government of
Japan in pioneering and facilitating the process that led
to the submission of draft resolution A/76/L.80 for the
General Assembly’s consideration.
In noting the importance of the issue of access
to justice for survivors of sexual violence, several
Member States have recognized the significance of a
stand-alone resolution to extend access to justice and
remedies to all survivors of sexual violence. It is our

22-584303/27

A/76/PV.99

collective belief that sexual violence must be treated
and addressed as an issue on its own, for appropriate
consideration and action.
While previous efforts in the Security Council
have addressed the crucial issue of rape as a weapon
of war, most incidents of rape occur outside of war
and should therefore be addressed separately. Draft
resolution A/76/L.80 fills that critical gap. It calls for
international cooperation and for the General Assembly
to periodically consider it as a recurring resolution in
order to ensure that the needs of survivors throughout
the world remain a priority for our Organization.
Regarding the process, I am pleased to note that as
co-facilitators, Sierra Leone and Japan, led open and
transparent negotiations over the course of five months,
in which all delegations were able to express their
views. Substantively, the draft resolution contains 23
preambular paragraphs and eight operative paragraphs.
The final text reflects a fine balance between the
different positions expressed and offers practical
guidance on how to improve the situations of victims
and survivors of sexual violence.
The concepts referred to in the draft resolution
are based on long-standing agreed language, on
which the States Members of the United Nations have
been able to find consensus on multiple occasions in
the past. Since the focus of the draft resolution is to
address the particular need for access to justice and
remedies, including support and care, for all survivors
of sexual violence and to provide the way forward
for international cooperation, the text reiterates the
principle of respect for national law and does not create
any new obligations for Member States.
The draft resolution recalls the need to ensure
access to sexual and reproductive health and
reproductive rights for victims and survivors of sexual
violence, in accordance with the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development and the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, as well as the outcome documents of their
review conferences.
Since those two instruments were adopted in 1994
and 1995, respectively, the references contained therein
have been regularly included in Assembly resolutions,
including in a number of African-led initiatives. For
instance, paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/76/L.80
is taken verbatim from paragraph 11 of resolution
73/148, entitled “Intensification of efforts to prevent
4/27

02/09/2022

and eliminate all forms of violence against women and
girls”, which was adopted by consensus.
Furthermore, the draft resolution’s use of terms
that refer, for example, to “sexual and gender-based
violence” instead of “violence against women and
girls” ensures that it covers all situations of violence,
including those targeting men and boys. The term
“sexual and gender-based violence” was appropriately
defined by the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and relevant General Assembly resolutions.
Since then, the Assembly has used that term
for decades, including in the following more recent
resolutions 76/146, on the girl child, 76/147, on the
rights of the child, 76/153, on the human rights to safe
drinking water and sanitation, 75/167, on child, early
and forced marriage, 76/14,1 on violence against women
migrant workers, and 73/148, on the intensification of
efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence
against women and girls: sexual harassment.
We also wish to note that the term “intimate partner
violence” is also long-standing agreed language,
as included in resolutions 75/284, on the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Ending Inequalities
and Getting on Track to End AIDS by 2030, 73/148, on
the intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls: sexual
harassment, and 70/176, on taking action against
gender-related killing of women and girls.
We sincerely believe that all States Members
of the United Nations share the common belief that
sexual violence is condemnable and that we must all
take effective action to address it and to provide access
through national legislation to timely and unimpeded
justice for the victims and survivors. The focus of draft
resolution A/76/L.80 is to increase cooperation in order
to eliminate sexual violence and set up the international
response to support victims and survivors.
In conclusion, allow me to again ask the General
Assembly to let this year be the year that we all give
survivors of sexual violence the remedies and action
they deserve. We as a global community must stand
up and address the scourge of sexual violence. Draft
resolution A/76/L.80 gives us the opportunity to take
that significant step by adopting its balanced text by
consensus. We are eternally grateful for the broad crossregional support that the draft resolution has received
so far. We would also like thank all delegations for their
very constructive engagement and active support.
22-58430

02/09/2022

We hope that all Member States will support our
efforts to have the draft resolution adopted by consensus.
We would especially like to extend our appreciation
and thanks to the Permanent Mission of Japan for its
leadership and hard work as a co-facilitator of this
process. Our sincere thanks also go to the Secretariat
for its technical support and the Rise Foundation for its
cooperation. At the United Nations, we all believe in
leaving no one behind. Let us therefore not leave anyone
behind, in particular the survivors of sexual violence.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Nigeria to introduce the draft
amendments contained in documents A/76/L.81 to
A/76/L.84.
Mr. Nze (Nigeria): I am honoured to introduce
the draft amendments to draft resolution A/76/L.80,
as contained in documents A/76/L.81 to A/76/L.84,
co-sponsored by Belarus, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Libya,
Mauritania, Nicaragua and my own country, Nigeria.
Draft amendment A/76/L.81 is a request to delete
the eighth preambular paragraph.
Draft amendment A/76/L.82 is a request to delete
the controversial and undefined term “intimate partner
violence” from the sixteenth preambular paragraph.
Draft amendment A/76/L.83 is a request to delete the
words “paying particular attention to women and girls
facing multiple intersecting forms of discrimination”
from subparagraph 2 (a).
Draft amendment A/76/L.84 is a request to delete
in the second part of the paragraph the words
“including through the development and
enforcement of policies and legal frameworks
and the strengthening of health systems that
make universally accessible and available quality,
comprehensive sexual and reproductive healthcare services, commodities, information and
education, including safe and effective methods of
modern contraception, emergency contraception,
prevention programmes for adolescent pregnancy,
maternal health care such as skilled birth
attendance and emergency obstetric care, which
will reduce obstetric fistula and other complications
of pregnancy and delivery, safe abortion where
such services are permitted by national law, and
prevention and treatment of reproductive tract
infections, sexually transmitted infections, HIV
and reproductive cancers, recognizing that human

A/76/PV.99

rights include the right to have control over and
decide freely and responsibly on matters related to
their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive
health, free from coercion, discrimination
and violence”.
Aside from the procedural concerns, draft resolution
A/76/L.80 continues to include highly problematic
language, including, in the eighth preambular
paragraph, the words “multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination”, which is not consensus language
and is a term on which multiple delegations at the
United Nations have outstanding reservations. It is a
controversial term open to ambiguous interpretations
that are not shared by all countries.
With regard to the sixteenth preambular paragraph,
the term “domestic violence” is a broad enough term.
The term “intimate partner violence” draws attention
to the sexual nature of a relationship; it is not essential
to include that term here, and drawing attention to the
sexual nature of a relationship can detract attention
away from the victim.
With regard to paragraph 6, it should reflect as
closely as possible the language of target 5.6 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, which frames sexual
and reproductive health as a matter of access to health
care and not as a human rights issue.
The second part of the paragraph contains a
reference to safe abortion. The notion of safe abortion
undermines the consensus reached at the International
Conference on Population and Development that
abortion is a political matter and not a human rights
issue. Paragraph 8.25 of the Conference’s outcome
document recognized that each country should decide
its abortion laws at the national level, without external
interference, and that countries should help women to
avoid abortion and provide mothers and their children
with health care and social supports. Including abortion
as a human right undermines that consensus and
creates the danger of women being pressured to abort
their babies.
The second part of the paragraph also contains
language about freedom in matters related to sexuality
that is taken out of context from the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. That language, as it appears
in the draft resolution, suggests a right to unfettered
sexual autonomy and is not used in the same way as
it is used in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, where it is clearly related to the rights of men

22-584305/27

A/76/PV.99

and women to freely marry and form a family, as well
as the right to decide freely and responsibly on the
number and spacing of their children.
I would like to underscore the importance of
draft resolution A/76/L.80, entitled “International
cooperation for access to justice, remedies and
assistance for survivors of sexual violence”, given
that most survivors of the violence suffer from trauma
and post-traumatic stress disorder and therefore need
psychosocial support and comprehensive health care.
It was in recognition of those facts that my delegation
welcomed the draft resolution in principle and was
a member of the core group initially, but we had to
withdraw when things became somewhat different.
We were disappointed by the co-facilitators who,
rather than conducting the negotiations in good faith,
displayed outright disregard for the concerns and
sensitivity of delegations. They were not transparent
at all and disregarded every effort to make it a
consensus document.
It is important to highlight and put on record that
the negotiations leading to the present draft resolution
were deeply flawed. Not a single paragraph of the text
was agreed by consensus. It does not address essential
elements, including the need for greater emphasis on
ending impunity, as well as for ensuring development
assistance, technical assistance and support and
comprehensive health care and psychosocial support.
We encourage the facilitators to be more open to
dialogue and compromise when they take up that issue
again in the future. When it comes to the critical issue
at hand, we believe that it is essential for the General
Assembly to adopt a principled, unified and objective
position — one that is devoid of non-agreed language,
political motivations and cultural sensitivities — given
the gravity of the matter we are discussing. We regret
that the main sponsors of the draft resolution insisted
on undermining an important draft resolution by
employing non-agreed and non-consensus language,
with no basis in international human rights law and in
an irrelevant context.
During
the
consultation
process,
many
Member States made straightforward requests
and submissions that would have enabled many
delegations to reach consensus on all paragraphs of
the draft resolution — requests to keep the language
in the draft resolution consensus-based and agreed
on — which were of course ignored. We had no choice
6/27

02/09/2022

but to propose the amendments I have described to
draft resolution A/76/L.80.
The amendments are born of a genuine attempt
to achieve consensus. Using a noble cause to adopt
contentious concepts is indeed unacceptable. Our
amendments aim to make draft resolution A/76/L.80
more balanced — not unbalanced as it is now —and
more consensual and representative of the wider
membership, not merely a group of States. We urge
all countries to vote in favour of the amendments in
order to restore balance and consensus to the draft
resolution and ensure that its objectives are achieved
and strengthened, rather than weakened.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Bourtembourg (European Union): I speak on
behalf of the 95 members of the cross-regional Group
of Friends for the Elimination of Violence against
Women and Girls, which was established in December
2020 to promote the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s call on gender-based violence and the
coronavirus disease pandemic and to support relevant
global initiatives aimed at eliminating violence against
women and girls, such as the Spotlight initiative.
Together we are committed to galvanizing efforts to
end all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. The
Group of Friends welcomes the introduction of the draft
resolution on international cooperation for access to
justice, remedies and assistance for survivors of sexual
violence (A/76/L.80), and we thank Sierra Leone and
Japan, as well as all survivors, for their leadership on
this initiative.
Sexual and gender-based violence — whether in
public or private spheres, online or offline — is a gross
violation and abuse of human rights. It has devastating
consequences for each survivor and for society as a whole.
Sexual and gender-based violence disproportionally
affects women and girls. Globally, one in three, or
35 per cent of women, experience physical and/or
sexual violence in their lifetime. In humanitarian or
crisis contexts, up to 70 per cent of women are affected.
Despite the high prevalence of sexual and genderbased violence, victims and survivors often do not
receive justice. Too often, perpetrators are granted
impunity for their crimes. That lack of accountability
fuels violence and further traumatizes victims
and survivors.
22-58430

02/09/2022

The Group of Friends underlines the need to
establish gender-responsive justice systems. That
implies reforming legal and justice systems in order
to guarantee safe, accessible and trauma-informed
complaint and reporting mechanisms for victims
and survivors in order to better equip institutions in
addressing sexual and gender-based violence, including
through dedicated training, and to ensure access to
essential services.
We further stress the importance of fulfilling
the commitments made by participating States at the
Generation Equality Forum, including its Action
Coalition on Gender-Based Violence.
Sexual and gender-based violence is a shadow
pandemic. It requires the full mobilization of the
international community. We strongly support the
recommendations included in the draft resolution,
and we are committed to working with all partners in
order to step up international cooperation on access to
justice for survivors of all forms of sexual and genderbased violence.
Mr. Riva Grela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay commends the work of the delegations of
Sierra Leone and Japan in the long negotiations that have
brought us to take action on draft resolution A/76/L.80,
on international cooperation for access to justice and
legal remedies and assistance for survivors of sexual
violence. We understand that the text presented by the
co-facilitators is the result of multiple compromises
reached among delegations to achieve a balanced text
that takes into account the priorities of all of us.
In that regard, we regret the presentation of
amendments that we believe divert the text from the
objective of achieving a resolution that effectively
condemns all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence, especially draft amendment A/76/L.82, which
deletes the reference to intimate partner violence.
Allow me to illustrate with three brief examples the
concerns of the Uruguayan delegation in that regard.
First, the World Health Organization, on behalf
of the United Nations Inter-agency Task Force on
Violence against Women, reported in 2021 that more
than 640 million women aged 15 and over have been
victims of intimate partner violence.
Secondly, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime also reported that during 2020 47,000 women
and girls worldwide were killed by intimate partners or

A/76/PV.99

other family members. That means that a woman or girl
is killed every 11 minutes.
Finally, this crisis is not even standing still; it is
getting worse. By way of example, a UN-Women report
at the end of 2020 provides evidence that various
countries have seen increases in domestic violence
cases reported to hotlines, women’s safe houses and
shelters and police. These are all linked to the isolation
resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. We may defeat COVID-19, but there will
still be floods, earthquakes or other situations that lead
to isolation, and women will continue to be victims of
this problem.
Those examples only go to show how my delegation
finds it difficult to understand why we cannot achieve
consensus in the simple declaration that we are “[g]
ravely concerned that domestic violence, including
intimate partner violence, remains the most prevalent
and least visible form of violence against women”.
We therefore call on all delegations gathered here
to support preambular paragraph 16 as presented by the
co-facilitators, as well as the remainder of the text.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me first convey our total condemnation of the
assassination attempt on Ms. Cristina Fernández de
Kirchner, Vice-President of Argentina. We express our
solidarity with her, the Government of Argentina and
its people. The way forward must always be the debate
of ideas and dialogue, never violence or weapons.
Chile thanks Sierra Leone and Japan for submitting
draft resolution A/76/L.80, which, for the first time
in the General Assembly, shows the importance of
international cooperation in guaranteeing access to
justice for the victims and survivors of sexual violence.
The draft resolution addresses an issue that, tragically,
is a recurrent problem that has long-term repercussions
on the lives of victims and survivors, as well as those
of their loved ones and families, with whom we stand
in solidarity.
Sexual and gender-based violence in all its different
forms and manifestations is still under-recognized
even today. In particular, that applies to intimate
partner violence, which is perhaps the most frequent
and least visible form of violence. In Latin America
alone, it is estimated that 29.8 per cent of women
who have ever had a partner have been physically or
sexually abused by them. Globally, one in three women,
around 736 million, have been subjected to physical or

22-584307/27

A/76/PV.99

sexual violence by a partner or sexual violence by a
non-partner — a figure that has remained virtually
unchanged over the past decade.
Chile therefore appreciates the inclusion of
preambular paragraph 16 as it has been presented on
this matter.
Faced with that dramatic picture, we reiterate our
commitment to successfully combat sexual and genderbased violence. That implies preventing, investigating,
prosecuting and holding accountable the perpetrators
of all forms of violence and eliminating impunity.
In addition, we must ensure the well-being of
victims and survivors, particularly those who experience
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination. That
must occur at the heart of our policies, for example,
by ensuring access to trauma-informed reporting
mechanisms and accessible essential services,
including sexual and reproductive health and other
types of support services, such as mental health and
psychosocial support, important elements contained in
this draft resolution.
In that regard, Chile has made significant progress
in its legal framework to ensure dignified treatment,
safeguarding the life, physical integrity and sexual
indemnity of the victims. This matter deserves the
highest degree of commitment and the application
of the highest human rights standards in order to
combat impunity and guarantee the well-being of the
most vulnerable people who have suffered that type
of violence. For that same reason, we must build on
and not undermine the commitments that have been
previously agreed upon, strengthening them in order
to benefit those who need them the most. That is why
Chile has decided to support draft resolution A/76/L.80.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States thanks Sierra Leone and Japan
for facilitating draft resolution A/76/L.80, on the
critically important topic of justice for survivors of
sexual violence, which we are pleased to co-sponsor.
We encourage all countries to adopt this historic draft
resolution by consensus and without any modifications.
We also want to thank the numerous civil society
advocates and survivors who helped to bring the draft
resolution to fruition today.
This is a historic moment for the General
Assembly, as it marks the first time that survivors
of sexual violence are recognized in a stand-alone
draft resolution. In 2016, President Obama signed the
8/27

02/09/2022

Survivors’ Bill of Rights Act, which demonstrated
America’s commitment to promoting accountability for
human rights abuses. The draft resolution is a reflection
of the global commitment to the issue. We know we
must do more to eliminate sexual violence across the
globe, but this landmark draft resolution takes us one
step closer to that goal.
We continue to support efforts to ensure that
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence have
access to survivor-centred justice. That includes
the meaningful representation of women in all their
diversity as criminal justice practitioners; the training
of law enforcement and justice sector personnel in
handling gender-based violence cases in a traumainformed manner; appropriate survivor and witness
protection and support; and access to health services,
including access to sexual and reproductive health
and rights.
In co-sponsoring the draft resolution, the United
States does not recognize any change to the current
state of conventional or customary international law.
The draft resolution does not create rights or obligations
under international law, and neither do we read it to
imply that States must join or implement obligations
under international instruments to which they are not
a party.
The United States strongly supports the use of
measures to prevent or protect individuals from acts
of violence committed by non-State actors. The United
States notes, however, that generally only States have
obligations under international human rights law, and
therefore the capacity to commit violations of human
rights. References in the draft resolution to human
rights obligations in connection with non-State actors
or violations of human rights by such actors should not
be understood to imply that such actors bear obligations
under international human rights law.
We emphasize the need to do more to eliminate
sexual violence, wherever it occurs, and to expand
services and deliver justice to survivors of all forms
of sexual and gender-based violence, particularly those
facing multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union on behalf of
the Group of Friends for the Elimination of Violence
against Women and Girls, as well as the statements
22-58430

02/09/2022

delivered by the representatives of Uruguay, Chile and
the United States.
We thank Sierra Leone and Japan for submitting
draft resolution A/76/L.80, of which Argentina is a
co-sponsor.
The draft resolution addresses the major challenge
of tackling gender-based violence, which is faced by
people in all their diversity, in particular domestic
violence and intimate partner violence. The text includes
fundamental elements with regard to the essential
services that States should provide for survivors, as
well as highlighting the need to eliminate barriers
that impede access to justice. Similarly, we welcome
the inclusive, consensus-based language and believe it
fundamental that the international community continue
to progress in that regard so that General Assembly
resolutions reflect the realities that all countries face.
Argentina believes it necessary to include a crosscutting diversity perspective in all policies, programmes,
measures and actions against gender-based violence, in
line with the commitments undertaken by the Argentine
State in the areas of human rights, in particular the
rights of women and minorities, so that they can live
lives free from violence.
We regret that references to important initiatives,
such as the Generation Equality campaign and the
Spotlight Initiative, which contribute significantly to
the fight against gender-based violence throughout
the world, have been removed from the text. We also
regret the introduction of last-minute amendments
that seek to undermine consensus-based languages,
the sources of which are essential instruments for
international progress.
In conclusion, I would underscore that the
right to live a life free from violence and to develop
independent living projects without discrimination are
an indispensable prerequisite in order to build fairer
and more equal societies in which the human rights of
all persons are respected.
Ms. Zhu Jiani (China) (spoke in Chinese): Sexual
violence is one of the gravest violations of human
rights and a common challenge for the international
community. China has always been firmly opposed
to any form of sexual violence and welcomes all
international efforts to combat it, as well as to protect
the rights and interest of women and girls.

A/76/PV.99

China appreciates Sierra Leone’s submission of
draft resolution A/76/L.80, on international cooperation
on access to justice for survivors of sexual violence,
which helps the international community to focus on
the issue of sexual violence, prioritize the protection of
victims and survivors of sexual violence and improve
their living conditions.
China participated in the consultations on the
draft resolution in a constructive manner, advocating
a victim- and survivor-centred approach for those who
have suffered the most from sexual violence, especially
those who experienced such violence in the Second
World War, in order to redress historical injustices.
China also advocates for increased support and
assistance to that most vulnerable group in accessing
justice and obtaining compensation.
Like many developing countries, China has
suffered due to the havoc of wars in its history and,
on top of that, horrendous sexual violence in conflict.
During the Second World War, the war of aggression
waged by Japanese militarists brought calamity to the
people of a vast number of victim countries, including
China. As many as 700,000 women and girls were
forced or enticed to become comfort women and were
subjected to systematic and heinous sexual violence. It
has become the most humiliating and painful memory
of the twentieth century.
China and many other Asian countries have a deep
sense of repugnance when it comes to sexual violence,
as that part of our history is still fresh in our memories.
It pains us to see that the suffering and humiliation of
those comfort women did not stop with the end of the
war. According to the limited information available,
there are only 12 comfort women victims still alive in
mainland China, most of whom are already very old,
with mental and physical trauma that has remained
hard to heal. Many victims who are no longer with us
did not see justice done before they passed away.
Japan owes the world an apology. Regrettably,
instead of squarely facing up to history and reflecting
on its evil deeds, the Japanese Government has denied
the facts of its invasion, repeatedly distorting the truth
in history and even glorifying its war of aggression.
To this day, it has refused to acknowledge the State’s
responsibility on the issue of comfort women and has
denied its coercive nature. That is tantamount to cruelly
rubbing salt into the unhealed wounds of the comfort
women victims.

22-584309/27

A/76/PV.99

02/09/2022

The international community should be very
vigilant and concerned about such increasingly
unscrupulous provocations to historical justice and
human conscience. History must not be forgotten, and
the truth allows no distortion. Only by facing up to
history can one avoid repeating the mistakes of the past;
only by admitting mistakes can one regain the trust of
one’s victims; and only by reflecting on the past can
one turn the page and look ahead to the future.

thank all delegations for their constructive engagement
and valuable inputs.

This is not simply a matter of a country’s image
but a matter of historical justice. Paying lip service to
morality and responsibility will not gain the trust of
the international community. We urge Japan to face
up to and reflect deeply on its history; act honestly
and responsibly in addressing the issue of the forced
recruitment of comfort women and other historical
issues; and take concrete actions to win the trust of its
Asian neighbours and the international community.

By adopting draft resolution A/76/L.80, the firstever General Assembly draft resolution devoted solely to
international cooperation under this important agenda
item, Member States will commit to offering a helping
hand to the survivors of sexual violence. It will be a huge
step towards ensuring protection and empowerment
for all survivors of sexual violence, including those
in conflict situations and humanitarian crises, as well
as in any community in the world — developing and
developed alike.

Tomorrow is Victory Day for the anti-Japanese war
in China. Draft resolution A/76/L.80, to be adopted
today by the General Assembly, will open the door
for victims and survivors of sexual violence during
the Second World War to seek justice, and it therefore
carries special significance. China will continue to
support the victims and survivors of sexual violence
during the Second World War as they seek justice,
compensation and relief through traditional channels
so that justice is served for all and the truth unearthed
for the world.
Mr. Osuga (Japan): At the outset, I wish to say that
I will refrain from saying something about a matter
with such little relevance to the important agenda that
we have before us.
I would like to thank all those delegations that
participated in today’s debate under agenda item 133,
entitled “International cooperation on access to justice
for survivors of sexual violence”, an item newly created
at the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly
under the strong political leadership of Sierra Leone. It
has been a great honour and privilege for the Permanent
Mission of Japan to take part in this initiative, and I
wish to express my deep appreciation to Sierra Leone
for choosing Japan as its partner.
We are grateful for the kind words extended
to Sierra Leone and Japan. On behalf of our two
Permanent Missions, which co-facilitated the
five-month intergovernmental process, I would like to
10/27

All survivors of sexual violence have the right to
be free from stigma and to live in dignity. All survivors
of sexual violence are entitled to freedom from fear and
freedom from want, with an equal opportunity to enjoy
all their rights, fully recover from their wounds and
further develop their human potential. That is a critical
issue of human security.

Frankly speaking, the negotiations were not
easy. Every country has its own domestic context,
constituencies and national policies that would be
happier with or without certain language in the text,
which is perfectly normal. With that in mind, the
co-facilitators gave their best efforts and worked
tirelessly to strike the best balance among the different
positions expressed during the informal consultations.
Our only wish was that our first baby would be blessed
by everyone in town by being adopted by consensus by
all Member States.
To our profound regret, draft amendments to
four paragraphs of draft resolution A/76/L.80 have
been introduced. Those paragraphs will have to be
finalized through a vote. However, once the language
of those paragraphs is sealed, in one way or another,
it is my most sincere wish and hope that the draft
resolution — amended or not — will be adopted without
a vote.
The positions of delegations will be clearly registered
through the paragraph votes. They will be on the
official record if delegations wish to make explanations
of position. Some delegations may choose to dissociate
themselves from the consensus, which is fine, if they
so wish. However, requesting a vote and voting against
or abstaining in the voting will be an enormous setback
for such an important global and universal agenda that
no one in our countries would deny. Who would dare to
object to promoting international cooperation to help
22-58430

02/09/2022

the survivors of sexual violence by improving their
access to justice, remedies and assistance?
Japan commends existing initiatives, such as
the Spotlight Initiative and the Generation Equality
Forum. By adopting draft resolution A/76/L.80 by
consensus and implementing it, we will have more of
those encouraging initiatives to support one another
domestically and internationally.
The restrictions under the coronavirus disease
pandemic or the geopolitical tensions in recent years
may have withered our willpower to strive for consensus
in intergovernmental negotiations at the United Nations
and may have lured delegations towards decision-taking
by vote. I appeal to all delegations, once again, to
exercise maximum flexibility and restraint for the sake
of consensus on such an important global agenda.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Murphy (Holy See): Sexual violence is
an affront to human dignity and a heinous crime. Those
who have experienced it must be able to seek, from the
competent judicial and law enforcement authorities,
protection from further abuses and justice for the
harm suffered.
Sadly, victims’ pain is often compounded when
people dismiss their experiences as unbelievable or
even place the blame on them for the wrong done to
them. Those social factors often pose the first barrier
to access to justice. Women and girls, who comprise the
majority of victims, are at particular risk of being held
culpable for wrongs done to them when society fails
to accord them respect equal to that accorded to men
and boys. Fewer in number but no less important are
male victims, who face their own unique challenges in
accessing justice.
Victims of sexual violence will not have access
to justice unless the law properly criminalizes those
harmful acts in ways that conform to the relevant
principles of national legal systems, including
evidentiary standards, witness requirements, protection
for victims, due process and respect for the rights
of the accused. Clear legal standards must govern
evidence collection and preservation. Protection from
intimidation, retaliation and violations of privacy must
be guaranteed.
Victims of sexual violence should also be able, as
appropriate, to voice their perspectives and concerns. In

A/76/PV.99

particular, child victims and witnesses require special
protection and care during the course of proceedings.
Access to justice requires that both the law and the
operational standards of law enforcement authorities
do not place excessive burdens on reporting crimes of
sexual violence. Alleged victims and their families are
always to be treated with dignity and respect and must
be offered medical, social and psychological support,
as required by each specific case.
Regrettably, no country is free of the scourge
of sexual violence or its harmful effects. However,
we can all adopt measures to prevent and reduce the
incidence of such crimes. Capacity-building assistance,
including through the sharing of best practices
and other partnerships, particularly in support of
developing countries, can help ensure that every victim
of sexual violence is protected from further harm. In
each of those matters, local ownership is necessary
for durable de jure — and also de facto — change. My
delegation would like to add the following remarks on
resolution A/76/L.80.
The Holy See wishes to thank Ms. Roselynn Finda
Senesi and Mr. Kaoru Magosaki for facilitating the
draft resolution. Credit is due to in particular to Sierra
Leone for placing this important topic on the agenda.
While we remain hopeful regarding the potential
positive impact of the draft resolution, the Holy See
regrets that its potential impact is severely diminished
by unclear, controversial and long-disputed terms and
concepts with little relation to the theme, including
ambiguous and contentious terminology related to
violence, discrimination and health care. The inclusion
of paragraph 6, despite many objections throughout the
negotiations, is particularly troubling. Moreover, it is
worrisome that long-standing language on women’s
participation in peacebuilding processes taken from
women and peace and security resolutions was altered
to include children.
The co-facilitators strived to be inclusive in their
approach to negotiations. Nevertheless, the concerns
about the draft resolution cannot be separated from its
negotiation process, which produced a text in which not
a single paragraph was agreed ad referendum before
it was submitted for adoption. At the outset, it must
be noted that many of the most challenging elements
were included in the zero draft and remained unaltered,
or even increased in number, through subsequent
revisions, entrenching rather than bridging differences.

22-5843011/27

A/76/PV.99

In addition, while recognizing the importance of
building on prior efforts, the Holy See does not consider
text that has been voted on or subject to reservations to
be agreed language. Moreover, each text has its own
balance and internal coherence as the result of the
common effort to find consensus. Regrettably, that
process was impeded for draft resolution A/76/L.80
owing to the inability to alter, rework, add to or delete
from paragraphs that had appeared in other resolutions,
which would have necessitated additional consultations.
Regarding the text to be adopted, the Holy See
is obliged to recall that the reservations it submitted
at the Fourth World Conference on Women and
the International Conference on Population and
Development remain valid and in force, including
reservations on the terms “sexual and reproductive
health and reproductive rights”, “health services” and
other related terms, including so-called “safe abortion”,
the asserted “right to have control over and decide
freely and responsibly on matters related to human
sexuality” and the term “gender”. When this crucial
subject is next addressed, the Holy See sincerely
hopes that a consensus-based and focused text will
be adopted. To that end, my delegation offers the
following considerations.
First, draft resolution A/76/L.80 and the survivors it
seeks to help would be best served by concentrating on
the four key elements of the theme — access to justice,
remedies, assistance and international cooperation in
support of the first three elements.
Secondly, an open approach to the text is necessary.
Delegations should be permitted to work on the
language and take the lead in striking the necessary
balances and finding compromises.
Finally, controversial elements and weakly related
topics that divert time and attention from substantive
provisions should be avoided.
The Holy See hopes that those suggestions will
be taken on board at the seventy-ninth session of the
General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the observer of the International Development
Law Organization.
Mr. Brinkman (International Development
Law Organization): It is a pleasure to take the floor
on behalf of the International Development Law
Organization (IDLO), the only global intergovernmental
12/27

02/09/2022

organization focused on the promotion of peace and
sustainable development through the rule of law. The
IDLO welcomes the presentation of draft resolution
A/76/L.80, on international cooperation on access
to justice, remedies and assistance for survivors of
sexual violence.
Gender-based violence, including sexual violence,
is one of the most pervasive human rights violations
against women and girls. Eliminating gender-based
violence and ensuring access to justice for women
and girls is at the core of the work of the IDLO. We
have been working for many years to counter genderbased violence through research, policy, advocacy and
programming in various countries, including Honduras,
Myanmar, Mongolia, Somalia and Tunisia.
Our work has shown that women and girls’
vulnerability to gender-based violence is exacerbated
in complex contexts, such as conflict, organized
crime, health emergencies and climate crises. Women
face heightened difficulties in accessing justice
and protection owing to weakened justice systems,
disrupted justice delivery, low levels of trust in State
institutions and the deprioritization of gender-based
violence responses, as evidenced during the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Women are therefore more likely
to experience violence in situations of crisis and less
likely to receive justice. Those are profound challenges
to combating gender-based violence, especially in
complex settings. However, our work has also shown
that there are concrete approaches to enhance justice
for the survivors of gender-based violence if we are
fully committed to eradicating it.
First, we need to implement a comprehensive
survivor-centred justice response to gender-based
violence that meets the needs of diverse groups of
women, including the use of effective gender-responsive
laws and the elimination of discriminatory ones.
Secondly, we need to foster the integration of
services for survivors of gender-based violence in
ways that enhance prevention, protection and access
to redress, including through formal and informal
pathways to justice.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the legal empowerment
of women and girls, including by raising their awareness
on their rights and the legal support services available
to survivors of gender-based violence.
Fourthly, it is
women’s collective

imperative that we support
action against gender-based
22-58430

02/09/2022

violence, including by providing targeted financing
for local women’s organizations and essential
community networks.
Fifthly and lastly, we must expand the monitoring
and collection of data on gender-based violence and
strengthen research on what works.
The IDLO strongly supports draft resolution
A/76/L. 80 and is committed to working with partners
to enhance multilateral action and collaboration to
ensure access to justice for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Before we proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A.76/L. 80 and draft amendments A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84, may I remind the
Assembly that delegations wishing to make a statement
in explanation of vote before the voting on the draft
resolution and draft amendments are invited to do so in
one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate, Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association countries,
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area, as well as Georgia, Monaco
and San Marino, align themselves with this statement.
We deeply regret the decision to present last-minute
amendments on agreed language in such an important
draft resolution as A/76/L.80. We commend Sierra
Leone and Japan for the way in which they conducted
the negotiations, and we thank all other delegations for
their genuine efforts to maintain consensus and achieve
a good outcome for all.
Eliminating sexual and gender-based violence
and ensuring access to justice for survivors requires
us to join forces, go beyond our differences and act
in a responsible way. Undermining the consensus on
draft resolution A/76/L.80 can have only negative
consequences that impact first and foremost the rights

A/76/PV.99

of survivors. The text before us represents a fine
balance among the various positions expressed during
the negotiations. The facilitators decided to revert
to previously agreed language when it became clear
that concerted and lengthy efforts to find alternative
wording would not lead to an agreement acceptable to
all delegations.
The States Members of the United Nations, many
of which hold divergent views on the issue at hand, have
always been able to agree on the language attacked by
the amendments submitted today, which illustrates how
carefully crafted and balanced those long-standing
paragraphs are. The Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action clearly defines those terms.
Two years ago, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration, the SecretaryGeneral called on us to resist the push-back against
gender equality and women’s rights. That is what we
must do today to send a positive signal to all survivors
around the world.
For those reasons, we will vote against those hostile
amendments, and we call on all Member States to do
the same.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): With deep regret given
the circumstances and our fraternal relationship, my
delegation takes the floor to object to the amendments
to the eighth and sixteenth preambular paragraphs and
to operative paragraphs 2 and 6 of draft resolution
A/76/L.80, as contained in documents A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84, respectively,
proposed by the Federal Republic of Nigeria. My
delegation’s objection is premised on both the
facilitation process and the substance.
Allow me to reiterate that on the issue of
the facilitation of draft resolution A/76/L.80, the
delegations of Sierra Leone and Japan led open and
transparent negotiations for more than five months,
including consultations on the various iterations of
the text from the pre-draft and zero draft to the Rev.1
through Rev.4.5 versions of the text, the last of which
contained the text of draft resolution A/76/L.80. All
delegations were able to express their views, including
the brotherly delegation of Nigeria, which was part of
the core group.
With regard to substance, let me also reiterate
that the final text represents a fine balance among
the various positions expressed and offers practical
guidance on how to improve the situation of the

22-5843013/27

A/76/PV.99

victims and survivors of sexual violence. The concepts
referred to in draft resolution A/76/L.80 are based on
long-standing agreed language, on which the States
Members of the United Nations have been able to find
consensus on multiple occasions in the past, including
our brother Nigeria.
Allow me now to address the specific proposed
amendments contained in documents A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84.
Concerning documents A/76/L.81 and A/76/L.83,
containing the proposed amendments to the eighth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 2 (a),
respectively, namely, to delete the words “Recognizing
the particular risk of sexual and gender-based violence
faced by all those who suffer multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination” and to delete the words
“paying particular attention to women and girls facing
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination”, we
continue to note that several international instruments
and human rights mechanisms explicitly recognize
the impact of multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination on women and girls on the enjoyment of
their human rights. The language calls for specific and
targeted protection from multiple compounded and/or
intersecting forms of discrimination.
The Vienna Declaration, the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing, and the
third World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related in Intolerance,
held in Durban, addressed discrimination based on
multiple grounds, such as sex, language, religion,
political or other opinions, social origin, property,
birth, disability or other status.
Furthermore, Member States committed to tackle
the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination
against refugees and migrant women and girls,
indigenous people and people of African descent in the
New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples and the International Decade for People of
African Descent, respectively.
With regard to the deletion from the sixteenth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/76/L.80
of the words “including intimate partner violence”,
as proposed in draft amendment A/76/L.82, we note
that the proposed amendment contradicts established
facts and agreed language. For instance, the World
Health Organization briefs on the coronavirus disease
14/27

02/09/2022

pandemic note that intimate partner violence is the
most common form of violence globally.
Intimate partner violence is an inclusive technical
term that has been agreed and used in various forums
and General Assembly resolutions, including in
resolution 70/266, entitled “Political Declaration on
HIV and AIDS: On the Fast-Track to Accelerating the
Fight against HIV and to Ending the AIDS Epidemic
by 2030”, paragraph 61 (h); resolution 71/170, entitled
“Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate all
forms of violence against women and girls: domestic
violence”, tenth and nineteenth preambular paragraphs;
resolution 72/162, entitled “Implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the Optional Protocol thereto: situation of women
and girls with disabilities”, paragraph 14 (a); and
resolution 75/161, entitled “Intensification of efforts
to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against
women and girls”, sixteenth preambular paragraph.
With regard to the deletion of substantial elements
of paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/76/L.80, as
proposed in draft amendment A/76/L.84, we reiterate
the important point that the language in question is
taken verbatim from paragraph 14 (f) of resolution
71/170, which was adopted by consensus. The language
simply recalls the need to ensure access to sexual
and reproductive health and reproductive rights for
victims and survivors of sexual violence, in accordance
with the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development and the
Beijing Platform for Action, as well as the outcomes of
their review conferences.
Those references have been regularly included in
General Assembly resolutions since the adoption of
those documents in 1994 and 1995, including a number
of African-led initiatives. Furthermore, the wording
of paragraph 6 includes a caveat in that the reference
is to specific services “permitted by national law” to
accommodate all views, leading to a balanced text.
In addition to reflecting paragraph 14 (f) of
resolution 71/170, which was adopted by consensus, the
language in paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/76/L.80
reflects agreed language contained in the following
non-exhaustive declarations and resolutions.
First, such language is contained in paragraph 61
(j) of the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS of
2016 and the agreed conclusions of the fifty-seventh
session of the Commission on the Status of Women on
22-58430

02/09/2022

A/76/PV.99

the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence
against women and girls.

no room for impunity for the perpetrators of such
heinous acts.

Secondly, such language is contained in paragraph
20 (y) of resolution 69/147, entitled “Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women
and girls”, which was adopted in 2014.

While we appreciate the efforts of Sierra Leone
and Japan in introducing the text, we regret that the
process leading up to the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.80 has done a great disservice to such an
important issue. Many delegations, including my own,
participated in the negotiations on the draft resolution
in good faith with the goal of achieving a consensus
text, as envisioned by the co-facilitators.

Thirdly, such language is contained in paragraph
9 of Human Rights Council resolution 32/19, entitled
“Accelerating efforts to eliminate violence against
women: preventing and responding to violence against
women and girls, including indigenous women and girls”,
which was adopted in 2016; paragraph 11 of Human
Rights Council resolution 32/4, entitled “Elimination
of discrimination against women”, which was also
adopted in 2016; and Human Rights Council resolution
29/14, entitled “Accelerating efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women: eliminating domestic
violence”, which was adopted in 2015. All of those
resolutions included the relevant references.
Fourthly and finally, paragraph 106 (j) of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action of 1995 recognizes
and deals with the health and impact of unsafe abortion
as a major public health concern, as agreed in paragraph
8.25 of the International Conference on Population
and Development Programme of Action. Of course, it
is also referenced in paragraph 61 (h) of the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS of 2016.
The wording of paragraph 6 of draft resolution
A/76/L.80 was taken verbatim from each of those
documents and resolutions that I have just mentioned.
With regret, we are compelled to state that the
call for amendments cannot be justified, given that
the proponent joined consensus on the adoption of
resolution 71/170, for instance, which contains the same
language in its paragraph 14 (f). The proponent also
voted in favour of resolution 75/161.
While remaining respectful of the expression of the
sovereign will and equality of each State Member of
the United Nations, as provided for in the Charter of
the Organization, we can ask only that Member States
do so in good faith, as also required by the Charter. We
therefore call on all Member States to vote against the
amendments in support of the draft resolution.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): Malaysia recognizes and
supports efforts to ensure that victims and survivors of
sexual violence are accorded proper access to justice,
remedies and assistance. There should be absolutely

However, the approach undertaken was inconsistent
with that desire. After many rounds of consultations and
tireless reasoning, it appeared to some of us — including
my delegation — that there was no genuine interest in
finding the lowest common denominator upon which
all delegations could agree. Numerous concerns
expressed by a number of delegations, including my
own, regrettably fell on deaf ears.
We regret that contentious terms such as “multiple
and intersecting forms of discrimination”, “diverse
situations and conditions” and “the right to have control
over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related
to their sexuality” are featured in the text despite clear
and repeated opposition from a number of delegations,
on the grounds that they are consensual language.
It is extremely irresponsible to assert that
such terminology, although featured in resolutions
adopted without a vote, constitutes consensual
language, since a number of Member States, including
Malaysia, have consistently expressed reservations
concerning such terminology. The deliberate and
persistent mischaracterization of consensual language
by certain delegations to promulgate contentious
terminology must stop. As such, Malaysia will vote
in favour of amendment A/76/L.81, concerning the
eighth preambular paragraph; amendment A/76/L.83,
concerning paragraph 2 (a); and amendment A/76/L.84,
concerning paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/76/L.80.
Despite the dissatisfactory conduct of the
negotiations on draft resolution A/76/L.80, the issue at
hand is of great importance and deserves the attention of
the General Assembly. If the draft resolution were to be
put to the vote as a whole, my delegation would abstain
in the voting. We hope that the co-facilitators will
adopt a more inclusive approach in the future towards
achieving a text that can be supported unanimously by
all delegations.

22-5843015/27

A/76/PV.99

Mr. Kim In Chol (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): My delegation takes the floor to explain its
position on draft resolution A/76/L.80.
It is highly ironic and very hypocritical of Japan
to sponsor such a draft resolution, given the fact that it
desperately seeks to cover up its most heinous crime of
sexual violence and evade its responsibility to atone for
past crimes. Despite the full disclosure of criminal facts
involving the extremely cruel incidents of modern-day
sexual slavery enforced by the Imperial Japanese Army,
Japan denies them even on the international stage,
which constitutes a shameless act aimed at evading
legal and moral accountability for its past crimes.
It is by no means a cooked-up history that Japanese
imperialists kidnapped countless Korean women to
force them to work as sexual slaves for the Imperial
Japanese Army in the past. Women who were passing by,
working in the fields and lifting water from their wells,
and even young girls who were playing in their yards,
fell victim to the Japanese army’s human hunting. They
number as many as 200,000. The Japanese imperialists
committed the heinous and unethical crimes of abusing
abducted women as playthings of the Imperial Japanese
Army at battle sites and massacring them.
As the witnesses of history, survivors are exposing
the crimes of the Japanese imperialists, and some
assailants who were involved in the abduction cases
have testified to their crimes, while repenting their
past. Their testimonies have irrefutably proved that
the Japanese Government and military were directly
involved in institutionalizing modern-day sexual
slavery of a coercive nature from the very beginning.
Nevertheless, Japan flatly denies it, far from feeling
accountable for that atrocious crime. On the contrary,
Japan brazenly tries to justify its history of aggression
by saying that there is no need to feel guilty about
past history and that the Japanese do not have to be
burdened by making apologies, as 80 per cent of them
were born after the war. Not content with insulting the
victims of the sexual slavery as prostitutes and insisting
that wartime rapes are neither war crimes nor crimes
against humanity, Japan desperately resorts to deleting
sexual slavery, which was part of its history, from
textbooks in order to erase the criminal facts. Worse
still, Japan has banned the term “sexual slavery” and is
now attempting to strike the words “service in the war”.
Japan’s behaviour is intolerable and shameful
and is a mockery and defiance of justice and human
16/27

02/09/2022

conscience vis-à-vis human morality, as well as
international law. The world has been appalled by the
impudence of Japan in its struggle to shirk its legal and
moral responsibility for its past crimes by denying and
hiding the worst-ever ethical crime of violating the
basic human right to life and women’s dignity by all
kinds of deceit and forgeries.
Japan’s distorted viewpoint comes from its
yearning for the past, when it invaded and lorded over
other countries and nations and also reveals its sinister
intention to repeat its history of aggression. Japan’s
crimes can neither be erased nor changed, no matter how
hard it tries to deny or dodge its responsibilities. Japan
must bear in mind that war crimes must be punished,
especially sexual violence against women, which is a
war crime to which no statute of limitations applies.
Japan must sincerely apologize for its unprecedented
crimes and properly settle past events out of a sense
of guilt, not try to evade the evident and undeniable
crimes. The international community should pay
special attention to the unjust behaviour of the Japanese
Government, which is on its way to committing other
crimes against humanity by sweeping the grave crimes
committed by the Imperial Japanese Army under
the carpet.
Ms. Bukuru (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes draft resolution A/76/L.80,
entitled “International cooperation for access to
justice, remedies and assistance for survivors of sexual
violence”. We are grateful to Sierra Leone and Japan
for their leadership on this important initiative. The
United Kingdom is deeply committed to strengthening
the international response to sexual and gender-based
violence, including conflict-related sexual violence.
We reject the four draft amendments (A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84) put forward,
which seek to modify, roll back or delete agreed
language. The draft resolution before us is largely
based on language that has been carefully crafted over
the years to strike a balance among the different views
and priorities of Member States. Allow me to make the
following three points addressing the draft amendments.
First, in this organ we have agreed time and
time again that multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination exist and must be addressed in
responding to sexual and gender-based violence.
Acknowledging that means prioritizing the rights and
22-58430

02/09/2022

needs of all survivors, including those with disabilities
and other at-risk or marginalized groups.
Secondly, as has been said by previous speakers,
the data is clear. One third of women and girls aged
15 to 49 report that they have been subjected to some
form of physical and/or sexual violence by their
intimate partner.
Thirdly, we know that sexual and reproductive
health services are among the first places that survivors
of sexual violence seek assistance. Weakening
paragraph 6, which is taken verbatim from other
United Nations resolutions, not only undermines the
rights of survivors but also goes against the spirit of
multilateral negotiations.
In conclusion, we regret that we are being forced
to vote on those issues. We urge all delegations to
support the rights of all survivors and vote against the
draft amendments.
Mrs. Hassan (Egypt): At the outset, let me thank
Sierra Leone and Japan for facilitating the discussions
on draft resolution A/76/L.80, on international
cooperation for access to justice, remedies and
assistance for survivors of sexual violence.
My delegation would like to thank the delegation
of Nigeria for submitting draft amendments A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84. Egypt will vote
in favour of all of them, which aim to bring balance to
the text of the draft resolution. They were reiterated by
many delegations during the long negotiation process
and submitted in writing to the co-facilitators on many
occasions, including after the silence procedure on the
draft resolution was broken by 14 delegations.
We regret that, during the negotiation process,
delegations were asked to change their national positions
in order to accept controversial terms considered to be
agreed language, despite the well-known, consistent
and long-standing positions of those delegations with
regard to the terms included in the draft resolution.
Language that is copied, pasted, compiled and altered
from its sources, regardless of the context, cannot be
considered agreed language. Delegations’ reservations
and votes on certain language in the General Assembly
should not be ignored during negotiations.
Mrs. Arab Bafrani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to make the following statement in explanation
of position before action is taken on draft resolution
A/76/L.80, entitled “International cooperation for

A/76/PV.99

access to justice, remedies and assistance for survivors
of sexual violence”. I would also like to express my
appreciation to the co-facilitators for presenting and
facilitating the draft resolution.
My delegation takes note of the importance of
supporting and protecting the victims and survivors
of sexual violence and condemns any acts of sexual
violence, particularly against women and girls in armed
conflict. We believe that the empowerment of women
is critical to preventing and responding to any form
of violence, including sexual violence. In that regard,
the Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great importance
to all international cooperation within its national
legal system for the empowerment of women, as well
as the protection of victims and survivors of sexual
violence. With that, we would like to further elaborate
our national position on the process of negotiation and
content of the draft resolution.
My delegation actively and constructively engaged
in the process of the relevant negotiations on this
important draft resolution from the beginning. Despite
the fact that we participated in several bilateral
meetings with the co-facilitators and took part in other
pertinent meetings in an attempt to improve the text, as
well as to clarify and highlight our country’s principled
position, it is very regrettable that not only were our
main concerns ignored in the latest version but also our
multiple requests to focus on specific language were
disregarded and objected to by the co-facilitators.
We had expected a streamlined and focused text
that takes into consideration the concerns and views
of all States in a balanced manner. We believe that
the proliferation of controversial and non-consensual
language throughout the text will prevent us from
finding common ground to further implement its
provisions, while also weakening our shared efforts.
Therefore, in addition to our dissatisfaction
with the process I would like to announce that my
delegation supports draft amendments A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84, submitted by
the representative of Nigeria, and will vote in favour
of them. In that regard, Iran also disassociates itself
from the eighth preambular paragraph, the sixteenth
preambular paragraph, paragraph 2 (a), paragraph 6 and
other non-consensual and controversial terminology.
It is the understanding of my Government that the
implementation of the provisions of the draft resolution
will be based on States’ national laws and regulations.

22-5843017/27

A/76/PV.99

Accordingly, we would like to reiterate that the
content of the draft resolution will be interpreted in a
manner consistent with our national policies, laws and
regulations, including our cultural and ethical values
and religious background, in line with internationally
recognized human rights.
In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran does
not intend to challenge the adoption of this important
draft resolution by consensus. However, it reserves that
right for itself with regard to the issues I mentioned.
If a recorded vote is requested on draft resolution
A/76/L.80 as a whole, the Islamic Republic of Iran will
abstain in the voting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will address
sponsorship on draft resolution A/76/L.80 and draft
amendments A/76/L.81, A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and
A/76/L.84, one by one.
First, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.80 and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.80: Albania,
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana. Honduras, Iceland,
Israel, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, New
Zealand, Panama, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, South Africa,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Türkiye, the United
Kingdom and the United States.
I should also like to announce that since the
submission of draft resolution A/76/L.80, Czechia has
withdrawn its sponsorship.
I should like to announce that since the submission
of draft amendment A/76/L.81 and in addition to the
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors of draft amendment
A/76/L.81: Belarus, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Libya,
Mauritania and Senegal.
I should also like to announce that since the
submission of draft amendment A/76/L.82 and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
18/27

02/09/2022

following countries have become sponsors of draft
amendment A/76/L.82: Belarus, Cameroon, Ethiopia,
Libya, Mauritania and Senegal.
I should like to announce that since the submission
of draft amendment A/76/L.83 and in addition to
the delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors of draft amendment
A/76/L.83: Belarus, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Libya,
Mauritania and Senegal.
I should also like to announce that since the
submission of draft amendment A/76/L.84 and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have become sponsors of draft
amendment A/76/L.84: Belarus, Cameroon, Ethiopia,
Libya, Mauritania, Nicaragua and Senegal.
The Acting President: Before we proceed to take
a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.80, in accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure the Assembly shall
first take a decision on draft amendments A/76/L.81,
A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84, one by one.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
amendment A/76/L.81.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Kiribati, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
22-58430

02/09/2022

Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Türkiye, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Djibouti, Gambia, India, Kenya, Madagascar,
Maldives, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago
Draft amendment A/76/L.81 was rejected by 31
votes to 84, with 12 abstentions.
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
amendment A/76/L.82.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Kiribati, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,

A/76/PV.99

Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Benin, Djibouti, Gambia, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Kenya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago
Draft amendment A/76/L.82 was rejected by 30
votes to 84, with 15 abstentions.
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
amendment A/76/L.83.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Kiribati, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay

22-5843019/27

A/76/PV.99

Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Benin, Djibouti, Gambia, GuineaBissau, India, Kenya, Madagascar, Maldives, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago
Draft amendment A/76/L.83 was rejected by 31
votes to 83, with 13 abstentions.
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
amendment A/76/L.84.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Mauritania,
Nicaragua,
Nigeria,
Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Djibouti, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Jamaica, Kenya, Madagascar, Maldives, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago
20/27

02/09/2022

Draft amendment A/76/L.84 was rejected by 33
votes to 80, with 15 abstentions.
The Acting President: Since draft amendments
A/76/L.81, A/76/L.82, A/76/L.83 and A/76/L.84 were
rejected, we shall proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.80.
A separate recorded vote has been requested on
paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/76/L.80.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Cameroon, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Libya, Mauritania, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, China, Djibouti, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates
22-58430

02/09/2022

A/76/PV.99

Paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/76/L.80 was
retained by 87 votes to 24, with 20 abstentions.

mechanisms of accountability and assistance, both
nationally and internationally.

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Philippines
informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to abstain.]

The resolution rightly emphasizes the need to tackle
conflict-related sexual violence. In the Tigray region,
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Sahel region, Syria, Afghanistan and Ukraine, sexual
violence continues to be used as a method of warfare.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/76/L.80?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/304).

A/76/L.80

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
as well as Georgia, Monaco and San Marino, align
themselves with this statement.
The EU welcomes the adoption of resolution 76/304,
on access to justice for survivors of sexual violence, and
we thank Sierra Leone and Japan for their leadership.
Three years ago, the EU hosted the first-ever
United Nations Survivors Town Hall, which called
for the General Assembly to adopt a resolution on the
human rights of survivors. We are happy to see that
process concluded successfully today. We commend
civil society organizations, in particular survivors’
organizations, for their determination to push the
initiative forward. This outcome is fully in line with
the multi-stakeholder and survivor-centred approach
promoted by the Spotlight Initiative. We also take note
of the recommendations of the Generation Equality
Forum in that regard.
Beyond the trauma itself, survivors are too often
faced with unacceptable barriers against their access
to assistance, justice and reparations. The resolution
outlines a series of concrete actions that Member
States should implement in order to set up effective

We are horrified by the reports of sexual violence,
including against children, perpetrated by the Russian
troops in Ukraine.
Once again, the General Assembly has spoken.
The resolution is clear. Rape and other forms of sexual
violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against
humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide
or torture. Those crimes are punished under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. Justice
must be ensured.
We call on Russia to stop its war of aggression
against Ukraine and to abide by the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law,
including those reiterated in resolution 76/304.
At the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration, held two years ago, the
Secretary-General warned us of the ongoing global
pushback against gender equality and women’s rights.
Unfortunately, we have seen that pushback at work
once again in the negotiations for the resolution just
adopted. Any attempt to go back on human rights
is unacceptable.
Let me recall fundamental principles in that regard.
Women’s rights are human rights. They are universal
and non-negotiable. Discrimination fuels violence. To
ban violence, we must ban all forms of discrimination,
including on the grounds of sex, race, ethnic or social
origin, religion or belief, political or any other opinion,
disability, age, sexual orientation and gender identity.
Access to justice is a continuum that goes from
immediate assistance to effective remedies. There is no
justice without meaningful reparations.
The EU remains committed to the promotion,
protection and fulfilment of all human rights, as
well as the full and effective implementation of the
Beijing Platform for Action and the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development and the outcomes of their review
conferences, and remains committed to sexual and
reproductive health and rights in that context.

22-5843021/27

A/76/PV.99

With that in mind, the EU reaffirms its commitment
to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of the right
of every individual to have full control over, and decide
freely and be responsible for, matters related to their
sexuality and sexual and reproductive health, free from
discrimination, coercion and violence.
The EU further stresses the need for universal
access to quality and affordable comprehensive, sexual
and reproductive health information and education,
including comprehensive sexuality education and
health-care service services.
We once again thank all survivors and human
rights defenders who inspired this initiative. We must
now deploy all efforts to ensure its implementation.
The international community can count on the EU.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, it is an honour for me to deliver this
statement on behalf of the countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council — the Kingdom of Bahrain, the
State of Kuwait, the Sultanate of Oman, the State of
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and my own country,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council
express their sincere thanks and gratitude to the
delegations of Sierra Leone and Japan for their efforts
in submitting, for the first time on this topic, resolution
76/304, which was just adopted. Our countries joined
the consensus on the resolution, as we believe in the
importance of the issue that it addresses. Our countries
make substantial efforts to support the survivors of
sexual violence at the national and international levels.
We value the need to intensify and unify international
efforts at all levels in order to achieve justice and
provide urgent and effective support to survivors of
sexual violence.
We stress that health care, in particular for
women, is of great interest in our countries, and many
reproductive health programmes for women are being
offered in that regard.
With respect to the use of controversial terminology
such as “sexual and reproductive” rights in paragraph
6 of the resolution and other contentious terms, our
countries affirm the need for such terminology to be in
line with our countries’ cultural and societal realities as
well as our national rules and regulations.
I now have the honour to deliver some further
remarks on behalf of Saudi Arabia.
22/27

02/09/2022

My country’s delegation expresses its sincere
thanks and gratitude to the delegation of Sierra Leone
for its initiative in calling for action on international
cooperation for access to justice for survivors of sexual
violence. We thank the delegations of Sierra Leone
and Japan for having facilitated the negotiations on
the resolution.
The General Assembly has reached a historic
juncture in its affirmation of the importance of
international cooperation for supporting victims of
one of humankind’s most appalling crimes — sexual
violence. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns
sexual violence in all its forms and manifestations. My
country also believes in the importance of protecting
the victims of sexual violence, especially women
and girls, given that our national laws stipulate their
protection, and of imposing harsher punishment for
perpetrators of sexual violence when they are subjected
to imprisonment or the payment of fines. In order to
prevent recidivism for those atrocities and ensure that
justice is done, those punishments are doubled if the
offence is repeated.
At the international level, through the King Salman
Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, my country is
committed to the protection of women and girls and the
creation of a safe environment for them during and after
conflicts and natural disasters, including protection
against gender-based violence, through programmes
that protect women from all forms of violence. Those
programmes ensure that their needs are met, including
the provision of psychological, social, protection and
legal services.
My delegation participated in the negotiation
process on the resolution from the outset and in recent
months. We participated positively and effectively and
were committed to supporting all efforts to adopt a
resolution that ensures justice and reparations for the
victims of sexual violence.
My country’s delegation regrets that a number of
amendments proposed by certain delegations were
not taken into account. Therefore, my delegation
disassociates itself from the controversial language
of resolution 76/304, such as that contained in its
sixteenth preambular paragraph and in its paragraph
6. We also express our reservations on the repeated
attempts to combine the two concepts of sexual
violence and gender-based violence without a scientific
or methodological basis.
22-58430

02/09/2022

My country’s delegation supports resolution
76/304, given the suffering of the victims of sexual
violence and the importance of unifying the efforts of
the international community to support them. In that
regard, we stress the specificity of the resolution and that
some of its language cannot in any way be considered
consensual or be included in future resolutions.
Mr.
Jiménez
(Nicaragua)
(spoke
in
Spanish):
Our
delegation
attaches
great
importance to the item under consideration.
Nicaragua recognizes and promotes women’s
leadership and participation as a key priority policy of
our Government in its national plan to combat poverty
and advance human development. That is demonstrated
in the Global Gender Gap Report 2022 of the World
Economic Forum, which ranks Nicaragua seventh in the
world, and first in Latin America and the Caribbean, in
that regard, and fifth in the world in terms of women’s
political participation.
We also have in place Law No. 779, the
Comprehensive Law against Violence against Women,
and reforms to Law No. 641 of our penal code, which
establishes and guarantees protection, reparation and
punishment for all forms of gender-based violence.
It is vitally important that the positions of all
delegations be taken into account. We therefore
regret that the concerns of many delegations were
not taken into consideration during the consultation
process and that controversial language that
does not enjoy intergovernmental consensus was
included in the text. In that regard, our delegation
disassociates itself from paragraph 6 of resolution
76/304, which promotes abortion as a human
right. We appreciate the amendment submitted by
Nigeria in that regard, which would have balanced the
text. We regret that it was not adopted.
Nicaragua would like to state its position on the use
of the term “abortion”, which cannot be considered a
human right and should in no way be promoted as a
method of family planning. Abortion or the interruption
of pregnancy cannot under any circumstances be
considered as a means of fertility regulation or birth
control. The inclusion of the concept of abortion in
United Nations documents violates the Charter of
the United Nations and its purposes and principles,
especially that of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States. We reiterate, as established at the International
Conference on Population and Development, that it
is the sovereign right of each country to decide on its

A/76/PV.99

domestic legislation in that regard. Nicaragua reaffirms
its position of principle, pursuant to its Constitution
and laws, which establishes that every person has the
right to life as a fundamental and inalienable right from
the moment of conception.
Nicaragua would also like to note that it
disassociates itself from the ninth and tenth preambular
paragraphs of resolution 76/304, concerning the
International Criminal Court. Our country is not part
of that court system, and therefore we do not recognize
its jurisdiction. Neither are we signatories to the Rome
Statute. We also disassociate ourselves from those
paragraphs that contain concepts or terminology that
do not enjoy intergovernmental consensus.
Mr. Lim (Indonesia): Indonesia fully supports
the initiative to discuss international cooperation on
access to justice for survivors of sexual violence, an
issue that is very important to all States Members of
the United Nations. That initiative presented a potential
opportunity for the United Nations to have a meaningful
impact in addressing the needs on the ground.
Indonesia’s steadfast commitment in pursuing the
agenda is reflected, among other things, in its recently
enacted national Law No. 12, on the criminalization of
sexual violence, in which we highlighted how efforts to
provide protection, justice, remedies and assistance are
everyone’s responsibility. It requires multi-stakeholder
collaboration. We have also highlighted that there
must be harmony in the implementation of policies at
national and local levels in addressing the need on the
ground. Most important, we have stressed in the law the
equal importance of preventing sexual violence from
being perpetrated.
That law was enacted in a manner that complements
and strengthens the existing means of implementation
at the local level. Currently, we have in place 41 service
centres for women’s and children’s protection across
the 34 provinces of Indonesia. The service centres
are mandated to address cases of violence, including
sexual violence, at provincial and municipal levels. We
have also launched and operationalized the Friends of
Women and Children Call Centre service to provide
rapid access for violence reporting and response.
While pursuing all those initiatives, Indonesia
remains cognizant of the importance of international
cooperation in that regard. We dedicated a specific
chapter of the law to emphasizing the role of
international cooperation.

22-5843023/27

A/76/PV.99

Our experience and commitment led us to be very
hopeful upon the initiation deliberations on resolution
76/304. We had ambitious expectations that it could
elevate international cooperation and strengthen
countries’ capacities. To achieve such high expectations,
we believed that a deep, meaningful, comprehensive
and truly inclusive deliberation process was needed.
Indonesia regrets that, instead, the negotiation
process on the resolution was conducted in a rushed and
premature manner, with a take-it-or-leave-it approach.
That undermines the true spirit of constructiveness and
multilateralism at the United Nations. More important,
it results in a document that falls short of addressing
the real needs on the ground, guided by the topic
under consideration.
There is a lack of emphasis on the role of countries
with capacities in supporting other countries in need,
as well as on the role of international cooperation in
strengthening financing and funding for countries
in need of support. On the contrary, the document
includes elements that divert discussion away from
what actually matters. It has been counterproductive
to efforts to advance countries’ capacities to address
sexual violence.
In that regard, my delegation also expresses its
reservations about the following references and notes
that they do not contain universally agreed language:
first, references to “gender-based violence” and
“gender-based crimes” throughout the text, on the
understanding that the resolution should focus on issues
of sexual violence; secondly, references to “multiple
and intersecting forms of discrimination” in the eighth
preambular paragraph and paragraph 2 (a); thirdly,
the reference to “intimate partner violence” in the
sixteenth preambular paragraph; fourthly, the reference
to “gender perspectives” in paragraph 2 (d); and fifthly,
the reference to “gender perspectives” in paragraph 6
as a whole.
Finally, we wish to express our commitment
to implementing resolution 76/304 in the future in
accordance with our national policies, regulations
and priorities.
Ms. Navarrete (Philippines): The Philippines joins
the consensus on resolution 76/304 and recognizes the
importance of ensuring access to justice, remedies and
assistance for survivors of sexual violence. In joining
the consensus today, we wish to clarify our position on
some provisions of the resolution.
24/27

02/09/2022

The Philippines dissociates itself from the ninth
and tenth preambular paragraphs of resolution 76/304
and all other paragraphs in other resolutions that make
reference to the International Criminal Court. The
Philippines withdrew from the Rome Statute effective
17 March 2019, which reflects our principled stand
against those who politicize human rights and disregard
our country’s independent and well-functioning organs
and agencies. Notwithstanding our withdrawal from
the Rome Statute, the Philippines firmly believes
that sexual and gender-based violence has no place in
modern society and that perpetrators thereof should be
held fully accountable.
Mr. Vorobiev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sexual violence is one of the most egregious
crimes. The Russian Federation condemns all forms
and manifestations of sexual violence and coercion and
adheres to a policy of zero tolerance for such crimes.
In recent years, the United Nations has stepped up
its efforts to combat sexual crimes in armed conflict
and has produced an impressive range of documents
on the subject. At the same time, criminal instances
of sexual violence or coercion beyond the context of
armed conflicts, in so-called “peaceful societies”, have
traditionally been ignored by our Organization. The
new agenda item formulated by the State that initiated
its consideration, Sierra Leone, should have filled
that gap.
We are all familiar with Harvey Weinstein, Jeffrey
Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell and their high-profile
clients, the sordid soirées attended by a number of
leaders of European States and the abuse of minors
in the United States, Canada and Britain. The slew of
notorious sex scandals in recent years demonstrates
the need to combat that scourge. We are convinced that
efforts to prevent and eradicate sexual violence must be
comprehensive and, above all, should aim to eradicate
its root causes.
We regret that the content of resolution 76/304
has little in common with the original objective and
effectively diverts the focus to very different issues,
most of which are already reflected in other General
Assembly resolutions.
We expected the discussion of the issue and the
resolution to focus solely on the victims of sexual
violence and measures to provide them with support
and rehabilitation. However, what we have instead is
a document that essentially echoes resolutions on the
22-58430

02/09/2022

eradication of violence against women, effectively
duplicating them. Furthermore, the shift in focus from
sexual violence to “gender-based violence” — a concept
that remains contentious among States — effectively
renders the new agenda item ineffective and further
crowds the already overburdened agenda of the
General Assembly.
We disagree with a number of provisions
in the resolution just adopted. In particular, we
believe that the International Criminal Court is
not the appropriate tool for the administration of
justice. The Court must first restore its credibility
and abandon its policy of double standards. Neither can
we support the use of terminology in the text that is not
supported by States. Specifically, we feel that references
to intimate partner violence, as well as multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination, are inappropriate.
We are concerned about the attempts of the sponsors
of the resolution to rewrite language that was agreed
upon by the Security Council in an attempt to tailor it
to suit the necessary context and short-term interests.
We are disappointed by the lack of elements in the text
to encompass the legal dimension of ensuring access
for victims of sexual violence to justice and legal
protection. Instead, we see vague passages and slogans.
In our view, victims need practical support, first and
foremost, not theorizing. Moreover, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child defines a child as a human being
below the age of 18 years, unless majority is attained
earlier under the law applicable to the child. We believe
that, in bringing children into the various sectors of
public life, we must be guided by the provisions of the
Convention on the primary responsibilities of parents or
legal guardians, as well as developmental levels. Also
contentious in the context of minors is the emphasis on
access to sexual and reproductive health services. We
believe that access needs to be provided only with the
consent of a child’s parents or legal guardians.
From the very beginning, negotiations were
deadlocked. The Russian Federation spared no effort
to seek compromise in a number of areas, but we regret
that our calls, like those of other delegations, fell on deaf
ears. We are disappointed that the Japanese coordinator
of negotiations lacked any desire to heed the views of
a number of Member States. Instead, we saw blatant
disregard for the positions of other States and a lack of
interest in transparent and equitable dialogue.

A/76/PV.99

We wish to note that the Russian Federation shall
continue to proactively combat all crimes of a sexual
nature on the basis of universal documents and will
continue to meaningfully engage in international
cooperation in that area. The resolution adopted today
is not such a document.
In the light of those considerations, the Russian
Federation disassociates itself from consensus on
the document and does not view its provisions as
agreed upon.
I turn now to the Russophobic, unfounded and
unsubstantiated accusations against the Russian
Federation and Russian military personnel carrying out
their military duty under the special military operation
in Ukraine. We strongly reject those baseless, insulting
insinuations. We see it as part of an unprincipled
information war that is actively being waged against
the Russian Federation by Ukraine and its Western
handlers. The actions of Russia in operational units in
military duty and outside of it are subordinate to single
uniform rules applicable to all, regardless of rank
or position.
The Kyiv regime has been deliberately
disseminating mendacious information about alleged
rapes perpetrated by the Russian soldiers. I would
counsel caution, for those kinds of allegations have
no evidence to support them. Living proof of that is
Ms. Denisova, the Ukrainian — now former — human
rights ombudswoman. She went too far and was then
fired by the Ukrainian regime, due to unexplained focus
on numerous details of sexual crimes rapes perpetrated
against children in occupied territory, which could not
be backed by evidence. In other words, the Ukrainian
Ombudsman, without evidence, lied to the world, as
she acknowledged, in order for the West to continue to
provide Ukraine with weapons. That was the purpose.
The conflict in Ukraine has activated an industry
of exploitation of Ukrainian refugees on the territory
of Western countries. According to our information,
specialized European agencies consider the threat
of trafficking of Ukrainian refugees to be very high.
Given that in recent years Ukraine was among the
top five countries in terms of the number of human
trafficking and sexual exploitation victims in Europe,
it would be naive to believe that situation has changed
overnight. We call for that information not to be swept
under the rug.

22-5843025/27

A/76/PV.99

Mr. Al-shaikhli (Iraq): The plight of sexual
violence in conflict is in every corner. Some Iraqi women
and girls fell victim to the heinous crimes of terrorist
groups such as Da’esh/the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) and continue to face their implications.
Iraq adopted a milestone reparations bill, which
is an essential step towards justice for Iraqis who
suffered atrocities committed by Da’esh/ISIS. The
Yazidi Survivors Law is one of the few examples of
legislation globally to specifically address the rights
and needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. It includes numerous specific provisions on
reparations. Iraq is committed to deliver justice to
survivors in accordance with its national legislation
and international commitments.
My delegation joined the consensus today
on resolution 76/304. I would like to explain my
country’s position after its adoption, and we highlight
the following.
Iraq would like to thank the co-facilitators of the
resolution for presenting the text and facilitating the
discussions on its content. Iraq firmly believes in the
importance of multilateralism and friendly relations
between States, which are crucial for this Organization.
Although the resolution contains many positive
elements, my delegation believes that it deviated
from its main goal and included several instances of
ambiguous and controversial terminology, all of which
have been objected to by many delegations, including
my delegation on previous occasions. A more inclusive
approach is definitely needed in future.
My delegation understands the word “gender” in
the resolution as referring to women and men, or male
and female, according to its ordinarily agreed usage
before, during and after the negotiations on the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.
Iraq would like to disassociate itself from the ninth
and tenth preambular paragraphs, as they contains
elements that are not in line with our national legislation.
My delegation would like also to stress that
its understating of the interpretation of the terms
“multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination” and
“diverse situations and conditions”, referred to in the
eighth preambular paragraph and operative paragraph
2, sub-paragraphs (a) and (k), does not refer to any
non-consensual concepts. Iraq understands the “review
conferences” referred to in the third preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 6 to refer to
26/27

02/09/2022

agreements negotiated and adopted by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
Iraq would like to disassociate itself from the
reference in the sixteenth preambular paragraph to
“intimate partner violence” and would like to reserve
on elements referred to in operative paragraph 6.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation, which supported resolution
76/304, dissociates itself from the references to the
Rome Statute and the International Criminal Court in
the ninth and tenth preambular paragraphs.
The promotion of international cooperation in order
to guarantee greater and more robust access to justice
for victims of sexual violence is a noble cause that
we share. However, my delegation cannot align itself
with references to the Rome Statute, to which Cuba is
not party, or the International Criminal Court, whose
jurisdiction we do not recognize.
My delegation expressed its legitimate concerns
regarding to those references to facilitators in a
transparent and timely fashion. Sadly, they were not
taken into consideration, which obligates us to act
accordingly. My delegation therefore dissociates itself
from the language mentioned and notes that we do not
consider it to be agreed language and that we do not feel
obligated to adhere to it or its potential scope.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate my
country’s commitment to the collective efforts of the
international community in the fight against sexual
violence, especially against women and girls.
Mrs. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Sierra Leone and Japan for
the work they have accomplished during the negotiations
process on this important resolution (resolution 76/304),
which is directly in line with our shared struggle for the
liberation of women and the establishment of a world
without sexual violence.
Senegal is firmly committed to the fight against
sexual violence, as is attested to by a number of national
laws such as Law 2020-05, which criminalizes rape
and paedophilia. However, we regret that the resolution
was considered during the General Assembly plenary
without Member States having reached a consensus
that unifies the views of all parties.
The stakes of the fight against all forms of
violence against women should prompt us to take
into consideration the positions that we have upheld
22-58430

02/09/2022

and clarified unstintingly since the beginning of
negotiations. It is incumbent upon all of us to know that
we are all in the same boat and to be cognizant of our
common fate, which requires us to arrive at felicitous
conclusions in order to leave no one out.
My delegation therefore voted in favour of the
four amendments submitted by Nigeria (A/76/L.81 to
A/76/L.84) — in order to demonstrate our disapproval
with regard to the use of non-consensual concepts that
were preserved in the final document. My delegation
also wishes to underscore that, in our understanding,
the term “gender” refers solely to social relations
between the male sex and the female sex — to social
relations between man and woman.
In that regard, Senegal also believes that the term
“gender-based violence” refers exclusively to violence
against women and does not include sexual orientation
or gender identity. Neither does it require policies to
promote acceptance of other social categories that have
not found an accepted consensual definition under
international law.
In conclusion, my delegation recalls that the notion
of safe abortion as a human right, as in paragraph 6, is
not internationally recognized. Therefore, any mention
of abortion in a United Nations resolution should
include or refer to caution about abortion in the final
document of the International Conference on Population
and Development in 1994, paragraph 8.25, which, I
note, stipulates that abortion cannot be promoted as a
method of family planning, that Governments should
help women avoid abortion and that international
agencies should not interfere in national abortion
policies, insofar as that falls within the exclusive remit
of sovereign States.
My delegation therefore disassociates itself from
all of those terms and paragraphs in the amendments
submitted to the vote.
Mr. Wang Zixu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has pointed out many times that there is no
internationally agreed, commonly recognized or legally
based definition for the term “human rights defenders”.
Each country has its own view on who those people
are. As such, China opposes the inclusion in resolution
76/304 of a concept on which there is no consensus at
the United Nations. That is a common concern for many
countries. China therefore dissociates itself from the
paragraphs in the resolution that contain the expression
“human rights defenders”.

A/76/PV.99

The Chinese position on the issue of comfort women
has been consistent and clear. The forced recruitment
of comfort women is a serious crime against humanity
committed by Japanese militarism against the people of
Asia and other victim countries during the Second World
War. That is a historical fact supported by irrefutable
evidence. It is a fact recognized by the international
community. Any attempt to deny, distort or even
embellish the history of aggression — any attempt to
downplay or evade its historical responsibility — will
be met with righteous and conscientious condemnation,
and it appears even more ironic and ridiculous with the
adoption of this resolution. We once again urge Japan to
face up to and reflect deeply on history, adopt an honest
and responsible attitude in order to properly address
this and other unresolved historical issues and take
practical steps to win the trust of its Asian neighbours
and the international community.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position. We shall
hear the remaining speakers in explanation of vote or
position after the voting on Wednesday, 7 September,
after the consideration of agenda item 100.
The exercise of right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Chala (Ethiopia): My delegation takes the
floor to exercise its right of reply.
I would like to reply to the baseless claims and
outrageous accusations made by the representative of
European Union. The claims made by the European
Union representative have been disproved by an
internationally credible investigation. The motives
for the statement are political and unacceptable. It
is regrettable for this stage to be used to make such
unbecoming and untrue statements against a sovereign
State. My delegation urges the European Union to
refrain from making such unsubstantiated allegations
against my country.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 133.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

22-5843027/27
