A /77/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

43

rd plenary meeting
Thursday, 1 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Jiang
Zemin, former President of the People’s Republic of
China
The President: I wish to honour the memory of
the former President of the People’s Republic of China,
His Excellency Mr. Jiang Zemin, who passed away
on Wednesday, 30 November 2022. On behalf of the
General Assembly, I request the representative of China
to convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of China and to the bereaved family of His
Excellency Mr. Jiang Zemin.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to his memory.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
Agenda item 11
Sport for development and peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/161)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.28)
The President: As I look over the General Assembly
today, there are relatively many of us here, but not
nearly the number of spectators who would be attending
a major sports event. Today the World Cup is under way
with shouts of “Goal” or expressions of disappointment
echoing through the halls. Athletes, men and women
alike, are among the most powerful and influential

people in the world. They are role models looked up to
by millions of young people around the globe. I do not
think that any young people today are wearing jerseys
with our names on them.
If we want to make changes, to transform the
world, we must include sports and athletes in our
work. Where politics and ideology can divide, forcing
animosity and separation, sport brings together people
in peaceful competition. It has the ability to break
down racial and other barriers, combat discrimination
and defuse conflict. Sport is a platform to combat some
of the gravest dangers that the world faces today. It is
not surprising that our Sustainable Development Goals
bring together sport, peace and development. Athletes
and fans can join forces to be powerful advocates
for action.
As the great Latin writer Publilius Syrus once
said, “Where there is unity, there is always victory”.
But it is also up to us to make sporting events a model
of respectable behaviour, of fighting violence against
women and girls, of combating stigma, such as against
people with HIV or AIDS — just a few examples,
ones that are supported by the wording of draft
resolution A/77/L.28.
I want to thank the co-Chairs of the Group of
Friends of Sport for Development and Peace, Qatar and
Monaco, for their contributions to and support for this
draft resolution.
I encourage all Member States to preserve the
unifying spirit of sports and the Olympic movement. It
is far more promising for the world if nations compete

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-71742 (E)
*2271742*

A/77/PV.43

in the field of sports rather than on battlefields. The
former makes us nobler and stronger; the latter leaves
death and devastation in its wake.
Yes, we are living in a volatile world with deep
divisions. Yet in my view, sports and its organizations
should remain inclusive. We should not forget that it is
much more desirable to end armed conflicts than to end
cooperation. Sport is a solid common base for many of
us. But it is also about willpower and perseverance. Or
as Pele, who needs no introduction here, stated, success
is no accident. It is hard work, learning, sacrifice and,
most of all, love of what we are doing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Monaco
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.28.
Mr. Botto (Monaco) (spoke in French): On behalf
of Her Excellency Ms. Alya Al-Thani, Permanent
Representative of Qatar, and Her Excellency Ms. Isabelle
Picco, Permanent Representative of Monaco, I have the
honour of delivering this statement to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.28, entitled “Sport as an enabler of
sustainable development”.
In their capacity as co-Chairs of the Group of
Friends of Sport for Development and Peace, they
express their most sincere gratitude to all delegations
that participated in informal consultations for their
constructive participation, their flexibility and
their support.
The in-depth discussions held reflect the interest in
this item on the agenda and its cross-cutting nature, as
the draft that we are considering today has many facets.
In addition to technical updates, several new elements
have been added to the text, including those emanating
from the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document A/77/161, entitled “Sport: catalyst for a
better, stronger recovery for all”.
The report sets out recommendations to accelerate
our work on sport for development and peace and to
maximize the contribution of sport to post-pandemic
recovery. It also contains a great deal of information on
the potential of sport as a catalyst for the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and for climate action.
A reference to the guidance note of the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs on fighting climate
change through sport was also added. In the light of
the increased awareness of the link between sport and
climate change, a new paragraph was added stating that
the sports sector can contribute to efforts to combat
2/17

01/12/2022

the negative impact of climate change, especially
by reducing its own carbon footprint, adopting
sustainability standards and raising awareness among
millions of people throughout the world and by changing
their behaviour.
Two preambular paragraphs were included
that reaffirm the provisions of resolution 70/1,
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, and resolution 69/313,
on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. The preambular
paragraph on the risks linked to corruption was
fleshed out to state that the General Assembly noted
with appreciation the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and its publication of the
Global Report on Corruption in Sport, as well as the
efforts made by the International Partnership against
Corruption in Sport, established in 2017.
In addition, the draft resolution calls on Member States
to step up their collaboration with sports organizations
and civil society, especially non-governmental
organizations, which are implementing initiatives
based on sport for development and peace. Member
States may also thus foster partnerships and strengthen
local capacities as they see fit in order to track impacts
and to accelerate their action.
The role played by the private sector, federations
and national and international sports bodies, as well
as all relevant national initiatives in this area, are
also mentioned.
Recognizing the importance of protecting sport, a
new paragraph was added to the operative part to ask
Member States and the sports sector to step up their
efforts to prevent and combat trafficking in persons,
especially in children and women, as well as to
fight forced labour, sexual exploitation, attacks and
harassment and all forms of violence in sport.
Lastly, the draft resolution, as was the case during
previous sessions, refers to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, the Beijing+5 Political Declaration
and Outcome and the International Convention against
Doping in Sport.
The role of the United Nations, UNESCO, UNWomen, the International Olympic Committee and
the International Paralympic Committee, as well as all
major sporting events, is once again mentioned.
22-71742

01/12/2022

In conclusion, as co-facilitators, Monaco and Qatar
call for the adoption by consensus of the draft resolution.
We thank all delegations that have already stepped
forward as co-sponsors and call on those that have not
yet done so to co-sponsor the text before its adoption.
In my national capacity, I should make the following
comments on behalf of Monaco. We are now almost
at the halfway point to the deadline for attaining the
SDGs, and we are forced to note that collectively we
are lagging behind. We need to mobilize all actors
and use all possible means to accelerate our action.
Education, physical and mental health, the prevention of
non-communicable diseases, the promotion of healthy
lifestyles, the inclusion of people with disabilities, and
the empowerment of women and girls all are areas in
which sport plays a key role.
The universal language of sport brings people
together and promotes the values of peace, friendship and
respect, especially towards children and young people.
That is why the work of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) that use sport in their initiatives and field
programmes should be recognized and underscored.
Activities for development and peace should be supported
to promote good practices and expand results. The
Monaco association “Peace and Sport: an organization
for peace through sport”, whose annual forum is taking
place this very day in Monaco, is one of those NGOs.
I should like to cite as an example its programme
aiming to assist educators working with almost 2,000
children in 10 countries to develop sport sessions and
promote the values of peace. At the other end of the
spectrum, institutional actors have major leadership
capacity. Here I would like to commend the role of the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) of the Olympic
Agenda 2020+5, the Olympism 365 strategy and the
efforts deployed by the IOC to be carbon-neutral.
The goals of the IOC and the United Nations are
aligned, as are their values. That has never been truer
than today, and the messages of peace and solidarity
expressed by the President, Mr. Thomas Bach, echoes
similar messages from Secretary-General António
Guterres. When addressing Group of 20 leaders in Bali,
President Bach reaffirmed the neutrality and unifying
cause of sport, the IOC and the Olympic and Paralympic
Games. He also reaffirmed two key messages: the world
needs more solidarity, and we must give peace a chance.
At the level of the United Nations, I would like to
commend the role of the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, especially the tireless involvement of

A/77/PV.43

Ms. Daniela Bas, Director of the Division of Inclusive
Social Development, and her colleagues. The strong
cooperation that we have had with Ms. Bas and her
Division has helped us to increase the visibility of
sport on the United Nations agenda, as shown by the
increasing number of side events and discussions on
sport throughout the year.
I would also like to recall that in 2022 the Permanent
Mission of the Principality of Monaco joined events
on the role of sport in fighting inequality, the role of
sport and culture for the inclusion and participation
of persons with disabilities, the fight against the
trafficking of children in sport, and how to strengthen
the role of sport to prevent youth crime.
The world is facing many challenges, one of which
is the crisis caused by climate change. The sports sector
is a contributor to that through the environmental and
climate impact of competitions as well as through
the indirect impacts of sports venues, the production
of sport equipment and clothing, and travel by
participants and spectators, inter alia. But the sport
sector can also be part of the solution. It can reduce its
emissions and its carbon footprint and act as a catalyst
to raise awareness among the public and to promote
changes in behaviour and habits toward healthier, more
eco-friendly lifestyles.
In addition, sport is affected by problems such
as corruption and organized crime. Trafficking in
persons, especially that of children and young people,
in sport is a pernicious problem that is understudied
and insufficiently addressed. We must strongly fight
the instrumentalization of the dreams of young people
who are seeking a better future thanks to sport and who
end up being held prisoner by criminal networks that
live off of trafficking, exploitation and forced violence.
We must protect sports from all kinds of violence.
Sexual, physical and psychological violence are all
unacceptable and must not go unpunished.
In Monaco, sport is a major part of our identity.
Access to high-quality physical education, high-level
sport infrastructure and appropriate programmes allow
all of us to practice our preferred sports during and
after our schooling. The Principality, a land of sport,
recognized for its sporting events, for its own sporting
performance and for its teams’ performance, has always
viewed sport as a multifaceted tool.

22-717423/17

A/77/PV.43

In conclusion, this draft resolution addresses all
actors concerned: Member States, the United Nations
system, sports organizations, national and international
federations and all other relevant actors.
Sport is everyone’s business. It is our collective duty
to ensure that the sports world is beyond reproach and
that it see greater use as a sustainable development tool.
Ms. Rasheed (Maldives): As highlighted in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, sport
plays a growing and critical role in contributing to
development and peace. It aids in empowering women,
young people, individuals and communities. During
these challenging and unprecedented times, sport has
been a catalyst for a better and stronger recovery for all.
It has brought people together, giving people hope. In
that regard, the Maldives is pleased to join in adopting
draft resolution A/77/L.28 today, entitled “Sport as an
enabler of sustainable development”.
Sports, particularly the Olympic and Paralympic
movements, have played a pivotal role in promoting
peace and development. That is reflected in the ideal
of the Olympic Truce, where the power of sports is
harnessed to encourage peace, build dialogue and,
more broadly, create reconciliation. The Maldives has
proudly participated in the Olympic movement since
1988. Last year, Maldivian para-athletes represented
the country in the International Paralympics for the
first time.
Global, national and local sporting events have
the power to build communities, shift attitudes
and behaviours, and raise awareness of social
responsibilities. For example, the Tokyo 2020 Olympics
ushered in a new era for gender equality when for the
first time participating countries had dual flag-bearers
at the opening ceremony. Further, in the lead-up and at
the Fédération Internationale de Football Association
Football World Cup in Qatar, football leagues, players,
the media, fans and other stakeholders were invited
to become agents of change by adopting sustainable
practices and acting as champions of climate action,
equity and human rights, all actions that advance the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Indeed, the World Cup in Qatar is poised to be the mostwatched event of all time. We applaud the Government
of Qatar for the excellent arrangements made for football
fans and players gathered from different parts of the world
The Government of Maldives has utilized sports
as an instrument for youth development and has
given great priority to expanding access to sporting
4/17

01/12/2022

opportunities across the country. In September 2015,
the Maldives enacted its first Sports Act, aiming to
promote competitive sports and cultural activities at the
international, national and local-island levels. Moreover,
the Government has provided many opportunities that
were not available to athletes in the past, including
funding for athletes’ further education and professional
training abroad. The Maldives is taking the initiative
to host major regional and international tournaments as
well, such as the 2021 South Asian Football Federation
Championship and a leg of the Bodyboarding World
Tour in 2022.
The Government of Maldives is making steady
progress in facilitating sports development projects
across the country, including the development of 82
football pitches, 70 futsal pitches and 39 volleyball
courts across the country. We also are determined to
establish the Maldives as a globally viable water sports
destination. There has been a growing interaction
between the Government, the youth, sportspersons and
the sporting community to identify needs and address
the existing gaps. In that regard, there are initiatives to
build sporting complexes and youth centres on various
islands. The encouragement of youth participation in
sports promotes the development of leadership and
cooperation skills, ensuring that young people become
positive role models in their communities and contribute
to economic and social progress. Such initiatives will
lead to the development and promotion of sports at the
grass-roots as well as professional levels.
During the coronavirus disease pandemic,
lockdowns contributed to a decline in physical activity
as well as to a spike in anxiety and depression, especially
among young people. The resumption of high-quality
physical education is vital to recovery.
Sports programmes have been found to address
mental-health challenges and facilitate sustainable
development. In September, the Maldives launched
its National Physical Activity Policy and the National
Guidelines on Physical Activity to improve public
awareness of the importance of physical activity and
exercise for healthy living and ageing, as well as to
encourage an active lifestyle.
As outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/77/161), sports can be utilized as a low-cost, highimpact tool to rebuild solidarity within and between
countries and to deliver concrete benefits to people
in the short term. It can also generate broader societal
change, in line with the Sustainable Development
22-71742

01/12/2022

Goals. The increase in investments in sports has already
reaped benefits for the Maldives. It is our hope that
the power of sports will be fully utilized to maximize
development and peace all over the world.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): Singapore thanks Monaco
and Qatar for their work on draft resolution A/77/L.28,
entitled “Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”.
We congratulate Qatar on its hosting of the Fédération
Internationale de Football Association World Cup and
wish all teams participating the very best of luck.
Sport facilitates the building of community and
the coming together of nations. At the national level,
sport helps to forge a deeper sense of national pride and
identity, as we cheer on our national teams, celebrating
their achievements and commiserating with them in
their defeats.
Sport has the unique ability to bring people together
and inspire us towards the pursuit of excellence. Sport
also allows us to inculcate important values: those
of sportsmanship, fair play, teamwork and respect.
Those values, in turn, are essential building blocks
towards unity and amicable, rules-based interactions
between nations, which is what we strive for here at the
United Nations.
Just as the ancient Olympians observed the
Olympic Truce, sports continue to bring us together in
the present day and allow nations to compete on the
playing field instead of the battlefield.
Sport also contributes to individual and community
welfare. For example, sports are integral to Sustainable
Development Goals 3 and 4: ensuring healthy lives
and promoting well-being for all at all ages, as well as
ensuring inclusive and quality education for all. The
International Olympic Committee has stated that sports
can contribute to achieving 11 of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. It is no surprise, then, that sports
have been recognized as an important enabler of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Singapore is committed to supporting the Olympic
Movement and to the advancement of sports as a means
to promote peace and development.
The year 2022 has been a busy one for Singapore
athletes, who participated in the 31st Southeast Asian
Games in Hanoi; the 22nd Commonwealth Games
in Birmingham, United Kingdom; and the 11th
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Para Games in
Solo, Indonesia. In addition to those traditional sporting

A/77/PV.43

events, Singapore will host the inaugural Olympic
Esports Week in June 2023, which will feature the best
of virtual sports — both hybrid physical and simulated
sports — broadening participation and introducing new
ways to engage in sports.
Another important priority for Singapore is to
expand the accessibility of sports, especially to athletes
with disabilities. We recognize the potential of sports
in empowering persons with disabilities and are
committed to supporting the needs and aspirations of
disabled athletes.
All upcoming, new and rejuvenated sport centres
in Singapore are built in accordance with local building
codes on accessibility. In addition, we are working to
improve the accessibility of all public gyms for persons
with disabilities by 2026.
The Singapore Government has also established a
Para Sport Academy to support athletes with disabilities.
The Para Sport Academy will provide aspiring paraathletes with a clear pathway from recreational
participation to high-performance sport. That is
important because our para-athletes have achieved
considerable success at the highest levels, including
at the Paralympics, and are a source of inspiration and
national pride.
But even as we promote competition at the
highest levels, countries must also develop a broad
sporting culture and ecosystem to encourage
greater participation in sports and support the wider
sporting community. During the coronavirus disease
pandemic, sports activities had to be curtailed, and
the sporting community was badly affected. As we
transition towards living with the virus, the Singapore
Government launched the Bring Sport Back initiative,
which has encouraged the return of sports activities
by restarting mass participation events and providing
grants to event organizers.
Support for the Olympic ideal is about support not
only for sport but for the ideal that sport represents — a
commitment to engaging with other nations on the basis
of fair play and mutual respect. Singapore will continue
to uphold and promote those values as an active member
of the international community.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to deliver this statement during this important
meeting on sport for development and peace.

22-717425/17

A/77/PV.43

While addressing the General Assembly today, I am
full of joy and pride as we witness a unique and historic
FIFA World Cup event currently under way in the State
of Qatar.
At the outset, I would like to thank the representative
of Monaco for introducing draft resolution A.77/L.28,
entitled “Sport as an enabler of sustainable
development”. We are proud that we participated in
facilitating the consultations on the draft as co-Chairs,
along with Monaco, of the Group of Friends of Sport for
Development and Peace. That is an extraordinary draft
resolution that addresses an issue of utmost importance
to the State of Qatar, which is currently hosting the
largest and most important world sporting event, with
unprecedented success. It also reflects our aim of
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and serving humankind without any discrimination.
Today we are fulfilling our promise to the world.
The historic opening of the Fédération Internationale de
Football Association (FIFA) World Cup event took place
on 20 November, launched by His Highness Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar,
with strong and inspiring words. He said:
“We exerted efforts and invested in the good
of humankind; finally we are here at this longawaited opening day. People from different races,
nationalities, beliefs and affiliations will gather here
in Qatar and around screens across the continents
of the world to take part in the same moments of
excitement. How great it is that people can put aside
what separates them and celebrate their diversity
and commonalities at the same time”.
We are proud that that historic speech by His Highness
is the strongest and most eloquent response possible to
the unfair, selective and politicized campaigns, which
are replete with racism and arrogance, that target the
organization of the FIFA World Cup event by the State
of Qatar. Regardless of the intensity of those campaigns,
the State of Qatar will rise above them and move forward,
staying true to our commitment to our national and Arab
values and to established international standards that
prevent the politicization of or discrimination in football
and sports in general.
We will continue to focus on what serves humankind
by building strategic partnerships and expanding
international cooperation mechanisms to achieve
coexistence and disseminate a culture of tolerance and
peace among all the peoples of the world.
6/17

01/12/2022

We would like to announce that the SDGs are
omnipresent during the FIFA World Cup event through
the launching on 21 November of an exceptional
campaign entitled “Scoring for the SDGs”, which calls
for solidarity and cooperation in order to achieve the
SDGs on the sidelines of the World Cup event.
Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser, Chairwoman
of the Board of the Education Above all Foundation and
member of an international group in support of the SDGs,
inaugurated the SDGs pavilion in a dedicated area for
fans. Many activities will be launched throughout the
World Cup event, in cooperation with partners, namely,
UNICEF, UNESCO and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, including seminars
with world leaders, artistic performances and workshops
highlighting sports as a means to promote development
and peace internationally. We were honoured by the visit
of His Excellency the Secretary-General to the pavilion
during his participation in the opening of the World
Cup event.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reaffirms its
steadfast commitment to working with our regional
and international partners to confront the international
challenges and crises facing us and to provide effective
solutions to them, especially through the implementation
of the draft resolution. In that context, we commend the
report of the Secretary-General entitled “Sport: catalyst
for a better, stronger recovery for all” (A/77/161) and call on
members to implement its important recommendations.
Mr. Sharma (India): A healthy body and mind are
fundamental to our quest for peace, and sport, indeed,
plays a critical role towards that end.
Under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the international community has recognized that sport is
an important enabler of sustainable development. Sport
is an effective way of engaging the energies of young
people in a positive and constructive manner. It teaches
the spirit of sportsmanship, which generates tolerance,
compassion and respect for one’s opponent. It also
inculcates discipline through observance of the rules of
the game. It develops camaraderie and good fellowship,
which enhances the ability of communities to coexist
peacefully. We support the efforts made by the United
Nations system to generate awareness among young
people through various initiatives.
The contribution of sports to furthering
development is well recognized. Sport not only
improves physical well-being but also brings people
22-71742

01/12/2022

A/77/PV.43

together for a common purpose. Sports improve
productivity and foster social harmony and discipline.
Indeed, sports play a subtle, positive and constructive
role in sustainable development and peace.

that initiative, the Government organizes various
programmes throughout the country with the aim of
bringing about behavioural change and moving towards
more physically active lifestyles.

Associating sports personalities with the United
Nations with the objective of creating public awareness
about education, health, climate and development
issues, and promoting tolerance, understanding and
peace within and between communities and cultures is
praiseworthy. Several Indian sports personalities have
entered into association with United Nations entities
to promote peace, development and the protection of
the environment.

The Khelo India National Programme for the
Development of Sports, launched by the Government
in 2017, is being implemented across the country in
order to infuse sport into the culture and to encourage
sport all over the country. That scheme has one major
vertical, that is, “Sports for peace and development”.
Under that vertical, sports activities and competitions
are organized at the village, block and district levels.
Special emphasis has been placed on the development
of women through sport by including it as a special
vertical of the Khelo India scheme. Various tournaments
have also been organized to promote the participation
of girls and women in sports.

We commend the leadership of Monaco and Qatar
in steering our discussions and submitting a draft
resolution (A/77/L.28) entitled “Sport as an enabler
of sustainable development”, which aptly underlines
the growing contribution of sport to the realization of
development and peace.
In the ancient Indian tradition, exercise, which is at
the heart of sport, was considered an inseparable part
of good health. An old Sanskrit proverb mentions that
exercise results in good health, long life, strength and
happiness. Good health is the greatest blessing. Health
is the means of everything.
The education system in modern India is
continuing that rich heritage and respect for sports and
physical education. Sport development is a national
priority for us. It promotes active lifestyles, child and
youth development, social inclusiveness, employment
opportunities, peace and development, and, above all, a
sense of belonging and national pride.
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports provides
the policy framework and institutional support for
sports-related activities. The Sports Authority of India
is the principal arm for nurturing talent and for the
provision of infrastructure, equipment, coaching and
other facilities.
The Government of India has taken several
initiatives to encourage sports activities and to improve
the standard of sports in the country.
The Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi,
launched the FIT India Movement in August 2019 to
encourage people to remain healthy and fit by including
physical activity and sports in their daily lives. Under

In the conduct of those events, the theme of “Ek
Bharat, Sreshtha Bharat” has been followed to promote
interaction and developing bonds between people
from different regions and areas, fostering fraternity,
togetherness and unity.
Sport is an inalienable part of the educational
process and a factor for promoting peace, friendship,
cooperation and understanding among peoples. We
must therefore strengthen our efforts to promote sports
for development and peace.
India reiterates its commitment to supporting
United Nations endeavours to promote sports and a
culture of sports around the world.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and
representatives for their words of condolence on the
passing of Mr. Jiang Zemin, former General Secretary
of the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee
and President of China. His passing is an incalculable
loss for the Communist Party and the Government and
the people of China.
During his tenure as China’s top leader, he made
outstanding contributions to the development and
progress of socialism with Chinese characteristics
and friendship and cooperation between China and
the rest of the world. I will convey your message of
condolences and sympathy, Mr. President, and those
of representatives to the Government and the people of
China and the family of Mr. Jiang Zemin.

22-717427/17

A/77/PV.43

The Chinese delegation supports the adoption by
the General Assembly of draft resolution A/77/L.28,
entitled “Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”
and is delighted to be a co-sponsor of the draft. China
appreciates the efforts made by Monaco and Qatar as
co-Chairs.

01/12/2022

Global viewership topped 2 billion, another historic
high. The United Nations issued the first-ever “Sport
for Peace” stamps for the Winter Olympic Games.

Sport transcends race, religion and culture. It
enhances communication, understanding and trust and
helps to defuse conflict, tension and division. In sports,
rivals are also partners for mutual inspiration, and
competitions are also platforms for mutual fulfilment.

As the first global multi-sport event delivered on
schedule after the outbreak of the pandemic, the Beijing
Olympic Winter Games, with the slogan “Together for a
shared future”, presented the spectacular performances
of athletes from all over the world as they sought to
break new barriers and excel, bringing hope and
warmth to people and injecting the strength of peace
and unity into a pandemic-stricken world.

The goal of sport is to be faster, stronger and go
higher. It is not about beating or destroying one’s
opponent but about excelling and bettering oneself.
Even as we speak, football teams from across the globe
are showing us the appeal of sport and interpret the
spirit of sport as they compete in the World Cup in
Qatar. The spirit of sport should become the basis for
countries to coexist and serve as guiding principles for
their interaction and competition.

The Beijing 2022 Games came to a successful
conclusion, leaving a legacy that we will inherit and use
well. It can thus become a driver for China’s endeavour
to be a leading sports nation and an enduring impetus
for friendship and cooperation between China and
other countries and help forge a strong synergy for
implementing the concept of sport for development and
peace and building a community with a shared future
for humankind.

As the world undergoes changes, including the
pandemic, unseen in a century, and faces geopolitical
conflicts and multiple crises, the international
community more than ever yearns for peace,
tranquillity and development. We should rise above
differences and work together to overcome difficulties
and oppose coercion, bullying and imposition. We
should strive for excellence and go beyond self-interest
to seek common development. We must say no to the
concept of a zero-sum game and bad-faith competition.
We should respect and trust one another, learn from one
another, embrace exchanges and integration, and reject
arrogance, prejudice, isolation and division. We hope
that the flourishing spirit of sport can prevail and guide
us in surmounting the challenges and difficulties facing
us and in ushering in a better future.

Mr. Mohamed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt stresses the important role of
sport in promoting sustainable development and
its close link with enhancing the capabilities of
young people, especially in the wake of the difficult
circumstances that the world faced due to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its
socioeconomic repercussions.

After seven years of hard work, Beijing successfully
hosted the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games
this year thanks to the joint efforts of China and the
international community. As promised, China delivered
to the world streamlined, safe and splendid Olympic
Games that set many world records.
Beijing is the first city in the world to host both
Summer and Winter Olympic Games. For the first time,
Beijing Winter Olympic venues achieved full coverage
by 5G signals. The Beijing Olympic Winter Games
featured over 45 per cent female athletes — a new record.
8/17

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/161), sport may prevent as many as 5 million
deaths annually. There can be no doubt that sports
activities are a complementary element in the
maintenance of physical and mental health in societies,
especially for young people and children, as it plays a
role in developing their talents and skills.
In the same vein, sport promotes mutual
understanding among peoples, celebrates cultural
diversity and strengthens dialogue. Those are concepts
that have become increasingly important in the light of
the major challenges facing the world, which require
solidarity and cooperation.
The delegation of Egypt is pleased to co-sponsor
draft resolution A/77/L.28, submitted by the State of
Qatar and the Principality of Monaco, entitled “Sport
as an enabler of sustainable development”. We also
appreciate their efforts in facilitating consultations on
the draft. We also take this opportunity to sincerely
22-71742

01/12/2022

congratulate the delegation of the State of Qatar on
successfully hosting and organizing the Fédération
Internationale de Football Association World Cup
2022 event.
Egypt, which believes in the importance of sport
and its role in promoting sustainable development,
attaches growing importance to that vital sector as part
of our efforts to achieve comprehensive development,
in line with Egypt’s Vision 2030. According to the
Egyptian Constitution, the right to practice sports is
guaranteed to all. Both the State and society discover and
sponsor talented athletes. The State also sponsors young
people and children and works to develop their talents
and capabilities.
Egypt has set a number of goals to promote sports,
including by increasing the number of youth centres as
part of our efforts to build human cadres and encourage
sports and group activities.
In that context, the presidential “Decent Life
Initiative” is aimed at developing Egyptian towns and
promoting the efficiency of dozens of youth centres in
recognition of the close link between physical and mental
health and the success of comprehensive development.
Egypt has also launched several initiatives to
encourage sports, as we established new and smart
cities. Through its national human rights strategy,
Egypt aims to facilitate the participation of citizens
with disabilities in all sports activities and to ensure
that they benefit from such projects.
In addition, many projects for youth facilities
include innovation platforms that offer various activities
other than sports, such as technical and vocational
education programmes, economic empowerment and
training for the labour market, especially for small and
medium-sized projects. That will lead to maximize the
benefits of the capabilities of young people and their
full participation in development programmes.
As part of its model to include sport in sustainable
development and in conjunction with hosting the twentyseventh session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, Egypt launched the first phase of a new bicycle
project in Cairo aimed at reducing traffic and pollution
and encouraging the use of environmentally friendly
transportation and daily exercise.
In conclusion, Egypt continues to work towards
achieving comprehensive development, including through
its vital sports sector. That is based on our comprehensive,

A/77/PV.43

long-term vision of achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals in their various dimensions and ensure human
development and the relevant capacity-building.
Mr. Abdullah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the State of Kuwait is honoured to
participate in the debate today under agenda item 11,
entitled “Sport for development and peace”, as we are
deeply convinced of the role that sports can play in
developing societies and promoting friendly relations
among peoples. Sports allows us to give young people a
good education, as they are the foundation of the future
of developed nations and prosperous societies. My
country stresses the importance of deliberating in the
General Assembly the topic of sport for development
and peace.
Every year on 6 April, we commemorate the
International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,
because we are convinced of the many advantages
that sports give us. My country therefore reiterates
the importance of the call issued by the Assembly in
resolution 67/296 for all Member States, international
organizations and civil-society institutions to celebrate
and raise awareness of the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace.
As all are aware, health is our crowning glory. It
is better to prevent than to cure. The health benefits
of sports are countless. They prevent disease, promote
better blood circulation and enhance mental and
psychological health. No investment could be as good as
investment in people, even more than in infrastructure.
Young people are our future. The best way to
immunize them against extremist and destructive
ideologies is by harnessing their energies towards
supporting their communities and countries. The
values of sport, namely, solidarity, collective work,
honest competition and the sporting spirit, are noble
ones. They help to create healthy sporting generations
and build communities and world of peace, cooperation
and love.
We highlight in that regard the conviction and
tireless work of the State of Kuwait, which gives full
attention to promoting young people. That is why
many years ago we created the Ministry for Youth as
well as the public authority for youth and sports in
Kuwait, which work to develop and guide youth to
improve their sports skills and help them participate in
sporting competitions.

22-717429/17

A/77/PV.43

We wish also to recall the significant role of the
Kuwaiti Society for the Handicapped, which for half
a century has welcomed athletes with disabilities who
have strong will and determination. We pay tribute
to them, as they are exemplary persons with the
determination to overcome their difficulties and realize
their sporting ambitions. Nothing is impossible for such
resolute individuals.
It is with great pride that I share with the Assembly
today one of the most important aspects of the 2035
Vision of the Government of the State of Kuwait in
relation to young people. It has adopted a national
policy that represents a guiding framework for youth
for the next five years, including all direct and indirect
policies concerning young people. In that context, we
are strengthening partnerships with the private sector
in order to sponsor many programmes for youth, such
as the Role of Innovative Youth, the Professional and
Our Matches programmes. Through its 2035 Vision,
the State of Kuwait also aims at creating many youth
centres to harness young energies and meet the needs
of all segments of society by helping young people
develop their skills and capabilities. Those youth
centres create an environment conducive to practicing
all sporting hobbies and activities. They include many
health clubs and indoor and outdoor courts that are
in line with the Fédération Internationale de Football
Association’s recommendations, including Olympicsized swimming pools.
In its 2035 Vision, the State of Kuwait stresses
the pioneering role of Kuwaiti women in sporting
activities. We are working to develop women’s clubs
and create environments conducive to promoting their
sport skills, in addition to raising women’s awareness
about sports and promoting sporting activities among
them by increasing their social awareness and the
number of those benefiting from sporting activities,
and empowering Kuwaiti women while broadening
their role in society.
It is important on this occasion to emphasize the
harmony and great consistency between sports and
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted
by the General |Assembly in resolution 70/1, on
25 September 2015. That harmony is clearly illustrated
in Goal 3, relating to good health and well-being, and
in Goal 5, relating to gender equality. Sport offers
equal opportunities for both men and women to work
diligently and cooperate among members of the same
group. Goal 13 calls for addressing climate change,
10/17

01/12/2022

while Goal 14 calls for preserving marine life. Goal 15
stresses the need to safeguard wildlife. In that respect,
we must harness sporting events to raise awareness
about the threat of climate change and ways to address
its effects. Goal 17, which is the last of the SDGs, calls
for strengthening global partnership. In order to realize
those Goals, nothing can match sports in the fields of
cooperation, solidarity and collective work. That is how
we can achieve the highest number of SDGs.
In conclusion, the Holy Koran states:
“O mankind! We created you from a single (pair)
of a male and a female, and made you into nations
and tribes, that ye may know each other ... Verily
the most honoured of you in the sight of Allah
is the most righteous of you. And Allah has full
knowledge and is well acquainted (with all things).”
(The Holy Koran, XLIX:13)
It is on the basis of that honourable verse that the
State of Qatar has ushered in a new era of sporting
diplomacy and has become the capital of sports; all
eyes throughout the world are focused on it now. It
has had major success in organizing the Fédération
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) World
Cup event. Indeed, we consider it a Gulf achievement
and an Arab success story for the State of Qatar to be
hosting the twenty-second edition of the FIFA World
Cup event. That event of distinction will become an
example to be followed in all sporting events in future
because it demonstrates the importance of sports and
its role in bringing nations together, achieving human
solidarity, enabling and promoting the skills of the
individual, strengthening the economy and increasing
investment opportunities. That underscores the
importance of sport to development and peace.
Mr. Fifield (Australia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (interpretation from
Russian): Sport is a language that we all speak and
understand. It is difficult to imagine a more effective
tool for social integration, as it strengthens ties
among peoples and promotes the ideals of humanism,
brotherhood and solidarity.
Sport has a unique potential to promote peace
and tolerance and an immense capacity to popularize
the key ideas of sustainable development through its
remarkable ability to engage and to inspire.
22-71742

01/12/2022

In every country of the world, sport is an integral
part of the foundation of the social and cultural unity of
peoples. It is regarded as a tool for developing national
identity and social cohesion.
Public health, the development of exercise and sports
are priorities of the social policy of Belarus. The State
takes a very active part in the development and financing
of exercise and sport, as well as the construction and
maintenance of sports facilities and sports clubs. We
are training experts in the area of exercise and sport,
and we are also training the highest calibre of athletes.
While all of us here today reaffirm our readiness to
contribute to strengthening the role of sport to achieve
peace and sustainable development, we must note with
regret that objective reality is casting a shadow over the
aspirations expressed at this rostrum.
It is no secret that sport is heavily politicized. For
certain Western officials, sport has long been used as a
tool to serve their own political ambitions and achieve
their selfish goals. Even so, we had thought that everything
had its limits, but no; lawlessness knows no limits.
Resolution 67/296, which established the
International Day of Sport for Peace and Development,
which the Republic of Balarus was very pleased to
sponsor, acknowledged the role of the International
Paralympic Committee (IPC) in demonstrating to
people throughout the world the achievements of
athletes with physical disabilities. But unfortunately,
two weeks ago the International Paralympic Committee
once again gave a vivid demonstration of the opposite.
First, the IPC, for political reasons, excluded
Belarusian athletes with disabilities from participating
in the Winter Paralympic Games in Beijing. On
16 November, the General Assembly of the IPC
suspended our membership. That decision — which, by
the way, was adopted by a minority of votes — was
illegal, unjustified and politically motivated. Belarus
has not violated any part of the Constitution of the
International Paralympic Committee.
It is especially cynical that at the same time that
it suspended Belarus’s membership, the IPC General
Assembly decided to amend the Organization’s
Constitution, stripping “undesirable” countries of the
ability to take part in the International Paralympic
Games. Those who initiate such decisions are doing all
they can to punish States and their athletes to further
their own political ambitions.

A/77/PV.43

We believe that those actions should be recognized
by the international community, including the United
Nations leadership, for what they are.
But so far the world community has remained silent,
as has the sports community in response to a clear
flouting of the Olympic Charter. Human rights bodies
are also remaining silent in the face of those appalling
violations of the rights of persons with disabilities.
The politicization of international cooperation on
sport community goes against the principles of friendly
and civilized international relations and the ideals and
principles of sport, as well as the spirit and letter of the
Olympic Charter.
Belarus will continue to defend humanist ideals
and the principles of Olympism. Our Olympians and
Paralympians, regardless of all this, will continue,
through their personal example, to inspire millions of
people to believe in themselves and their own strength.
We reiterate that Belarus is willing to establish
partnerships and to develop targeted, mutually
beneficial cooperation in the area of sports with all
interested parties to strengthen its positive contribution
to sustainable development and lasting peace.
Ms. Alblooshi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like at the outset to thank the President
of the General Assembly for having convened today’s
important meeting. The United Arab Emirates believes
in the importance of harnessing sport as an effective
means of promoting understanding and respect among
peoples along with supporting social progress.
In its endeavour to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals at all levels, including that of the
sport sector, the United Arab Emirates established a
national committee for sustainable development in
2017. One of that committee’s goals is to support the
institutional framework of the sport sector.
My country is in the process of launching a 2032
integrated strategy for sports to develop a professional,
competitive sports sector as one of the most important
foundations of promoting the capacities of Emirati
society. As we develop our sport infrastructure to
attract talent, that strategy encourages the adoption
of a healthier and more active lifestyle. That was
illustrated, for example, through the Dubai Challenge,
a programme that encourages people to take 30 minutes
of exercise a day for 30 days. The sixth version of that
programme was concluded last November.

22-7174211/17

A/77/PV.43

Our efforts are not only local; they also include
effective participation in building and developing a
strong regional and international sports environment by
hosting championships and sporting events, including
the Global Sports Leadership Summit, which aims to
benefit from the expertise of more than 400 leading
athletes to discuss ways of developing the sport sector
across the world.
As part of our efforts, my country is committed
to empowering young people in the area of sports
and working to attract them thereto in order to raise
a promising generation of athletes by launching
programmes and strategies that help to develop their
mental and physical capabilities, as well as their
capacity for innovation, along with strengthening
cooperation among them.
My country is committed to empowering women
at all levels. We have taken a quantum leap in that
respect, especially in sports, at the international and
national levels. Emirati women are now chairing three
sports federations. We have also launched a number
of initiatives and organized a number of women’s
championships, including the Fatima Bint Mubarak
International Award for Sports, a one-of-a-kind event
in the region. It aims to highlight the achievements of
women in the sport sector.
The United Arab Emirates is also working on
promoting the role of sports for persons with disabilities
and on strengthening inclusiveness in sports. We are
look forward to holding a sports event for charity in
January 2023 that will benefit people with disabilities
in certain Asian countries as part of social partnership
and cooperation to promote various initiatives that
support persons with disabilities.
As the sisterly State of Qatar is hosting the
Fédération Internationale de Football Association
World Cup event, the world is witnessing our sports
achievements in the context of international efforts to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and promote
cooperation among various civilizations. We thank the
State of Qatar and Monaco for their efforts in facilitating
the negotiations on draft resolution A/77/L.28, entitled
“Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the United
Arab Emirates is committed to supporting all efforts to
promote sports with a view to enhancing inclusiveness
and progressing towards the advancement of nations
and the civilization of peoples. In that context, we look
12/17

01/12/2022

forward to a clear vision on the part of the international
community in terms of developing the sport sector
globally that will contribute to building a better and
more beneficial world for future generations.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French): My
delegation is honoured to participate in the consideration
of this agenda item in view of the importance and
relevance of sport to development and peace.
My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report contained in document A/77/161,
submitted pursuant to resolution 75/18, which reflects
the progress made in the implementation of the
United Nations Action Plan on Sport for Development
and Peace over the past two years, building on the
contributions of Member States, United Nations entities
and other stakeholders.
Burundi welcomes the innovations and adaptations
contained in the report, which reflect the important
contribution of sport to sustainable human development
and peace and to efforts to combat poverty. Sport is
shown to serve as a catalyst for a better recovery. It
should be used in every context in order to build
resilient communities.
My delegation is pleased to underscore that Burundi
continues to value sport as a language promoting
peace, tolerance, understanding, reconciliation and
socioeconomic development.
Beyond its importance to physical and mental
health, sport also unites different peoples and the
citizens of a State. It brings peoples and States together,
breaks down barriers and artificial stereotypes that pit
some against others and fosters greater understanding.
It is a tool for promoting the values of tolerance,
non-violence and solidarity within and among States.
Most importantly, sport helps us to overcome our
differences and obstacles and create a safer, more
peaceful and more sustainable future for all.
In Burundi, the Torch of Peace debuted in 2006. Its
goal was to promote a message of peace throughout all
the provinces of our country, with stops along the way
to help carry out community development works.
Burundi just concluded in November the
sixteenth edition of the Torch of Peace. A ceremony
was held during which all social segments of the
country — its active forces, small and large, men and
women, young and old — inspired by a single ideal of
unity, development, tolerance and non-violence, took to
22-71742

01/12/2022

A/77/PV.43

the roads of Burundi, running with the Torch of Peace
and stopping at places where public works were under
way, including schools, hospitals, stadiums, markets
and reforestation projects, to participate in development
and environmental protection efforts.

Sport is a vector for humanist values such as
tolerance and understanding among peoples and cultures
and is today a key and ongoing element of our lives
that we must continue to cultivate to foster peace and
solidarity in the international arena.

That was concrete evidence of the powerful link
between sport, peace and development. The promotion
of sporting activities, sponsored by His Excellency
the President of the Republic, helps to strengthen
social cohesion, peace and various socioeconomic
development programmes contained in our national
development plan 2018-2027. It is also a response to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063 of the African Union.

It is also a crucial factor in preventing young people
from falling prey to some of the issues that undermine
various societies, including violence, extremism and
drug abuse. During the difficult coronavirus disease
pandemic, many people turned to sport to overcome the
difficulties stemming from the uncertainty caused by the
pandemic, which led to the closing of many sports and
recreation centres.

My delegation believes that sporting activities not
only create a strong tradition between peoples, promote
good health and social cohesion but also protect the
environment and foster socioeconomic development.
The annual ceremony of the Torch of Peace ceremony
is an opportunity in my country to acknowledge the
very positive role that sport and physical activity play
within Burundian communities and in people’s lives.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that sport
has the power to change mindsets and should be used
as a powerful tool to bolster social ties and promote
sustainable development and peace, as well as solidarity
and respect for all.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank President Kőrösi for having convened this
annual debate on sport for development and peace. I
also thank the Permanent Representatives of Monaco
and Qatar, the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of
Sport for Development and Peace, for having submitted
and co-facilitated draft resolution A/77/L.28, entitled
“Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”, which
my country is proud to co-sponsor. We look forward to
its adoption by consensus at the end of this debate.
We align ourselves with preceding speakers to
commend the role played by sport, as it not only promotes
development, peace and social progress but also plays
a vital role in ensuring physical and especially mental
health. We are pleased at the recognition of sport as
an important factor in sustainable development that
contributes to, inter alia, the empowerment of women,
young people and persons with disabilities. Sport also
promotes peace, tolerance and mutual respect.

The social and universal dimension of sport
has often been underscored by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, who has always endeavoured to create
the conditions necessary for the sports sector to meet the
various challenges facing it and to shine during major
sporting events.
Sport is not just about training champions but also
requires the establishment of the necessary infrastructure
and the enactment of the relevant laws. Thus, under the
guidance of His Majesty, the goal of sport is not just
entertainment or achieving well-being, or a means of
taking part in regional, continental and international
competitions; it also relates to major development
projects and promotes the socioeconomic development
of Morocco.
The multifaceted role of sport is at the heart of
the royal vision, which focuses on the importance of
expanding access to sport for men and women throughout
society. Sport is a viewed as a strong driver of human
development as well as inclusiveness, social cohesion and
efforts to fight poverty, exclusion and marginalization.
The 2011 Constitution breathed new life into His
Majesty’s efforts by endorsing sport as a right to which
citizens must be ensured access by the public authorities
and is thus a vital pillar of the national strategy for the
promotion of sports.
As a reflection of the importance Morocco places on
sports, an annual race known as “10 km for peace” has
taken place every 6 April since 2007 to commemorate the
International Day of Sport for Peace and Development.
At the global and continental levels, Morocco has
successfully held numerous sporting events. It organized
the largest sporting event in Africa, that is, the twelfth
edition of the African Games, in 2019, providing

22-7174213/17

A/77/PV.43

01/12/2022

cutting-edge sporting equipment and infrastructure in
keeping with international standards, so as to meet the
expectations of our continent’s athletes.

improving lives through high-quality sporting
infrastructure, which provides a powerful tool to
achieve healthier lifestyles through sporting activities.

In 2013 and 2014, Morocco also successfully hosted
two editions of the Fédération Internationale de Football
Association (FIFA) World Cup and is a candidate for
hosting the 2025 African Cup of Nations.

At a time when the world’s soccer elite are
currently competing in Qatar, we should recall that
sport remains a vector for many positive values for
athletes and the general public alike. Sport speaks a
universal language that fosters fellowship on the field
while promoting the culture of success, sportsmanship
and love for one’s neighbour. It is a virtuous circle that
calls on all participants, both athletes and spectators, to
come together in brotherhood and peace. Sport, which
promotes tolerance and openness, is thus a true school
of life that helps everyone achieve their potential.

In addition, educating and protecting young people
so that they can contribute to building a better and
more peaceful world is a noble goal that the Kingdom
or Morocco has always endorsed by co-sponsoring the
various draft resolutions submitted in that area.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the brotherly State of Qatar on the excellent manner in
which it is hosting the 2022 FIFA World Cup, the first to
be held in the Middle East and the Arab world. Qatar’s
outstanding success in holding such an exceptional
global event, the warm welcome provided to guests and
the magnificent stadium and advanced infrastructure
continue to draw the entire world’s attention to and
admiration of this unprecedented edition in the history
of the World Cup. Not only the Arab world but the entire
world can be proud of Qatar’s success in its outstanding
and historic hosting of the 2022 World Cup.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
President Kőrösi for having convened this important
meeting on the topic of sport as an enabler of peace.
I thank the delegations of Monaco and Qatar for
their leadership in facilitating this important draft
resolution (A/77/L.28).
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the Groups of Friends and wishes to make a
statement in its national capacity.
Senegal commends the relevant initiatives of
the United Nations, particularly the inclusion since
2003 of this new agenda item on sport for peace and
development. My country welcomes the outstanding
work of the International Olympic Committee (IOC),
which, through its seamless organization of international
competitions and the Olympic Games in particular,
works tirelessly to build peace through sporting values
as tools for unity, tolerance and solidarity.
Through its policy of establishing sporting
programmes, the IOC, under the skilful leadership
of President Thomas Bach, is also promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women while
14/17

Keenly aware of all this, Senegal is ready to
contribute to the development of sport and to the
universalization of the noble values it represents. Indeed,
it will be hosting the Dakar 2026 Summer Youth Olympic
Games, to be held in Africa for the first time, to which
we invite all Member States. That is the significance of
my country’s commitment to the integration of sport
into various development programmes, striving to
leave no one behind, as recommended in the operative
part of the draft resolution before us. That is also why
my delegation has co-sponsored this draft resolution,
and we strongly urge its adoption by consensus.
Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Sport
motivates all society segments to engage in good
practices that promote the most noble principles and
values. Therefore, it is important for the international
community to attach great significance to sport and to
incorporate it into the daily lifestyle of all individuals
in all societies in order to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, under the wise leadership
of His Majesty King Hamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa and
on the instructions of His Royal Highness the Prime
Minister, Prince Salman Bin Hamad Al Khalifa, is
fully participating in international initiatives aimed
at promoting the role of sports in achieving peace and
development in the world and is committed to delivering
our message of supporting the international community
in stressing the important role of sports.
Every year on 10 February, the Kingdom of Bahrain
celebrates the National Day of Sport because sport
promotes ethical and human values, provides health
benefits and is a great driver of activity. We encourage
our citizens and residents to effectively engage in sport.
22-71742

01/12/2022

Sport is a key pillar of the prosperity of every
society. It should be among the main issues considered
by decision- and policy-makers, especially at this time
when recovery from the coronavirus disease pandemic
is a socioeconomic need. Sport contributes to getting
peoples closer, promoting peace and preventing chronic
diseases. The competent authorities in the Kingdom
encourage all citizens and residents to exercise so as to
ensure a healthy society.
Under the instructions of His Highness Nasser
Bin Hamad Al Khalifa, Representative of His Majesty
for Humanitarian and Youth Affairs, the Kingdom
of Bahrain has hosted a number of continental and
global championships and competitions, which
reflected our pioneering and distinguished stance
regarding world sports. That has made the Kingdom
a desirable destination and a centre for a number of
world competitions, including auto racing, martial
arts, horseback riding, triathlons and cycling. Those
competitions also include persons with disabilities.
We therefore stress the need to include sports in the
lives of persons with disabilities. Sports can be used to
achieve major humanitarian goals within a society. In
that context, the Kingdom of Bahrain hosted the Bocce
World Cup to raise awareness of and introduce people
to that sport. It is a quality sport that can be practised
by people with significant mental disabilities.
The Kingdom of Bahrain also stresses the important
role of sports in the lives of children and youth so as
to ensure a healthy lifestyle from childhood. In 2024
we will host the International School Games, in which
5,000 people from 80 States will participate.
In conclusion, we strongly believe that sport,
if well invested in, constitutes one of the pillars
of socioeconomic development. It is vital for postcoronavirus disease pandemic recovery and to achieve
sustainable development, as well as to promote the
culture of peace among all peoples of the world.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Olympic Committee.
Mr. Moreno (International Olympic Committee):
Please let me convey to all members the greetings
and best wishes of the President of the International
Olympic Committee, Mr. Thomas Bach, who asked me
to deliver his statement to the Assembly.

A/77/PV.43

“Please allow me to express the heartfelt thanks
and gratitude of the entire Olympic Movement to the
members of the United Nations General Assembly
for the imminent adoption of the draft resolution
entitled “Sport as an enabler of sustainable
development” (A/77/L.28). In particular, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
for his words, for presiding over this meeting and
for his supportive remarks. My thanks also go to
the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Sport for
Development and Peace, Qatar and Monaco, for
their invaluable role in galvanizing support for the
draft resolution.
“The many Member States that are supporting
the draft resolution as co-sponsors reflect the
widespread recognition of the essential role
of sport in society today. For that support and
recognition, we in the Olympic Movement are
humbled and grateful. The unity and consensus
among all United Nations Member States on the
draft resolution serve as further encouragement
for the entire Olympic and sporting community for
everything we are doing to make the world a better
place through sport.
“We also want to express our appreciation
for the report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Sport: catalyst for a better, stronger recovery
for all” (A/77/161), as well as to the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs for showcasing
many dimensions of the contribution of sport to
immediate-term recovery from the coronavirus
disease and the positive impact of sport in a postpandemic context.
“In the difficult times that humankind is
facing, it is crystal clear that we need the power
of sport as a force for good in our communities
more than ever before. That is why our Olympic
Agenda 2020+5 reform programme is fully focused
on strengthening the role of sport as an important
enabler of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Encouraged by the strong acknowledgement
in the draft resolution of that contribution of
sport, the message from the Olympic Movement
to the Assembly is that we are ready to fulfil the
enabling role that Member States have assigned to
sport. With our Olympism 365 strategy, we intend
to strengthen collaboration between the Olympic
community and partner organizations within the
United Nations system and beyond to advance the

22-7174215/17

A/77/PV.43

SDGs through sport in areas such as peace, health,
education, gender equality, climate action and
many more.
“In delivering on Olympic Agenda 2020+5,
we have also committed to strengthening our
credibility and integrity, because we know that our
ability to fulfil the enabling role of sport depends
on our credibility. As values-based organizations,
we have the double duty to uphold good governance,
fight corruption, promote human rights and
safeguard within our remit and across all activities
for which sport is responsible. We are therefore
fully committed to living up to our role in all the
dimensions called for in the draft resolution.
“By adopting the draft resolution, members
would also be supporting the overarching mission of
the Olympic and Paralympic Games to be a unifying
force, bringing the entire world together in peaceful
competition with no discrimination whatsoever. In
our polarized world, with divisions and conflicts
on the rise, there are not many occasions whereby
all of humankind can set aside differences and
come together in peace. As the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, said, the Olympic spirit
is the most important symbol of peace in today’s
world. That is why we are so grateful that the draft
resolution specifically highlights that international
sport events should be organized in a spirit of
peace, without discrimination of any kind and, in
particular, that the unifying and conciliative nature
of those events should be respected.
“We can accomplish that unifying mission only
if the Olympic and Paralympic Games stand beyond
all political, cultural and other differences. That is
possible only if the Olympic Games are politically
neutral and do not become a tool to achieve political
goals. It is therefore with the highest appreciation
that we welcome the unequivocal support from
United Nations Member States for the political
neutrality of the International Olympic Committee
and the autonomy of sport, which is expressed in the
draft resolution.
“That is only the most recent example of
numerous declarations in which the international
community has thrown its weight behind our unifying
mission and political neutrality. At the recent Group
of 20 (G-20) Leaders’ Summit, the Chair of the
G-20, Indonesia’s President Joko Widodo, expressed
16/17

01/12/2022

his support for the political neutrality of sport,
while also emphasizing the unifying power of the
Olympic and Paralympic Games. Support also came
from President Emmanuel Macron of France, the
host country of the next Olympic and Paralympic
Games, who said that sport should not be politicized.
He went on to say that, while he did not know the
context in which the Olympic Games to be held in
France in 2024 would take place on a geopolitical
level, such major events were meant to allow athletes
from all countries — sometimes including countries
at war — to live their sport. He also expressed his
belief in the need to preserve the ability to find,
through sport, means of discussion when people can
no longer talk to each other.
“We see how important that support for our
mission is at this very moment with the war in
Ukraine. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine blatantly
violates the Olympic Truce resolution and, with it,
the Olympic Charter. That gives us all the more
reason to promote our unifying mission with our full
determination and all our heart.
“In that context, the wide support for the Olympic
peace mission, as expressed in the draft resolution
to be adopted today, sends a hopeful message in
these dark times. It reflects our conviction that only
by coming together in peace and solidarity can we
overcome the manifold challenges facing humankind
at this time. That is why we changed our Olympic
motto to “Faster, higher, stronger — together”.
The word “together” emphasizes our belief that, no
matter what obstacles we might face, we can make
progress only in partnership and in solidarity with
our fellow human beings.
“We are heartened and humbled by the trust and
confidence that the Assembly has placed in sport as
an enabler for sustainable development and peace.
In partnership with all members and based on our
principle of political neutrality, we will continue
to strengthen the contribution of sport as called
for in the draft resolution. We will take the draft
resolution and members’ encouragement fully into
account in our current and future deliberations and
actions. We also look forward to reporting back to
the Assembly at next year’s session on the progress
that we have made. In that Olympic spirit, let us
join hands to make the world a better place through
sport — together.”
22-71742

01/12/2022

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/77/L.28.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Ms. Marks (United States of America): The
United States strongly believes that sport and physical
education contribute to the promotion of education,
health, development and peace, as well as to the
promotion of equal access to opportunities for physical
education and physical activity for all, including for
women and girls, in all their diversity, and persons
with disabilities.
The United States looks forward to joining the
consensus on draft resolution A/77/L.28, entitled
“Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”,
with the understanding that, when this draft resolution
acknowledges the importance of taking measures
with respect to various aspects of education, it does
so in terms that are mindful of, and consistent with,
the Government’s framework for education in our
respective federal, state and local authorities.
We further understand the reference in the draft
resolution to “internationally agreed development goals”
to refer to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on A/77/L.28,
entitled “Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda: (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.28: Algeria,
Andorra, Bahrain, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Chad, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,

A/77/PV.43

the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, the Maldives,
Mauritania, Montenegro, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname,
Switzerland, Togo, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.28?
Draft resolution A/77/L.28 was adopted
(resolution 77/27).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Programme of Work
The Acting President: Before adjourning, I would
like to draw the attention of members to the date of
recess of the current session. Members will recall
that, at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022
(see A/77/PV.3), the General Assembly decided that
the seventy-seventh session would recess on Monday,
12 December 2022.
However, I have been informed by the Chair of
the Fifth Committee that the Committee requests
an extension of its work to Friday, 23 December
2022, in view that such an extension would facilitate
a comprehensive consideration of the agenda items
before it.
In that connection, and in view of the work that
remains to be completed for this part of the session,
may I take it that the Assembly agrees to postpone the
date of recess to Friday, 23 December 2022?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I also take it that the
General Assembly agrees to extend the work of the
Fifth Committee until Friday, 23 December 2022?
It was so decided (decision 77/504).
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-7174217/17
