Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

---------to the effect that they should refrain from action running

counter to the main purposes of that Convention;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in
the light of the comments and observations submitted
by Governments, the study of the question of the
punishment of war crimes and crimes against humanity
and the criteria for determining compensation to the
victims of such crimes, in order to submit a report on
this question to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2713 (XXV). Measures to be taken against nazism
and racial intolerance
The General Assembly,

Reaffirming its faith in the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and abiding by
them,
Recalling its resolutions 2331 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, 2438 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and
2545 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
Noting that nazism, racism, apartheid and other
similar ideologies and practices have in the past repeatedly led to barbarous acts that trouble the (conscience of mankind, and ultimately to war, and still
have the power to threaten universal peace and the
security of nations,
Deeply concerned by the fact that, twenty-five years
after the foundation of the United Nations, the activities
of groups and organizations which are proponents of
the ideologies and practices of nazism, racism and
apartheid are still continuing,
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that not all
the States concerned have taken the measures specified
in the aforementioned resolutions for the complete
prohibition of Nazi and racist organizations and groups
and for their prosecution in the courts,
Welcoming the contribution which the relevant specialized agencies can make to the fight against naZism
and racial intolerance and the measures already taken
by many of them in this respect,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
4 (XXVI) of 4 March 1970,86 in which the Commission noted the tentative nature of the findings on this
subject in the study on racial discrimination prepared
by the Special Rapporteur3 7 and requested the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to continue its study, placing
special emphasis on measures to be taken to detect and
effectively to prevent contemporary activities that might
be inspired by nazism or any other totalitarian ideology
based on incitement to hatred and racial intolerance,
1. Again resolutely condemns nazism, racism,
apartheid and other totalitarian and colonial ideologies
and practices which are based on terror and racial intolerance;
2. Urges the States concerned to implement without
delay the resolutions of the General Assembly and,
in particular, to take legislative and other effective
me¥ures with a view to the speedy and final eradication of nazism, including its contemporary forms, of
86 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/4816), chapter

xxm.

BT E/CN.4/Sub.2/301.

79

racism and of other similar ideologies and practices
based on terror and racial intolerance;
3. Calls upon States during 1971, the International
Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to take all effective measures to combat
s:ontemporary manifestations of nazism and other forms
of racial intolerance;
4. Decides to retain on its agenda the item concerning measures to be taken against nazism and other
totalitarian ideologies and practices based on incitement to hatred and racial intolerance.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2714 (XXV). Question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedom.8, including
policies of racial discrimination and eegre.
gation and of apartheid, in all countries, with
particular reference to colonial and other
dependent countries and Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2440 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 in which, inter alia, it condemned any and
every practice of torture, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees and prisoners in South African
prisons and in South African police custody duimg
mterrogation and detention,
Recalling its resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969 in which it expressed the firm intention of
the United Nations, acting in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, to intensify its efforts
to find a solution to the present grave situation in
southern Africa,
Also recalling Security Council resolutions 264
( 1969) of 20 March 1969 and 269 (1969) of n
August 1969 on Namibia,
Further recalling General Assembly resolution 2547
A (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 relating, inter alia,
to the inhuman and degrading treatment and torture of
political prisoners, detainees and captured freedom
fighters in the Territories ruled by Governments and
rlgimes wedded to the policies of apartheid, radal discrimination and colonialism in southern Africa,
Determined to promote immediate and urgent actiou
with a view to restoring the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the oppressed peoples of southern
Africa,
1. Commends the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts on the treatment of political prisoners in South
Africii 88 for its valuable report; 39
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggles of the
peoples of southern Africa to oppose the policies of
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism and to
assert their right to self-determination;
3. Condemns any and every practice of torture and
ill-treatment of prisoners, detainees and captured freedom fighters in Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and the
African Territories under Portuguese domination, as
well as of persons in police custody in these Territories;
88 Established under Commission on Hrlman Rights resolution 2 (XXIII) of 6 March 1967.
89 E/CN.4/984 and Add.1, Add.2/Rev.1, Add.3/Rev.1,
Add.4 and S, Add.6/Rev.1, Add.7/Rev.1, Add.8 and 9, Add.10/
Rev.I, Add.11/Rev.1, Add.12-14, Add.lS/Rev.1, Add.16/Rev.1
and Add. 17-19.

General A.11embly-Twenty-fifth Seesion

. 4. A.gain condemns any and every practice of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners and detainees in
prisons and in police custody in South Africa;
S. Reaffirms that the Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners, of 30 August 1955,'° apply
to all political prisoners or detainees, in prisou or
in police custody throughout South Africa, Namibiaa Territory under direct United Nations responsibility
and at present under illegal South African occupationthe rebel United Kingdom colony of Southern Rhodesia
and the African Territories under Portuguese domination;
6. Condemns the trial of the twenty-two Africans
held under the Suppression of Communism Act and
further condemns their subsequent re-arrest under the
notorious Terrorism Act of 1967;
1. Reaffirms that:
(a} The condition of political prisoners in South
Africa continues to cause alarm;
( b) The increasing co-operation between the Government of South Africa and the illegal racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia poses a further and continuing threat
to the opponents of the two regimes and to captured
freedom fighters;
(c) Sections 10 and 29 of the General Law Amendment Act, 1969, concerning the Bureau of State
Security, not only constitute one of the most sinister
pieces of legislation in recent years, but also contribute
decisively towards making South Africa a complete
police State, and the working of that law is also contrary to article 11, paragraph 1, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, since it prevents the accused
from proving his innocence;
(d) Many political prisoners and detainees have died
in South African prisons during 1969, in conditions
which warrant a full inquiry;
(e) Mr. James Lenkoe, a P,Olitical prisoner in South
Africa, did not commit suiCide as reported, but died
as a result of electric shocks administered to various
parts of his body;
(f) The practice of compelling prisoners to testify
against their erstwhile comrades is reprehensible;
(g) In the Caprivi Strip, Namibian villages have
been shelled by the occupying South African security
forces and indiscriminate firing has been resorted to in
villages that are suspected of harbouring freedom
fighters;
(h) The system of "Bantustans" established in South
Africa is being gradually extended to the occupied
Territory of Namibia;
(i) In the absence of intervention by the United
Nations, the occupation of Namibia by South Africa is
resulting in ever increasing hardship to the non-white
population as well as a total suppression of human rights
there;
(i) The so-called "Constitution of Rhodesia" of
1969 is an illegal as well as a pernicious document and
the "Declaration of Rights" embodied in it confers
few, if any, rights on non-Whites;
(k) Section 84 of the 1969 "Constitution of
Rhodesia", providing that no court shall inquire into
or pronounce upon the validity of any law on the
ground that it is inconsistent with the "Declaration of
'° See First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders: report prepared by the
Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No.: 1956.IV.4),
annex I, A.

Rights", establishes a clear inconsistency in the illegal
"legislation" itself and, further, brings out the authoritarian and racist character of the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
( l) The reserves in Southern Rhodesia consist of
poor and infertile lands into which Africans are herded
like cattle;
( m) The condition of Africans in the reserves is
appalling and nothing is being done to improve their
conditions of hygiene, diet, nutrition, sanitation, health
and their educational standards;
(n) In the Por.:uguese Territories, the mass killing
of suspected opponents of the regime continues
unabated;
( o) The most inhuman form of forced labour prevails in the African Territories under Portuguese
domination;
8. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
implement the recommendations contained in the
earlier reports of the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts and also:
(a) To disband immediately the Bureau of State
Security;
( b) To discontinue the practice by which political
detainees are compelled to testify against their former
colleagues;
(c) To release immediately and unconditionally the
twenty-two Africans re-arrested on 16 February 1970
under the Terrorism Act;
(d) To grant full access at all trials of political opponents of the regime to independent outside observers;
( e) To permit a full and impartial investigation into
the deaths of political prisoners and detainees in its
gaols as well as to indemnify fully the families of the
deceased;
9. Condemns the trial of the eight Namibians under
the Terrorism Act, which took place at Windhoek
between July and November 1969, and further calls
upon the Government of South Africa:
(a) To release immediately and unconditionally
those tried under the above-mentioned Terrorism Act;
( b) To desist forthwith from the extension of the
"Bantustans" system into Namibia;
10. Once again calls upon the Government of South
Africa to terminate its illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to intervene
more effectively than heretofore in its rebellious colony
of Southern Rhodesia with a view to:
(a) Implementing the action proposed by the Ad
Hoe Working Group of Experts in paragraphs 82 to 94
of its report; 41
( b) Liberating the Africans from the reserves in
which they are concentrated in conditions of near
captivity and bondage;
( c) Repealing the entire so-called "Constitution of
Rhodesia" of 1969;
12. Requests the United KinJdOm to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session the results
of the effective measures it is called upon to take in
paragraph 11 above;
u See E/CN.4/984/ Add.8.

Reeolution1 adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

13. Calls upon the Government of Portugal:
(a) To observe immediately the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949;42
(b) To eradicate the practice of xibalo, or forced
labour, in its African colonies;
(c) To introduce a system in which the products
of the African farmers can be freely bought and sold
in normal market conditions;
14. Condemns once again the actions of those Governments which continue to maintain diplomatic, economic. cultural and other relations with the Government of South Africa and with the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia in violation of United Nations
resolutions;
15. Calls upon those Governments urgently to consider breaking off such relations and, if they have not
already done so, to report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session the reasons therefor;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution and also to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyseventh session on the measures taken to publicize the
report of the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2715 (XXV). Employment of qualified women in
llellior and other profeaional positions by
the secretariats of organizations in the
United Nations system

The General Assembly,
RecalUng Article 101 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women,
1. Expresses the hope that the United Nations, including its special bodies and all intergovernmental
agencies in the United Nations system of organizations,
will set an example with regard to the opportunities
they afford for the employment of women at senior
and other professional levels;
2. Urges the United Nations, including its special
bodies and all intergovernmental agencies in the United
Nations system of organizations, to take or continue
to take appropriate measures to ensure equal opportunities for the employment of qualified women in
senior and other professional positions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
report to the General Assembly on the composition of
the Secretariat data on the employment of women at
senior and other professional levels by the secretariats
of the above-mentioned bodies, including their numbers
and the positions they occupy.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2716 (XXV). Programme of concerted international action for the advancement of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1777 (XVII) of 7 December
a United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos.
970-973.

81

1962 initiating the study of a unified, long-term United
Nations programme for the advancement of women,
Recalling also the ~laration on the Elimination ol.
Discrimination against Women, adopted on 7 November 1967, and the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, adopted on 11 December 1969,
Noting resolution IX of the International Conference
on Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968,'3 on
measures to promote women's rights in the modern
world, including a unified, long-term United Nations
programme for the advancement of women, which
established guidelines for such a programme,
Noting also that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2571 (XXIV) of 13 December
1969 and with paragraph 79 of Assembly resolution
2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, concerning the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, arran1ements should
be made to keep under systematic scrutiny the progress
towards achie~J the goals and objectives of the
Decade, to identify shortfalls in their achievement and
the policies that are not consistent with the attainment
of those objectives and to recommend positive measures, including new goals and policies as needed,
Expressing the hope that general and complete disarmament under effective international control will
allow for the use of the resources released progressively
for purposes of economic and social progress of all
peoples, including the elaboration of programmes designed to advance the status of women,
Believing that a programme of concerted international action, planned on a long-term basis, will advance
the status of women and increase their effective participation in all sectors,
Considering that the success of such a programme
will require intensified action on the part of Member
States, at the national and regional levels, as well as
maximum use of the methods and techniques available
through the United Nations system of organizations,
Believing that an important step in the further development of such a programme would be the establishment of concrete objectives and minimum targets,
1. Recommends that the objectives and targets set
forth in the annex to the present resolution should be
achieved as widely as possible during the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations or
members of specialized agencies and all organs and
agencies within the United Nations system to co-operate
in achieving these objectives and targets, and hopes
that adequate staff and resources will be made available for this purpose;
3. Recommends that concerted efforts should be
made to increase the resources available for technical
co-operation projects which advance the status of
women and that consideration be given to allocating
a specific percentage of the available funds for this
purpose;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Commission on the Status of Women if
possible at its twenty-fourth session, information 'on
the ex!ent to which ~omen are participating in, and
benefiting from, techmcal co-operation projects;
63 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E 68 XIV'>)
p. 10.
. .
·- '
