S/PV.8033

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8033

rd meeting
Tuesday, 29 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Dovganyuk
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Their potential contribution to the overarching goal of sustaining peace
Letter dated 7 August 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/692)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-27086 (E)
*1727086*

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Their potential contribution to the overarching
goal of sustaining peace
Letter dated 7 August 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/692)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cyprus, Estonia,
Fiji, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland,
Thailand, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations; and His Excellency Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/692, which contains a letter dated
7 August 2017 from the Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, of the High-Level Independent
2/70

29/08/2017

Panel on Peace Operations; and Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.
Egypt has convened this meeting because it believes
in the importance of pursuing efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of the international peace and security
system at the United Nations. Egypt is also concerned
about the need to identify a clear vision of the optimum
benefits to be drawn from the available tools in
addressing crises. There is no doubt that peacekeeping
operations are the most important and widely used tool
of the Security Council to maintain peace and security,
protect civilians and create a climate conducive to the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Peacekeeping operations are also a means to
facilitate the recovery of societies from the tangible
and intangible destruction that is the legacy of warfare.
In that regard, Egypt believes that the credibility and
effectiveness of peacekeeping mandates are linked to
a fundamental restructuring of the philosophy of the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
the need to shift from the standard, accepted ways of
managing conflict in order to seek a true transformation
towards the achievement of sustainable peace.
Today’s discussion is therefore aimed primarily
at developing a strategic approach to enhancing
the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations, and at considering the means available
to improving peacekeeping mandates in order to
make peace sustainable. This approach gains added
importance in the light of the huge challenges related
to armed conflict, which are interlinked with the threat
posed by the spread of terrorism, organized crime and
major population movements, not to mention weak
State structures, the torn social fabric, the lack of
employment opportunities and low standards of living
in certain societies.
We hope that we shall emerge from this meeting
with a clear vision and practical ideas that will
contribute to modifying the culture and the tools used
to design and review peacekeeping operations in a
manner that will guarantee the twofold goal of ending
violence and protecting civilians, on the one hand, and
paving the way towards sustainable peace, on the other.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Security Council and the Egyptian presidency for
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

this timely reflection on the contribution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to global efforts to
sustain peace.
The nature of today’s challenges requires us to
connect all our efforts for peace and security, human
rights and sustainable development. Member States
have explicitly acknowledged this interlinkage, most
recently in the twin resolutions on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture (Security Council 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262).
The universality of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its pledge to leave no one behind
has put sustainable development at the core of the
sustaining peace agenda. Sustainable development
cannot be achieved in the absence of the conditions
for peace, and implementing all the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) will make an enormous
contribution to the sustaining peace agenda. The links
between both agendas are found not only in Goal 16, on
strong institutions and inclusive societies, but across all
17 Goals. Sustaining peace, understood as a process and
a goal to build a common vision of a society, underlines
the comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred
approach of the 2030 Agenda.
Implementing the sustaining peace agenda requires
an inclusive strategy that supports the diverse range
of our missions and takes account of the entire peace
continuum, from prevention, conflict resolution
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term
development. The resolutions on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture outline
the importance of strong coordination, coherence and
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the formation, review
and drawdown of peacekeeping operations. The Council
has a vital role to play.
Peacekeeping operations need clear, realistic and
up-to-date mandates with well-identified priorities,
adequate sequencing and the flexibility to evolve over
time. Coherence, complementarity and collaboration
between the United Nations peace and security efforts
and its development and humanitarian work are also
essential to preventing conflict and mitigating risks,
fostering more sustainable outcomes and ensuring that
no one is left behind.
Looking ahead, we must work together to ensure
that peacekeeping lives up to its full potential as an
essential tool for sustaining peace — not in isolation but

S/PV. 8033

as part of our new, integrated approach. Peacekeeping
missions operate with strong links with the United
Nations development system and the humanitarian
community to facilitate a more integrated approach to
peacebuilding initiatives, exit strategies and transition
plans, as we have seen in the cases of Liberia and Haiti.
Sustaining peace is an inherently inclusive
political process that spans development activities,
preventive measures, mediation, conflict management
and conflict resolution. Implementing the sustaining
peace agenda means putting Member States and their
populations in the lead, prioritizing political solutions,
making prevention the priority, and leveraging the
United Nations three pillars — human rights, peace
and security, and development — in a mutually
reinforcing way.
The Secretary-General’s vision of prevention goes
beyond averting crisis and violent conflict and takes
account of the changing nature of crises in today’s
unpredictable world. It requires a broad, whole-ofUnited Nations approach, as well as greater synergies
for more effective delivery and impact. We need
to enhance our support by drawing on the United
Nations early warning capacity, mediation, preventive
diplomacy and programmes and activities in the field.
In line with this vision, the Secretary-General
has committed to a surge in diplomacy for peace, in
partnership with a wide range of actors. Prevention
measures and peace processes must be driven by
national leadership and inclusive ownership that
recognize the needs and contributions of all segments
of society, especially women and young people as our
agents of development and peace.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the international community
acknowledged the role of young men and women as
critical agents of change. They will find in the SDGs a
platform to channel their capacities for peace into the
creation of a better world. The future of humankind
lies in their hands, and they will pass the torch to
future generations. Empowering them and building a
sustainable future requires stronger institutions and
better governance. That is why we must invest more in
development and mobilize our efforts towards fostering
peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are free
from fear and violence. There can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without

17-270863/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sustainable development, and there can be neither
without human rights.
In order to achieve sustaining peace and sustainable
development we need to engage in strong collective
action and enhanced collaboration and partnerships,
including with the business community, financial
institutions, civil society, and regional and subregional
organizations. We need to deepen ties with regional
and subregional partners, the World Bank, which is
drastically increasing its involvement in conflictaffected countries, and the International Monetary
Fund, which is seeking to reduce the destabilizing
influence of corruption so as to ensure better investment
in peace.
At the African Union summit in July, I committed
the Organization to strengthening our partnership on
political issues and peace operations, with stronger
mutual support and continued capacity-building
through the joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. The Peacebuilding Commission occupies
a unique role in bringing all those partners together.
I invite the Security Council to engage more actively
with the Commission. Those partnerships must also be
based on solid and predictable funding, including for
prevention, in line with the sustaining peace agenda. I
hope a united Council will consider supporting missions
backed by a Council resolution and implemented by
our partners, either with assessed contributions or by
promoting other predictable financing mechanisms.
Let me now turn to the subject of reform. We need
to improve how we review peacekeeping operations, in
consultation with our development and humanitarian
partners, and to ensure a strong human rights and
gender focus. Women are the first to bear the brunt of
conflict and endure the post-conflict transition, they are
also expected to lay a foundation for peace. In all fields
of peacekeeping, women peacekeepers have proven that
they can perform the same roles to the same standards
and under the same difficult conditions as their male
counterparts. It is an operational imperative that we
recruit and retain female peacekeepers and police. Not
only because gender parity is essential for its own sake,
but because the involvement of women increases the
chances of sustained peace and reduces incidences of
sexual abuse and exploitation.
We must work together across our silos and address
the humanitarian/development/peace nexus, as well as
4/70

29/08/2017

the root causes of violence and conflict. Sustaining
peace can be achieved only through a broader vision
of prevention. Humanitarian and development actors
need to work together to bridge the gap between relief
efforts and development aid, and enable Governments
and communities to build and strengthen their
capacities for resilience, disaster risk reduction and
mitigation, and conflict prevention, in particular in
developing countries.
It is our duty to support the people of the
world and provide them with effective and timely
humanitarian assistance and development programmes
simultaneously, through a coherent whole-of-system
approach. Guided by the Secretary-General’s ambition
to overcome fragmentation and make prevention the
priority of the United Nations, we have taken important
steps to outline a comprehensive and bold agenda so as
to improve how the United Nations delivers to the people
it serves. It is crucial to recognize that development is
an end in itself and a central part of our work.
The Secretary-General’s repositioning of the
United Nations development system and the reform of
the peacebuilding architecture reflect the instrumental
role of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as
a road map for sustainable development and sustaining
peace. The Sustainable Development Goals are key
tools for preventing crises and achieving sustained
peace. The reform of the United Nations system has
been designed to reinforce the interlinkages between
the 2030 Agenda and the sustaining peace agenda,
as outlined in the presentation on the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the United Nations development
system (E/20183) to the Economic and Social Council
in July. Among other steps, the Secretary-General’s
recommendation calls for strengthening the leadership
of Resident Coordinators and establishing a direct line
from them to the Secretary-General, thereby ensuring
more responsive accountability, coordination and
efficiency on issues that are related to prevention,
sustaining development and sustaining peace.
In order to effectively implement such reforms
and sustain peace we must build the resilience of the
poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their
exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme
events and other economic, social and environmental
shocks and disasters. Each mission and peacekeeping
operation must be considered in its unique political
and development context. In many ways, one of
peacekeeping’s most important contributions to peace is
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the preparation for a smooth and effective peacekeeping
mission drawdown and hand-over to the United Nations
Country Team.
We have recently seen successful examples of
that process in Côte d’Ivoire and soon in Liberia. In
Haiti and Darfur, community-violence reduction
programmes are impeding the recruitment of at-risk
youth by armed criminal groups, thereby contributing
to stability and social cohesion. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali mainstreams the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security-sector
reform processes. In order to deepen those successes
we must work together for gender parity, particularly
in missions that are moving from military to police
and civilian components. For example, we must use
the window of opportunity that is emerging from the
drawdown of the military component of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to engage more
women in police and civilian operations.
Peace processes are rarely short or straightforward.
The complexity of current conflicts requires a
multidimensional approach that prioritizes a range of
initiatives. They include providing crucial protection for
civilians under threat and strengthening institutions, as
well as the rule of law, so as to bolster respect for human
rights at all levels. They require the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups, and
they entail a focus on justice and reconciliation, proven
credible elections and the extension of legitimate and
accountable State authority.
For many people suffering in conflict-affected
countries United Nations peacekeeping missions are a
rare source of hope for the return of peace. Their success
is a source of great pride for us all. I would like to pay
tribute to the brave men and women of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, whether civilian, military or
police, and take the opportunity to encourage more
women to join our missions. I would particularly like to
honour the sacrifices of those who have lost their lives
while providing an indispensable service.
In order to ensure that we are on the right
peacebuilding track, we must get the politics right.
Peacekeeping operations are political instruments that
ideally accompany a locally-owned peace process. To
that end, missions provide good offices and work closely
with the various parties and communities to achieve

S/PV. 8033

and implement peace agreements. In considering all
those areas, a broader and more sustained level of
engagement by members of a united and strong Security
Council, individually or collectively, is essential in
order to ensure that member States, the United Nations
system and all our partners are aligned behind a
common purpose and a common vision for action that
integrates all pillars of the United Nations and brings
all its activities together in a truly integrated fashion.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the
sustaining peace resolutions, we have mapped the
road to a safer, more resilient and sustainable world.
The challenge now is how to ensure that the journey
is successful and that its gains are truly irreversible.
I look forward to the support of the Security Council
in orienting efforts and resources towards our ultimate
goal of achieving sustainable development and
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahmoud.
Mr. Mahmoud: I thank you, Sir, for inviting
me to address the Security Council on such an
important subject.
The purpose of my briefing is twofold. First, it is to
present to the Council the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations’ (HIPPO) view of the conceptual
and attitudinal shifts that need to be internalized by
peace operations if they are to unleash their potential
to contribute to sustaining peace. Secondly, it is to
share with the Security Council some of the practical
implications of those shifts, in terms of the design,
implementation and review of peacekeeping operations.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) devotes some 10
pages to the issue of sustaining peace. Its main thrust
is to unpack the spirit and the letter of its title, which
calls for “uniting our strengths for peace: politics,
partnership and people”. HIPPO views sustaining
peace as the ultimate objective of United Nations postconflict engagement, in which inclusive politics and the
people in that inclusive plurality, including women and
youth, play a central role.
What are the shifts advocated by HIPPO for the
purpose of sustaining peace? Let me just mention three
of them. The first is to acknowledge that countries
emerging from conflict are not blank pages and their

17-270865/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

people are not projects. Internal actors at all levels of
society are the main agents of peace. That means that
our efforts to help sustain peace should be motivated by
humility to learn from what still works well in countries
emerging from conflict and to respect that every
society, however broken it may appear, has capacities
and assets, not just needs and vulnerabilities. Such
an approach goes against the grain of the practices of
some outside interveners who believe that countries in
conflict lack the competency and resources to address
their own predicament.
That myopia leads me to the second shift
advocated by HIPPO, namely, the need to challenge
the assumptions and values that underpin some of the
supply-driven templates and technical approaches and
solutions that are regular staples in the mandates of a
number of peacekeeping operations. Strengthening
central State institutions, for example, is believed to
create the conditions for peace. However, that approach
ignores the fact that State institutions, as they are
being strengthened, tend to be in the thrall of domestic
ruling elites who are concerned more about power
than governance and susceptible “to corruption by
powerful groups”.
The third shift advocated by HIPPO is
politics — legitimate politics, I hasten to add. Lasting
peace is neither achieved nor sustained through military
and technical engagements, but through political
solutions. Peace processes do not end with a ceasefire or
a peace agreement, which simply mean that belligerents
have decided, sometimes through coercive diplomacy,
to move from violence to politics, a transition usually
fraught with uncertainties and reversals. HIPPO
contends that politics is the best force multiplier where
missions are deployed in hostile environments.
Therefore, what are the practical implications of
those three shifts? Let me mention two.
First, there is a need to rethink the way that we
analyse peace and conflict when planning and reviewing
peace operations. Such analysis should not only assess
the factors that drive and sustain violence and instability,
it should also map what is still working and not just
what needs to be fixed. Such mapping would include
surveys of the resilient capacities that host societies
and ordinary people are using to peacefully manage
conflict and subsist in the direst of circumstances. It
would also assess other determinants of peace, such as
the commitments of domestic, bilateral and regional
6/70

29/08/2017

stakeholders to the cause of peace, accompanied by an
inventory of their respective interests and comparative
advantages. Given that the drivers of instability tend
to be transnational in origin and effect, the analysis
should assess those drivers from a regional perspective.
And because women and youth experience conflict
differently, specific measures should be taken to ensure
their unique perspectives are taken into account at
every step of that analytical exercise. Let me hasten to
add that several peacekeeping missions are undertaking
aspects of that type of analysis, including through
surveys. But I suspect that sustaining peace is not the
overarching organizing framework for collecting and
processing information.
The second practical implication of the shifts is the
development of a strategic compact for sustaining peace.
That could be initiated in response to a specific and firm
request from the Security Council. The compact would
articulate a shared, context-sensitive understanding of
what sustaining peace means in accordance with the
spirit and the letter of resolution 2282 (2016). It would
outline, on the basis of the analysis I just discussed, the
primary responsibilities of the host country and other
national stakeholders, as well as the supportive role
of the United Nations system on the ground under the
leadership of an empowered Resident Coordinator. The
compact would also include time-bound performance
benchmarks to ensure mutual accountability and
facilitate reporting. It would be a strategic framework
that would ensure inclusive national ownership and the
primacy of legitimate politics. In addition, it would
enable the mission to execute its mandate from a longterm, sustaining-peace perspective, whether the task
is the extension of State authority or the protection
of civilians.
The compact would also respond to the call by the
Secretary-General and others to build synergies among
the three foundational pillars of the United Nations and
to put “we the peoples” at the centre of United Nations
engagement. The pillars, including the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, would flow through
the compact in an integrated manner. It would also
provide a natural home for people-centred approaches,
particularly if the compact is vetted through a standing
civil society consultative body.
I recognize that this is a tall order, and attempts
have been made, particularly in peacekeeping missions
serving in challenging political contexts where host
Governments are unable or unwilling to cooperate. But
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

without a shift in mindset and an up-front investment
in strategic analysis and an inclusive compact-building
process for the sake of peace, the United Nations, in my
view, will continue to deploy peacekeepers into hostile
environments with little or no peace to keep, where
at times the line between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement becomes blurred and where the primary
focus during review periods is largely on meeting the
pressing operational and logistical requirements for
overstretched missions.
In conclusion, the next time peacekeeping
operations come up for review, particularly those with
“stabilization” as their middle name, I humbly suggest
that the Council consider the following four questions.
First, does the mission have dedicated capacity at
the highest level to generate and cultivate legitimate
political solutions?
Secondly, does the mission have the necessary
knowledge, skills and attitudes to regularly conduct
strategic, integrated and participatory analyses to
identify how it can contribute to sustaining peace?
Thirdly, does the mission have a binding, strategic
compact and an exit strategy that, in addition to its
intrinsic mandated objectives, are explicitly designed to
contribute to the overarching goal of sustaining peace?
Fourthly, and lastly, does it have mission-wide
consultative mechanisms that put people at the centre
and to ensure inclusive national ownership and effective
trust-building?
The answers to those questions and the debates
they may generate might offer the Council, with the
advisory support of the Peacebuilding Commission, an
opportunity to include in mission mandates provisions
that can enhance their potential to contribute to
sustaining peace, guided by the spirit and the letter
of HIPPO recommendations and the sustaining
peace resolutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Mahmoud
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rosenthal.
Mr. Rosenthal: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me in my capacity as Chair of one of the three
major 2015 reviews on how the United Nations deals
with its remit on peace and security. I thank you, also,
for the concept paper prepared by you (S/2017/692,
annex), which offers guidance for today’s deliberations.

S/PV. 8033

All three of the reviews, and perhaps most of all the
review on the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
struggled with a fundamental contradiction rooted in
the Charter of the United Nations. That contradiction
takes on at least three different expressions.
First, while we were arguing that sustaining peace
requires a coherent and comprehensive United Nations
approach, the segmentation of responsibilities assigned
to each of the principal intergovernmental organs
in the Charter has led instead to a fragmented and
muddled approach. As we all know, while the Security
Council’s purpose is to maintain international peace
and security, it is the Economic and Social Council and,
of course, the General Assembly, that deal with human
rights, development and governance issues. While
there is considerable overlap in the execution of those
functions, the traditional pillars of peace, human rights
and development generally do operate in the proverbial
silos that, sadly, we have all become accustomed to.
Secondly, while we were arguing that sustaining
peace requires that interventions be made during all the
various phases of a potential conflict — before, during
and after — the Council has continued to act on the broad
assumption that there is some unalterable sequencing
in the dynamics that lead to violent conflicts, referring
to peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding as
if they are part of a natural continuum. Indeed, the
Council still attaches the adjective “post-conflict” to
the word “peacebuilding”, subliminally relegating the
whole concept — and the issue of addressing many of
the root causes of conflict — to a relatively peripheral
role, because ending a war always takes priority over
other matters.
Thirdly, and picking up on my previous point, what
really deserves priority is preventing violent conflicts
in the first place by addressing the grievances that lead
to such outcomes. The fact is that while we have all
argued that sustaining peace requires putting the accent
on conflict prevention rather than acting when the train
has already left the station, a review of the Council’s
activities over the years reveals that, in practice, the
opposite has usually been the case. Those, then, were
the contradictions or dilemmas we faced.
Much has transpired in the two years since the 2015
reviews were presented. The five major developments
that I would like to highlight are, first, the high priority
that Secretary-General Guterres assigned to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace even before he assumed

17-270867/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

office and that he has pursued very decisively since. The
second was the adoption, on 25 September 2015, of the
landmark 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which not only offers a strategic framework for the
work of the United Nations moving forward but
incorporates into the Sustainable Development Goals
a specific commitment to promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies. The third was the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2282 (2016) on 27 April 2016,
simultaneously with the General Assembly’s adoption
of its resolution 70/262, completing the review of
United Nations peacebuilding activities. The fourth
was the General Assembly’s adoption on 21 December
2016 of resolution 71/243, which contains the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review mandates,
along with the subsequent Secretary-General’s report
(A/72/124), in June 2017, on repositioning the United
Nations development system; and the last is the
Secretary-General’s imminent proposal regarding the
restructuring of the Organization’s peace and security
pillar, based on the preliminary documents already
circulated as part of a broader internal review on
restructuring the Secretariat.
Building on those five major developments has
promising prospects for improving the performance of
the United Nations in its overarching goal of sustaining
peace. Still, the fundamental contradiction that I referred
to earlier — the fragmentation of responsibilities
assigned to each of the principal intergovernmental
organs — persists. Furthermore, even the reform
proposals whose outlines have already been announced
put the accent on coherence within each of the main
pillars — peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights — rather than fully addressing crosspillar coherence.
However, a practical, albeit partial, solution to
this dilemma appears in resolution 2282 (2016). As the
Deputy Secretary-General has already pointed out in
her remarks, it consists in fully embracing the potential
represented by the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and its subsidiary bodies to propose a bridging of the
inputs required by all three intergovernmental principal
organs in order to address the root causes of violent
conflict and promote sustainable peace. In that regard,
we should recall that the PBC is an advisory body to the
three principal intergovernmental organs, and that two
thirds of its 31 members derive from those organs, with
seven members coming from each of the three. Based
on the proposals of the Peacebuilding Support Office,
8/70

29/08/2017

and with the full involvement of the members elected
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council, this mechanism
could go a long way to fostering cooperation and
coherence in the way each of these principal organs
contributes to sustaining peace in targeted countries.
At the same time, the mechanism would respect the
Charter-mandated purview of each.
In conclusion, as a result of recent developments,
the United Nations appears much better equipped than
it was two years ago to do justice to the purposes and
principles of the Charter, adapted, of course, to the
needs of the twenty-first century. Hopefully, with a
clear road map to guide them, both the Secretariat and
the Member States will rise to the challenge.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Rosenthal for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s open debate, which definitely
constitutes a valuable contribution to the process of
reforming our peacekeeping operations and builds
on other discussions that we have had in the past
few months, while at the same time contributing to
September’s forthcoming high-level general debate.
I am also grateful for the briefings from Mrs. Amina
Mohammed, the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, co-author of the report (see S/2015/446) of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, former Chair of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture. The contributions they
have made today through their briefings contain a
cumulative weight of reflection that makes the poor
thoughts I will be sharing today pale in comparison.
The nature, origin and characteristics of the
issues on the Security Council’s agenda today are
very different from those that were on its agendas in
previous years. New threats to international peace and
security require responses that are tailored to these
challenges. In that regard, peacekeeping operations are
one of various tools, perhaps the most visible, available
to the Security Council in addressing these threats. For
some years now, Member States have been working
to adapt peacekeeping operations to the complexities
of today’s conflicts. We therefore note that we have
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

moved from traditional missions to the increasing use
of multidimensional missions mandated with new tasks
and often focused on building and sustaining peace.
The contribution of peacekeeping operations to
the global strategy for building and sustaining peace
is undeniable. This can be seen in what has been
achieved by various missions in recent years, such
as the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL),
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
These Missions have fulfilled a wide variety of tasks,
such as helping host countries to define priorities and
essential strategies for peacebuilding, helping to create
an environment that enables competent national and
international bodies to carry out peacebuilding tasks
and pre-peacebuilding tasks that help countries lay the
foundations for peace and reduce their risk of falling
back into conflict.
We must also recognize that peacekeeping
operations can and should contribute more to the goal
of sustaining peace. We already have a wide frame of
reference on this topic. We have a number of primary
documents which have been issued following various
reviews of the United Nations peace and security
architecture; various resolutions, both of the General
Assembly and the Security Council; and the results
of the deliberations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
Allow me elaborate some considerations that
are of special importance to Uruguay with regard to
contributing to peacekeeping operations with a view to
sustaining peace.
In designing and planning the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation, it is important to conduct an
exhaustive analysis of the operational environment in
which the peacekeeping operation will be developed
and the real possibilities of achieving the established
objectives, as that is a key factor in determining its
possible deployment. Once the deployment is decided,
it is important to establish clear and achievable goals,
the fulfilment of which will make it possible to plan the
drawdown strategy of the mission and thereby prevent
the creation of dependency and, at the same time,
develop national capacities.
It is also crucial that peacekeeping staff be properly
skilled, trained and prepared to execute all the tasks
specified in the mandate. In that sense, national

S/PV. 8033

restrictions — so-called caveats — whether they are
stated or, worse, not stated; the absence of effective
command and control; a refusal to obey orders; a lack
of response to attacks against civilians and insufficient
equipment cannot be tolerated, as they negatively affect
shared responsibility in order to effectively comply
with the mandates.
Furthermore, political solutions must always guide
the design and deployment of peacekeeping operations.
Coordination between peacekeeping operations, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations country
teams and the various development bodies working
on the ground must be strengthened with a view to
ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness in critical
tasks for peacebuilding and responding to urgent
development needs. It is also essential to provide the
necessary resources to attain the proposed objectives.
The transition processes should ensure that the
achievements obtained during the peace process are
not jeopardized.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the case
of Liberia as a clear example of a transition to the
presence of the United Nations on the ground. The
United Nations system and its international partners
have deployed many efforts to ensure the success of
the transition of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Responsibilities in the area of security were transferred
to the Government over a year ago and the country
is currently experiencing calm while, at the same
time, presidential and legislative elections are being
prepared, which will be held in the coming months.
Also, the Liberia peacebuilding configuration is doing
a commendable job in the area of establishing longterm capacity and stability.
For its part, UNMIL has adapted its mandate
based on changes in the situation on the ground and
has progressively reduced the number of people on
the ground, thereby guaranteeing peace until now.
As a counterpart, the Government of Liberia has
progressively assumed its responsibilities as a sovereign
country. We hope that this transition will be concluded
successfully and that the United Nations can use this
case as an example to follow in the future.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statements to be delivered later this morning on
behalf of the European Union and the Nordic countries.
Maintaining international peace and security is at
the core of the Organization’s mission. Peace operations

17-270869/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

have been the most visible — and by many measurements
successful — means by which we have sought to deliver
on this aim. The important work of reviewing the
United Nations role in peace and security that has taken
place over the past two years has underlined the need to
improve our efforts to prevent conflict from emerging,
in managing and ending conflicts when they do, and
in preventing a slide back into conflict when peace is
achieved. It is clear that peace operations are integral to
this work of sustaining peace.
I would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of
the Council for scheduling today’s open debate, which
creates the space for a frank and ambitious discussion
in support of the Secretary-General’s efforts to create
a United Nations system ready to meet the challenges
of sustaining peace in the twenty-first century. I would
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Amina
Mohammed and their excellent and prominent briefers
for their important contributions, which have helped
frame today’s discussion.
Let me make three points on how we believe
the Council and the United Nations system can best
organize itself to not only respond to conflict, but more
importantly, prevent it.
First, neither conflict nor peace emerges from a
vacuum. The drivers of conflict and the enablers of
peace are essentially political. For this reason, we must
recognize the primacy of politics in our strategies for
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
Long-term political strategies that aim to prevent
conflict and sustain peace by addressing root causes
are essential. Effective political strategies should tie
together all the international community’s efforts in an
integrated and mutually reinforcing way.
Our work, including peace operations, needs to
be people centred and results oriented. Improving the
daily lives of people is paramount, including through
core tasks such as protection of civilians’ physical
safety and their human rights. Peacebuilding should be
truly inclusive, involving Governments and societies,
and take into account local and national perspectives,
which are crucial to enable informed decision-making.
Lasting peace requires the involvement of the entire
population, meaning that the full, equal and effective
participation of women should be hardwired into all of
our efforts towards sustaining peace. Building political
strategies requires high-quality, context-sensitive and
inclusive analysis across the whole of the conflict cycle.
10/70

29/08/2017

That should be prepared jointly by the whole of the
United Nations system.
Let me also mention here the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to contributing meaningfully to the
Council’s efforts to adopt a sustaining peace approach
in peacekeeping operations. Unlocking the full
potential of the Peacebuilding Commission, not least
during mandate discussions and transitions of peace
operations, will require more informal and frequent
interactions between the Council and the PBC on a
wider range of issues. The Commission is uniquely
placed to convene international actors for the kind of
coordinated and strategic response for sustaining peace
that we know full-well is needed.
Secondly, as part of an integrated response
aimed at building long-term peace, the peace and
security instruments of the United Nations must
work in tandem with development, human rights and
humanitarian efforts from the start of every mission.
Human rights violations can be drivers of conflict,
and restoring respect for human rights will often
contribute to addressing root causes and to sustaining
peace. From the outset, the United Nations system must
simultaneously promote development, including social
service delivery, and aim to build the national capacities
needed to address those challenges.
As members of the Council, we have a responsibility
to ensure that mandates are realistic, context-tailored
and flexible. Within mandates, tasks need to be
prioritized, sequenced and adjusted over time. Effective
implementation of mandates also requires well-trained
and well-equipped peacekeepers. A clear vision of a
sustainable end state should guide integrated mission
planning and leadership from the outset. How the United
Nations system is working together to that end should
be an everyday question in a conflict setting — not
only a question of an exit strategy.
Thirdly, when it comes to sustaining peace, we
must never leave the job half done. Putting in place the
essential building blocks I have mentioned today will
allow the United Nations to better sustain peace before
and during transitions and the drawdown of peace
operations. Early and integrated work across the United
Nations system can ensure the sustainability of gains
and that transitions are transformative and forwardlooking processes. In Mali, the Council has sought
to achieve that by requesting a mission-wide strategy
with a view to — among other things — handing over
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

relevant tasks to the United Nations country team as
part of a long-term exit strategy. In times of transition,
national Governments and partners need to be fully
engaged to ensure their ownership of the process. In
Liberia, for example, we can draw useful lessons from
the recent peacebuilding plan — a process that engaged
both the wider United Nations system and the Liberian
Government, with the full support of the PBC.
When the Council asks United Nations country
teams to step up, which we often do, we have a joint
responsibility to ensure that they have sufficient
capacity and, not least, the resources to do the job. We
must find ways to avoid the financial cliff seen in many
transitions, most recently in Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur,
Liberia and Haiti. For instance, strengthening rule-oflaw institutions is often a focus of missions in transition.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti is one
such example. Ample resources are needed to continue
to underpin that focus, in which consideration of the
full chain of rule-of-law institutions is important.
The landmark resolution 2282 (2016) on sustaining
peace provides us with a foundation for our work.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report
on the steps taken so far to implement the sustaining
peace approach across the United Nations system, as
well as next steps. That includes concrete options for
more predictable financing for conflict prevention
and sustaining peace, including from assessed
contributions. We will continue this discussion with
our partners in the African Union during our visit next
week, as well as during the high-level event during
the General Assembly, organized by Ethiopia. Those
discussions will help us as we prepare to take stock
together at the high-level meeting next spring.
The range and nature of threats to international
peace and security are evolving and multiplying.
They now include terrorism and violent extremism,
the effects of climate change and the actions of
transnational organized crime, to name but a few.
Such challenges beg the question of whether existing
reform ideas go far enough to bring the United Nations
conflict management machinery into the twenty-first
century. Our focus should not only be to adapt to
today’s challenges, but also to anticipate how conflicts
will evolve. Prevention must be the new watchword.
That means understanding and getting ahead of events,
ahead of the curve, rather than merely reacting to them.

S/PV. 8033

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the briefers
that we have had today on this very important topic.
My time as United States Ambassador to the United
Nations has coincided by just a matter of weeks with
the Secretary-General’s leadership of this institution. It
was a nice coincidence. I share the Secretary-General’s
vision of reform for the work of the United Nations,
particularly in peacekeeping.
At the heart of that vision for reform are the
civilians we are meant to serve. Our near-term goal
must be their security and their safety, but our longterm goal must be their independence. In peacekeeping,
the United Nations must strive to ensure the ability of
people to live in peace and security without a United
Nations presence. The idea of sustaining piece tracks
very closely with the goal of lifting up civilians. It
recognizes that peacekeeping missions alone cannot
produce lasting peace. They can help create space
for peace to take hold, but they must be a part of a
larger strategy of coordinating the resources of the
United Nations to prevent conflict in the first place
and to address its causes. Critically, sustainable peace
recognizes that Governments must also hold up their
end of the deal. There can be no sustained long-term
peace without political solutions on the ground.
I welcome this opportunity to consider our
peacekeeping operations in the larger context of a
sustaining peace. I am a former accountant — alarms
go off when I hear ambiguous terms like synergize or
holistic. We need to see things we can measure; we
need to see accountability. We all need to make it a
priority to find value in what the United Nations does,
not simply financial value but value for the people that
the United Nations serves and value for the people who
pay the bills. That means true reform must be more than
the reshuffling of entities and departments. It must be
more than generating jargon-filled reports. It must be
about solving the problems that prevent the United
Nations from achieving sustainable political solutions.
The United Nations has many tools with which
to maintain peace and security. Are we using these
tools cooperatively and cohesively? Are all of them
necessary to achieve a political solution? Are we
creating independence or dependence? When we fail to
use all the tools in the United Nations toolbox or fail
to use them correctly we risk creating United Nations
missions like the one in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. The Democratic Republic of the Congo Mission

17-2708611/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

has existed for years with no end in sight — one of the
reasons is that the Mission has lost its way. The Security
Council has piled on new responsibilities over the years,
diverting resources and attention from its core mission
of civilian protection and stabilization. To make matters
worse, the Mission must work with an uncooperative
and, sometimes, hostile Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Further complicating matters is
the fact that it is clear that credible elections will not
be possible in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without the Mission’s logistical and technical support.
To help clarify the Mission’s role, earlier this
year the Security Council made some changes to
its mandate. First, we established clear metrics for
mission effectiveness, and secondly, we specifically
outlined support for the political process as a strategic
priority. These were good positive changes that will
bring us closer to the goal of a sustainable peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that same spirit, I welcome Egypt’s focus in
today’s meeting on making sure that there is a clear
exit strategy for our peacekeeping missions. This is one
of the United States’s principles for reform. Security
Council mandates must include plans for a viable
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The
Security Council did this when it mandated that the
United Nations devise a peacebuilding plan in Liberia
in preparation for the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission there early next year.
The United Nations devised that plan in close
coordination with the Government and with the
participation of civil society. The result was something
that all of the different parties could buy into. The
Liberian Government has committed to working with
the peacekeeping mission, the United Nations country
team, local stakeholders and international partners to
implement the steps laid out in this first-of-its-kind plan
to sustain peace in years to come. This is the model for
plans in similar transition situations in future.
Every situation is different, but just as Liberia
represents a potential peacebuilding success, South
Sudan represents a significant peacebuilding challenge.
When South Sudan started as a country, we sent a
mission to help build peace. But when conflict started
a few years later, the peacekeeping mission justifiably
needed to change its focus. The United Nations has many
necessary components there to get the country back on
its feet: a United Nations special envoy helping mediate
12/70

29/08/2017

a solution to the conflict, a peacekeeping mission
mandated to protect civilians, a United Nations country
team and various non-governmental organizations all
working on different parts of the puzzle.
One challenge is to put together the pieces of
the puzzle to make sure they all fit. The goal is the
integration of United Nations resources into a plan
focused on supporting a political solution. The second
and bigger challenge is that the United Nations efforts
will only be successful if the South Sudanese parties
have the political will to engage in regional processes
and end the violence.
The Secretary-General’s reform agenda gives us a
historic opportunity to institute long-overdue changes
at the United Nations. The United States shares his
commitment to using the considerable resources of the
United Nations to achieve lasting sustainable peace.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Egypt for convening
today’s timely debate on United Nations peacekeeping.
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their briefings.
At the outset, Japan commends all troop-contributing
countries, police-contributing countries and certainly
mission personnel themselves for their commitment to
maintaining peace and security. Situations that require
United Nations peacekeeping operations are becoming
ever more complex. The review of the United Nations
peace and security architecture is also under way. It is
clear that improvements are needed in United Nations
peacekeeping. Our question should be: how can we
fundamentally strengthen the impact of peacekeeping
on the ground?
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
ensure that peacekeeping contributes to durable peace.
The Council should assess how to achieve more efficient
and better-performing missions as well as betterdefined mandates and appropriate mandate reviews.
Today’s peacekeepers must be sufficiently prepared
to respond to today’s challenges. How can we achieve
this? I would like to touch upon several priority areas.
The first is capacity-building. Troop-contributing
countries have the obligation to send personnel with the
training and ability to meet United Nations standards
and effectively do their jobs. But the reality is that we
continue to see gaps and capacity shortfalls. These gaps
have implications for the Security Council’s credibility
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8033

in enforcing its mandates and for the ability of missions
to succeed. They also directly affect populations that
depend on the United Nations to restore peace and
stability. Force generation and capacity-building are
therefore crucial and interlinked.

Peacekeepers require both the capacity and mandates
to undertake their difficult and expanding work. The
Council has the responsibility to regularly and more
thoroughly discuss these matters to make sure that
every mandate authorization and renewal counts.

During the April briefing on peacekeeping
organized by the United States (see S/PV.7918), the
Secretary-General encouraged trilateral arrangements
under which countries provide additional training and
support to peacekeeping personnel under the auspices
of the United Nations. Japan strongly encourages
expanded discussion in the Council on trilateral
capacity-building efforts between the United Nations,
troop-contributing countries and third countries.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s very timely debate. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal and Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their
analyses, which enable us to better understand this
particularly complicated issue.

Even capable and well-prepared troops cannot
perform without realistic mandates that meet current
needs. The role of the Council in this context is of
vital importance. During the briefing in April, Japan
noted that we must engage in more serious discussions
on concise and strategically prioritized mandates that
give missions the tools to succeed. Recycled language
and ballooning resolution lengths cannot substitute
for frank assessments of what is needed on the ground
today. Clearer benchmarks will go a long way towards
meeting and adapting both short- and longer-term
mission tasks.
Peacebuilding and local reconciliation efforts
should also receive increasing attention as part of a
comprehensive effort to sustain peace. Within missions,
this requires closer collaboration between civil and
political affairs teams to ensure that localized conflicts
do not spread or derail nationwide reform efforts and
also that local reconciliation efforts be positively linked
to the overall political process.
There is room for enhanced mission support to local
reconciliation work, in close cooperation with United
Nations agencies and programmes, including through
the Peacebuilding Fund. Japan supports developing
the practice of regularly drawing upon the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) throughout the
mission life cycle, including during mission formation,
review and drawdown. At the drawdown stage, the
advice of the PBC could support smoother transitions
between missions and the United Nations country team.
Nearly 70 years since the deployment of its first
operation, United Nations peacekeeping remains more
important than ever. Conflicts have become more
complex, and sustaining peace is a persistent challenge.

I will address three main points on the action of
the Security Council. First of all, we have to continue
place sustaining peace at the heart of the goals of
peacekeeping operations. The goal of sustainable peace
is one of the major reasons for the development of
peacekeeping. It requires that we deal with immediate
and vital priorities, such as protection of the civilians
and human rights, as well as with long-term goals,
such as supporting political processes, security sector
reform and many others.
The emergence of integrated multidimensional
operations meets this need and shows how the United
Nations is adapting to this complex challenge. Today,
in many cases, peacekeeping operations — the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, for example — support
the development of local capacity, in particular in such
areas as disarmament and security-sector reform. In
such areas as justice, the restoration of State authority,
weapons management and the fight against impunity,
peacekeeping operations provide valuable support for
the long term.
The Council has to fully play its role in that constant
adaptation. That means that operations have to have
mandates that are clearer but ambitious and realistic at
the same time, as well as comprehensive and targeted,
in order to enable missions to deal with emergencies
and prepare a peaceful future. We welcome the efforts
made by the Secretary-General to provide the Council
with comprehensive and operational analyses in order to
inform our decisions. We must collectively continue our
efforts aimed at prioritizing mandates and sequencing
their implementation in order to ensure that we are as
close as possible to the realities on the ground. We must

17-2708613/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

also, as stated by the Deputy Secretary-General, work
with the troop-contributing countries so as to make
sure that there are women in peacekeeping operations.
That is essential in order to enable us to make as great
an impact as possible on the ground.
Peacekeeping operations can therefore play a
decisive role for peace, but — and this is my second
point — they cannot do so by themselves. Peacekeeping
operations do not operate in a bubble. In order to be
successful they must be supported, complemented
and strengthened by peace partners. That applies first
and foremost to the host country. Its full cooperation
with the peacekeeping operation is a precondition
for the peacekeeping operation’s success. Above and
beyond the emergency situation, the host country
has to invest in a relationship with the peacekeeping
operation in order to create the foundation for a longterm partnership that will ultimately result in the exit
of the peacekeeping operation. Such a partnership must
be based on the will to initiate the necessary reforms
in areas such as governance, security and others. It is
through such reforms that Governments will be able to
take ownership of a sustainable peace.
Such support to peacekeeping operations must
also involve the political arena. Above and beyond the
specificities of each conflict, one thing we know for
sure is that a lasting settlement of a conflict cannot be
of a military nature alone. It must be political in nature.
The synergy of the political initiatives of the Council
with the neighbouring countries, regional organizations
and ad hoc mediators is key in order to end up with a
peace agreement that will put an end to the crisis.
A crucial area for long-term stability that is
frequently overlooked is the area of economic
development. The economic fragility of a country is
very frequently compounded by the conflict and feeds
it. We can see how in South Sudan, for example, the
collapse of the economy feeds the spiral of violence.
Working together in the country team, agencies, funds
and programmes contribute to the effort to deal with
the challenges. But there are other essential actors,
such as the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund, regional banks and organizations, bilateral
donors and the private sector. In that area, which is
far from the mandate of the peacekeeping operations,
the international community must find the tools
that can enable it to coordinate its activities. As the
Deputy Secretary-General said, we have to invest in
the 2030 Agenda for Development and the system of
14/70

29/08/2017

Resident Coordinators if we want to make sure that the
Sustainable Development Goals become a reality for
one and all.
In that context — and this is the third point I would
like to make — the transition towards peacebuilding
serves as a pivot to ensure that sustainable peace takes
root. Such a transition will only be successful if we
promote the ownership by the host countries of the
political and security challenges they face, as well as
the social and economic challenges relating to the exit
of the peacekeeping operation. That was the case in
Côte d’Ivoire in 2014, for example. The United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivore (UNOCI) changed the
paradigm there. It switched from a security mandate to
a mandate to support the capacities of Côte d’Ivoire. The
drawdown in UNOCI personnel was carried out in such
a way as to ensure that the transition was orderly and
responsible. The transition plan was developed jointly
by the United Nations, the Government and major
partners, and in that way it was carried out successfully.
Today, in Liberia and in Haiti, similar developments
are under way. The international community, not only
through the country teams but also through the regional
organizations and bilateral donors, must accompany
the process, but there must also be full mobilization on
the part of the host countries. The authority of the State
can be restored only if it is based on real political will,
effective governance and the respect for human rights,
with a clear economic policy. On all of those points,
the international community, in particular the United
Nations, must remain mobilized after the departure
of the peacekeeping operation, in particular through
the Peacebuilding Commission, whose activities we
fully support.
Sustained peace is a hard long journey with frequent
pitfalls. Such a complex undertaking will be successful
only if it relies on a convergence of actors. Among them,
peacekeeping operations, of course, play a unique, but
not isolated, role. In order to be sustainable, peace has
to be the outcome of the mobilization of one and all.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank the Egyptian
presidency for organizing this open debate on the
theme “United Nations peacekeeping operations:
their potential contribution to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace”. That is a very important theme that
has not been seriously explored, and we express our
appreciation to Egypt for taking this initiative.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We thank Deputy Secretary-General Ms. Amina
Mohammed, for her comprehensive briefing. We also
appreciate the remarks made by Mr. Youssef Mahmoud
and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal. The briefings of
all three speakers were very rich and, frankly, very
comprehensive. What I am going to say might therefore
sound rather superfluous after their words. I must thank
all three speakers again for their masterful performance.
Peacekeeping is indeed one of the most important
tools of the United Nations for the promotion and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, peacekeeping missions can have a meaningful
impact only if they are guided by a clear political
strategy attuned to the specific conflict situations that
the missions are designed to address. They should also
have, as we all agree now, an exit strategy. We should be
guided by the specific context in which such missions
are operating and have a specific strategic end in mind,
so as to allow for a proper transition from conflict to
sustainable peace.
That has been made abundantly clear by the three
major peace-and-security reviews conducted in 2015. It
is only through the entire continuum of peace-oriented
activities, ranging from prevention and resolution to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, that conflicts can be
effectively addressed and sustainable peace ultimately
achieved. Implementing that in practice may not be
easy, but that does not make the approach less valid.
It has a lot of implications for the work that we do
here in the Council in terms of mandate design, the
implementation and review of peacekeeping operations
and the development of an exit strategy with the
goal of enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and realizing the overarching
goal of sustaining peace. That means that peacekeeping
operations must have clear, realistic and up-to-date
mandates from the Council, with well-identified
priorities, adequate sequencing and flexibility, so that
they can evolve over time, as the Secretary-General
indicated to us last April. Of course, the peacekeeping
reviews have stressed that very point.
This new approach to peacekeeping and sustaining
peace has certainly introduced a paradigm shift in the
manner in which the United Nations deals with the
difficult and complex peace and security challenges of
our time. That has been widely recognized by Member
States and enshrined in the concurrent resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and

S/PV. 8033

General Assembly resolution 70/262). What matters at
this stage is the need for a change in the mindset of the
entire United Nations system with a view to reforming
United Nations peacekeeping and reorienting it
towards the goal of sustaining peace. That requires
better and more coordinated planning, leadership,
better strategies, as well as better coordination among
the various departments and agencies. We are well
aware of what the Secretary-General is trying to do
in seeking to advance the reform of the peace and
security architecture. We look forward to engaging
with him on that issue next month as he embarks on
consultations with the Council and the wider United
Nations membership.
Finally, we wish to highlight, in the areas of
peacekeeping and sustaining peace, the significance
of global and regional partnerships in enhancing the
effectiveness of the international response as part of
the entire peace continuum, including peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Regional organizations such as the
African Union have demonstrated their capacity to
immediately respond to conflicts and crises, as they
arise, by deploying forces on the ground to stabilize the
situation, while the United Nations and its agencies are
in a better position to help consolidate peace at a later
stage. Therefore, if that kind of division of labour is
properly sequenced and employed, we will have a better
chance of achieving the desired result.
In that context, we want to see greater cooperation
and partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We very much hope that the eleventh
joint annual consultation between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council will afford us the opportunity to
explore possibilities for further enhancing cooperation
in peacekeeping and sustaining peace.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank Egypt for its initiative in
convening this open debate. We also wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal for their
respective briefings.
The current international security situation is
grave. Factors giving rise to conflicts in various parts
of the world have become increasingly complex, with
the interweaving of traditional and non-traditional
security threats. Countries are closely interdependent,
including with regard to their interactive, indivisible

17-2708615/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

security interests. The fundamental way to maintain
lasting peace and common security is to abide by the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, work together on building a community
towards a shared future for humankind, promote a
governance system featuring broad consultations,
relying on joint efforts and shared benefits, and practice
a new security concept that is common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable.
The United Nations is the central mechanism for
the maintenance of common security. At different
stages — including conflict-prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace — the Organization
has different priorities and focuses concerning
those four aspects. However, efforts to achieve the
overarching goal are interconnected and must be
managed holistically.
First, conflict prevention must be aimed at
maintaining peace and security, while targeted measures,
based on the type of conflict and its root causes, must
be taken. The most important consideration in resolving
disputes between States is to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic norms governing international relations,
while safeguarding the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of nations. The Council’s work must
reflect those principles and include urgiing the parties
concerned not to engage in words or deeds that may
escalate tensions.
Many issues on the Security Council’s agenda
concern countries’ internal conflicts. In addressing such
internal issues, the Council must observe the principle
that all countries are sovereign and equal, and that there
must be no interference in a country’s internal affairs.
The Council must also respect the will and leadership
role of the countries concerned, provide them with
constructive assistance to assist them in advancing the
political process, and facilitate reconciliation based on
the specific national conditions.
In areas plagued by protracted armed conflict, one
finds a proliferation of terrorist activities, often with
spillover effects. Conflict prevention and de-escalation
are closely linked to efforts to counter terrorism. The
international community must guard against potential
terrorist attacks against the weak links in national or
regional security mechanisms. In fighting terrorism,
uniform standards must be used. The relevant Security
Council resolutions must be strictly implemented and
16/70

29/08/2017

international cooperation in countering terrorism
strengthened. In particular, the terrorists’ mobility
networks and financing channels must be blocked.
Efforts must be directed at preventing terrorist
organizations from acquiring weapons and keeping
violent extremist ideologies from propagating. The
United Nations should support synergies forged among
regional countries in their fight against terrorism,
provide capacity-building assistance to developing
countries through bilateral and multilateral channels
and eradicate the root causes of conflict and terrorism.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must strictly comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the three
principles governing peacekeeping operations, and
formulate explicit, viable and focused mandates in
keeping with the specific conditions of the countries
concerned, while taking into full account the myriad
factors affecting the needs and security environments
of the host countries.
In order to improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations a periodic review mechanism
should be established in order to ensure the continuing
role that peacekeeping operations are expected to play
with a view to ensuring the progress and ultimate
fulfilment of their mandates. Peacekeeping operations
should adjust dynamically in keeping with evolving
needs, prioritize support in stages and focus on the
central task of peacekeeping in an attempt to lend
targeted assistance to efforts to resolve the most urgent
and prominent problems facing the host countries.
Once peacekeeping operations are decided upon, the
role that peacekeeping forces will play is key to executing
the peacekeeping mandates. The United Nations
must seriously consider the role of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), strengthen communications with
them, support their capacity-building, improve the
quality and equipment of peacekeeping personnel and
enhance the ability of peacekeeping troops to fulfil their
mandates and effectively deal with security threats.
Thirdly, peacebuilding must set an overall goal
of strengthening political security and development
capacity in order to promote the transition from a
conflict situation to development and reconstruction.
While countries differ in their specific conditions and
development stages, many countries mired in conflict
share a praiseworthy tradition of resolving differences
and achieving consensus through consultations.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peacebuilding work should respect the ownership of
the countries concerned, advocate seeking common
ground while resolving differences and the concept
of democratic consultation, adapt to the prevailing
conditions in host countries, optimize the tradition
of cooperation among countries of the same region,
promote social integration and consolidate the fruits
of peace. The relevant United Nations agencies should
strictly observe their respective mandates in carrying
out peacekeeping activities and focus on strengthening
the host countries’ ability to generate revenues, while
concentrating on assisting them in resolving the most
urgent problems.
Fourthly, sustainable peace and sustainable
development are mutually reinforcing and dependent.
Peace is not a castle in the sky, as it relies on
development for its foundation. Only by giving equal
attention to development and peace and by resolving
conflict in terms of both symptoms and root causes
will successful peace be assured. The United Nations
must intensify its input in the field of development,
comprehensively advance the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, vigorously help developing
countries improve livelihoods and reduce the gap
between the rich and the poor, while paying attention
to the advantages of regional initiatives and regional
organizations in efforts to form the synergies needed
to lay the foundation for attaining sustainable peace by
promoting sustainable development.
In supporting the economic development of
countries, the United Nations should respect the
social systems and development paths chosen by
countries on their own, put itself in the shoes of host
countries, understand their essential needs, solve their
key problems, offer them substantial help in their
concerted efforts to attain the goals of their domestic
programmes, and enable their people to effectively
enjoy the dividends of peace.
In recent years, the African Union (AU) has
vigorously promoted solidarity and unity among African
countries in their quest for peace and development, and
has made substantive progress in that regard. China
hopes that the United Nations and the AU will fully
implement the joint UN-AU Framework on Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security so as to enhance
cooperation in such areas as conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict reconstruction. China
supports the positive consideration of the African
proposal for financing AU-led peace operations,

S/PV. 8033

effectively helping Africans to secure sustained, stable
and predictable funding.
China looks forward to the alignment of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with the AU
Agenda 2063, in support of accelerated economic
development, to address the root causes of conflict
in Africa. China has always pursued an Africa policy
characterized by sincerity, practicality, affinity, good
faith, justice and shared interests. It supports African
countries in seeking African solutions to African
problems, and encourages the AU and other regional
and subregional organizations to play an active role in
finding solutions to regional problems.
China is firmly committed to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As the second-largest
contributor to the United Nations peacekeeping budget,
China has a total of 2,514 peacekeepers on active duty
in nine mission areas. We are working at full capacity
to fulfil the commitments made by Chinese leaders in
support of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and to advance the peace and security track of the
10 major China-Africa cooperation plans to enhance
capacity-building for African-led peace operations.
China will further enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations-China Peace and Development Trust
Fund, giving momentum to the peace and development
of developing countries, in particular those in Africa.
China stands ready to cooperate closely with
African countries within the framework of the Belt and
Road Initiative, supporting their social and economic
development and helping them to achieve peace,
stability and development at an early date. China looks
forward to working with the international community
to forge a new type of international relations featuring
win-win cooperation and to promote a new security
vision of universal security and common prosperity,
thereby making positive contributions to the sustainable
peace and development of the world community.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their insightful contributions. Let me also today,
through the Deputy Secretary-General, thank the
women and men of the United Nations around the world
for their service and courage.
The United Kingdom aligns itself with the upcoming
statement of the European Union.
Conflicts rarely follow a predictable path. We
must move beyond the idea of a set of sequential

17-2708617/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

responses, which is why the United Kingdom supports
the Secretary-General’s vision for a more holistic and
inclusive approach to conflict prevention, management
and resolution. Sustaining peace requires that all of the
United Nations system be aligned in every context and
able to carry out multiple tasks simultaneously.
I would like to focus on two issues today related to
sustaining peace.
The first is how peacekeeping missions should be
situated within wider United Nations efforts. At the
most basic level, the starting point for any peacekeeping
mission should be from all of the information gathered
by the United Nations family over the years, including
what the United Nations has already achieved in the
field. It should be clear what and how peacekeeping
missions will deliver with United Nations partners
during their deployment, and how they will hand over
to other United Nations actors when they leave. For
example, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
may be the second-largest in the world, but it is also
only one of 20 United Nations bodies and agencies
represented in the country.
We in the Council must reflect on these questions
during mission mandating and planning. We need to
take in clear views and understand ground truth from
the field. The Council must be more disciplined in
setting out strategic goals that can be translated through
mandates into prioritized objectives, benchmarks for
success and plans for mission drawdown once these
have been achieved.
On the ground, the whole of the United Nations
should have a joint analysis of the situation, common
objectives and clarity over roles and responsibilities
towards meeting them. In the context of Liberia’s
transition, a shared peacebuilding plan has gone some
way towards achieving that. Moreover, a better balance
of responsibilities between missions and country
teams needs to be struck. Not every conflict driver
can be addressed within the lifetime of a peacekeeping
mission. Long-term change is best supported by
United Nations country teams. They should be taking
on responsibilities much earlier, not waiting until a
mission drawdown looms. Important lessons will soon
emerge from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Darfur — contexts where more may be asked of
country teams.
Support from the top is needed for an integrated
approach. The coordinating role of the Strategic
18/70

29/08/2017

Planning and Monitoring Unit in the Executive Office
of the Secretary-General is a welcome start. It will
enable more integrated analysis and a more coherent
cross-United Nations review of activity in-country. We
would like to see the Unit regularly reviewing peace
operations and look forward to its contribution to the
review of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Peacekeeping missions cannot create the conditions
for their own exit without a sustainable political solution
to conflict. As such, the second issue I should like to
focus on is the primacy of politics.
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
need to be politically active, using their good offices and
leveraging support from their missions and the wider
United Nations system. We must accept that missions
are political tools in themselves, both representative
of the will of the Council and in their actions on the
ground. The tasks of peace operations are never merely
technical. For example, the re-establishment of effective
States often situations at the centre of mission exit
plans, but missions cannot improve the functioning of
State institutions without an understanding of how these
institutions will be used and by whom. Politically blind
capacity-building efforts risk worsening the situation.
United Nations country teams integrated into
the wider effort also have a role to play in promoting
sustainable political solutions. Greater understanding
of who does and does not benefit from development
programming and how this is linked to political
dynamics is critical. Let us face the facts — where
political regimes are unaccountable, unresponsive to
their own people and unrepresentative, including of
women, appeals to national ownership will ring hollow.
Finally, we in the Council must be politically
engaged and ready to speak. A Council united around
a shared political strategy to de-escalate tensions could
have a powerful effect, but even in the face of flagrant
violations of its resolutions the Council too often finds
itself deadlocked and unable to act. Gert Rosenthal
notes that the Security Council rarely acts to prevent
conflict. My own short experience here has shown that
we are not willing to act even when, as in South Sudan,
there has been conflict for five out of the six years of
the country’s existence, a third of the population is
displaced, half are living in food insecurity, and United
Nations resolutions and promises made have been
repeatedly broken.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peacekeeping is one tool in the sustaining piece
toolbox. It cannot be used in isolation, and we are seeing
progress towards more integrated approaches. Even the
most coherent United Nations response will still be
blunt without attention to the primacy of politics. In
that regard, we have further to go.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Egyptian
presidency for convening today’s open debate, which
is in line with the strategic discussion taking place in
the Security Council about how the United Nations
and its peacekeeping missions can contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
At the outset, allow me to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their insights, which serve
as a source of inspiration for our discussion today.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the delegation of the European Union. We
would like to make some additional remarks in our
national capacity.
Thanks to parallel Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on sustaining peace, the concept of
the peace continuum is embedded in our daily narrative.
It must now be implemented. In that regard, we encourage
the Secretary-General to move forward with his vision
and review of the Secretariat’s structure, including
through a new distribution of roles and responsibilities.
We commend the reforms already undertaken and look
forward to further recommendations, which will focus
on peace and security.
The pursuit of political settlements should be the
overall aim of the United Nations when it intervenes to
restore peace and security. In our opinion, preventive
diplomacy and working towards a negotiated, inclusive
political solution before a crisis erupts is the yardstick
for our work. Once a crisis erupts despite such efforts
and after the United Nations has failed to prevent
escalation, it may become essential to avoid a relapse
into conflict. I should like to make a few points on
that issue.
First, with regard to mandates, a core objective
of the mandates of peacekeeping missions should be
to contribute to creating the conditions for inclusive
political processes aimed at national dialogue and
reconciliation by defusing domestic tension and
violence. It is therefore key to define an entry strategy,
clear and achievable objectives and measurable

S/PV. 8033

benchmarks, as well as a responsible at coordinated
strategy to prevent mission creep and a potential
relapse into conflict. Such benchmarks must take into
full consideration the longer-term objective of a peace
continuum. As a result, mandates should not be seen
as set in stone. They should be flexible in order to
evolve, not only as the situation in a country or region
evolves but also as new challenges and threats to peace
and security emerge. In that context, regular mission
reviews are also key.
Secondly, with regard to capacity to implement
mandates, we should not refrain, when possible and
appropriate, from phasing out a military mission
towards a more agile and lighter footprint operation
based on specialized police and civilian units.
Such a step would help us to better focus on the socalled bridging tasks between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, such as stabilization, the rule of law,
justice and the protection of civilians. Such tasks are
essential to anchor the initial progress made and to
contribute to truly sustainable peace. In that regard,
we should also take into consideration tasks that can
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions,
thereby helping to pave the way towards sustaining
peace at the end of the transition — to include the
protection of cultural heritage, which is part of the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and enhancing
vigilance with regard to the environmental footprint of
a peacekeeping mission, such as in the United Nations
Organizational Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Equally, institutional consolidation is key to
bridging peacekeeping and sustaining peace efforts. In
that connection, the transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti is a model case and
test of the United Nations ability to shore up national
authority in the critical shift from crisis management
to a durable peace, while envisaging a responsible
exit strategy from peacekeeping towards strengthened
development assistance.
It is also key to ensure that peacekeepers are
reliable points of reference. It is essential to adopt a
zero-tolerance policy against those Blue Helmets
who have committed sexual exploitation or abuse. Of
course, it is a matter of full respect for fundamental
human rights, but also a matter for the United Nations.
In that context, training, in particular mandatory
predeployment training, is key. Allow me to recall

17-2708619/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Italy’s role via its training and logistics hub facility in
Vicenza — the Center of Excellence for Stability Police
Units — and the Brindisi Global Service Center and the
Turin Staff College.
Thirdly, with regard to partnerships, the United
Nations should work in close partnership as an enabler
for peace with entities and individuals that can
contribute to our common objective. The involvement
regional organizations, in implementation of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is crucial to
addressing international crises and finding sustainable
solutions. In that regard, the Council’s visit to Addis
Ababa to meet its African Union counterpart is an
important step to furthering strengthening cooperation
between the two organizations. I would also like to
recall the initiative of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the role of the European Union,
both of which can have a major role in complementing
United Nations efforts on the ground.
There is clear evidence that civil society’s active
involvement in peace processes is essential, in particular
by women. The full and sustained implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent such resolutions,
in particular resolution 2242 (2015), is therefore key. The
United Nations and its States Members should redouble
their efforts to that end. Making greater use of women’s
capacities as agents of change when it comes to conflict
prevention, mediation and preventive diplomacy will
lead to greater peace dividends in dispute settlement.
That is at the core of the initiative promoted by my
country to establish a network of women mediators in
the Mediterranean region in order to reduce the existing
capacity gap in this area.
Fourthly, with regard to better use of the tools at
our disposal, I will limit my remarks to the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the need for the
Council to constantly improve the use of that advisory
body to break the silos between our pillars of action
and between Headquarters and the field. The overall
objective must be strengthened United Nations capacity
to deliver as one.
Finally, on resources, we all know that they
are limited and should be used in a cost-effective
way. Nonetheless, savings cannot be an objective in
themselves, but a means, when appropriate, to enhance
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations and of
United Nations activities. That includes the need to
progressively close the gap between the resources
20/70

29/08/2017

that the Organization spends on peacekeeping and the
budget for mediation and special political missions.
As for peacekeeping missions themselves, the
different options for providing financial support
envisaged in the report of 2 January can be chosen
on a case-by-case basis. Already by 2008, almost 10
years ago, the report prepared by the panel of experts
chaired by former Italian Prime Minister Romano
Prodi (see S/2008/813) called for predictable and
sustainable financial support to United Nationsapproved African Union peacekeeping missions. We
are therefore in favour of exploring the use of assessed
contributions, provided, of course, that the appropriate
set of requirements in terms of troop quality, training,
equipment and high accountability standards are met,
especially when it comes to effectively countering
exploitation and abuse cases.
This new approach requires strong collective
efforts and political commitment. Italy will work to
build consensus together with the Secretary-General,
the Secretariat, our partners in the Council and the
broader membership.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
Sir, I would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of the
Security Council for taking the initiative to organize this
open debate on the theme of peacekeeping operations
and their potential contribution to the overarching goal
of sustaining peacekeeping.
I would also like to thank our briefers of
today — Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Principal Adviser to
the International Institute for Peace and a distinguished
member of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Chair of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture — whose
statements certainly help inform our debate.
In resolution 2086 (2013), the Security Council
welcomed the decisive role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations when it comes to maintaining
international peace and security, preventing and
controlling conflicts, upholding international standards,
implementing the Council’s decisions and consolidating
peace following conflict. It also reaffirmed the
Council’s commitment to improving the efficiency of
United Nations efforts at all stages of conflicts, from
prevention to resolution to peacebuilding.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Council also hopes for continued, and even
greater, efforts to adopt a comprehensive, coherent and
integrated peacekeeping approach to international peace
and security. That approach must be based on conflict
prevention, the prevention of the resumption of conflict,
the establishment of sustained peace through effective
preventive diplomacy strategies, and addressing the root
causes of conflict in order to restore peace and foster
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That was precisely
what occurred when the recommendations of the three
reviews conducted in 2015 and 2016 on United Nations
action in the areas of peace and security were looked at
together. The Security Council adopted resolution 2282
(2016) and the General Assembly adopted resolution
70/262 — the same resolution, one that put the challenge
of sustaining peace in context, along the continuum of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Meanwhile, in its rich diversity and under the
auspices of the United Nations, the international
community negotiated and, in 2015, adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which calls for
everyone — States and international organizations,
local and regional authorities and the private sector,
civil society and non-governmental organizations — to
do their utmost to ensure that no one is left behind. Since
then, the challenges that the United Nations continues
to face are being addressed through its willingness
and ability to reposition itself so as to ensure that no
one is left behind. That includes States, communities,
individuals, companies and so on. We all know that
exclusion, poverty, the lack of education and injustice
fuel conflict at the national and international levels.
That is why the reform of the United Nations
system, as a whole, through its three pillars of peace
and security, development and human rights, is of
particular importance. The Secretary-General plays an
important and smart role in drafting and implementing
reform programmes, with the support of the Deputy
Secretary-General and her team. It is up to the States
Members of the United Nations to participate and
assist in that endeavour. We are all aware that it is up
to the Member States to implement many of the United
Nations reforms.
As outlined today by our briefers, we must end
the fragmentation of the activities of the main United
Nations organs, which would allow for enhanced
cooperation and coordination with, for instance, the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is the principal

S/PV. 8033

platform for our collective efforts in certain areas, with
clearly identified and defined goals and targets.
We are faced with a new paradigm, which has the
potential to strengthen preventive efforts and enhance
the effectiveness of current peacekeeping missions.
Through an increasingly comprehensive approach
that encompasses the entire continuum of peace,
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, the concept of sustaining peace
encourages us to rectify the problems caused by the
fragmented efforts of the United Nations and other
stakeholders in the area of peace and security. It is
important to note the role of peacekeeping operations,
which, when they have clear, realistic and attainable
mandates with the necessary political support, remain
one of the Organization’s most important tools in its
efforts to address the challenges of international peace
and security, in particular in an environment in which
there is an ever-increasing number of asymmetrical
challenges and, regrettably, ever-decreasing resources.
United Nations peacekeeping operations face many
challenges, including constraints imposed by States and
by State and non-State organizations, which prevent
the operations from fully discharging their mandates.
United Nations peacekeeping missions must, therefore,
be provided with the capacity and resources required
to fulfil their mandates effectively. Mandates should
be aligned as far as possible with the situation on the
ground so that they can be carried out. Before missions
are deployed, mandates should be defined on the basis
of analyses and information that are as objective and
comprehensive as possible. It bears repeating that the
action carried out by United Nations missions must be
based on a specific and viable political strategy that
has the support needed to resolve the conflict once and
for all.
There is no doubt that, as political tools,
peacekeeping operations can help to achieve the
fundamental goals of conflict prevention, mediation,
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping. The
experience of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in the Gambia, among others,
provides a clear illustration of that assertion. The
Security Council should strengthen cooperation with
neighbouring States and regional and subregional
organizations, because, in Senegal’s view, ECOWAS

17-2708621/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and the African Union have been able to achieve
sustained peace through transition processes and
conflict resolution strategies. Lessons learned reveal
that it is a very demanding endeavour that requires early
planning and takes local conditions into consideration,
and clear objectives with the goal of bringing a
peacekeeping operation to an end, meeting the needs
of the population, establishing a peacebuilding office
or making other provisions, as the situation requires.
As soon as missions are established, peacebuilding
activities must also be developed by steering efforts
towards national capacity-building, addressing the
deep-seated structural socioeconomic challenges
that such countries often face and fostering ongoing
political dialogue and effective coordination among the
various stakeholders.
In conclusion, we believe that the Security Council
should give serious thought to the relevant observations
and recommendations made by our briefers today.
Mr. Dovganyuk (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
We thank the delegation of Egypt for convening today’s
debate, which serves to highlight the direct influence
of peacekeeping operations on the achievement of
the overall goal of maintaining peace, especially in
situations where security is fragile or countries are
being rebuilt after conflict.
Conflicts have become increasingly complex and
ever-more fractious and difficult to predict. The old
and new drivers of conflict have serious implications
for efforts to move international, regional and national
processes beyond conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. Our success depends, therefore, on pooling
our efforts in the main areas of United Nations action,
which are peace and security and human rights.
Mandate development should be accompanied by the
Council’s strategic vision of the desired outcome,
with adequate time allotted and possibilities for
consultations with experts on a wide range of
issues. Sustaining peace requires engagement and
coordination among the General Assembly, Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, in close
cooperation with the United Nations country teams and
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Commission must serve as an advisory and
coordination bridge among all actors and assist in the
mobilization of resources. It is therefore important
to strengthen the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund with long-term, predictable
22/70

29/08/2017

funding from donors, the World Bank and regional
financial institutions.
Success also depends on having realistic timelines
for United Nations peace operations and development
assistance. Sustaining peace after conflict is a
particularly lengthy and costly challenge. Thus, conflict
prevention and resolution, recovery, development,
together with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are important components of
sustaining peace.
Peacebuilding requires the increased participation
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict.
Also important is the inclusive engagement of youth,
together with parliamentarians, religious leaders,
civil society and grassroots organizations. National
reconciliation and peace processes must be inclusive,
bearing in mind that conflict and peace impact every
person in a society.
We also need to strengthen the peacebuilding
capability of the United Nations system and to pay
more attention to the timeline and the management of
transitions and smooth handovers to the Government
and the United Nations country team. If we are focused
only on conflict prevention without addressing the root
causes of conflict, we run the risk of seeing the conflict
re-emerge. Therefore, we need to resolve the drivers of
conflict, the economic and environmental issues, and
ensure that we fight mismanagement.
Peace agreements need to guarantee legal land
rights and introduce effective land registration and
administration. Investments must be made in preventing
deterioration in the quantity and quality of water
resources due to climate change, pollution, privatization
and inequities in resource distribution. Transboundary
water disputes are widely prevalent and should be
regulated politically, as well as the mass migration
of people caused by climate change. That means the
Security Council needs to be climate sensitive as well.
Since the majority of peacekeeping operations are in
Africa, Kazakhstan supports the focus on Africa’s
peace, security, governance and development.
(spoke in English)
Africa needs peace and stability — the bedrock
for development. Kazakhstan has therefore proposed
a new approach to eliminate the threat of war: the
establishment of the 2045 Global Strategic Initiative
Plan by the United Nations centenary, as presented
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

last year to the General Assembly by our President,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev (see A/70/PV.13, p. 46).
The aim is to create global development based on fair
conditions and a situation in which all nations would
have equal access to accountable world infrastructure,
resources and markets.
Finally, Kazakhstan is committed to sustainable
peace as the fundamental premise for all efforts to
achieve regional and global stability.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Egypt for bringing a very important issue to the
forefront of discussion in the Council. The interest of
the wider United Nations membership in today’s debate
is a testament to the importance and the relevance of
this subject. I also extend my gratitude to all three
briefers for their highly useful and important briefings.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later. In
my national capacity, I would like to add the following.
It is obvious that peacekeeping in its current state
faces challenges that did not exist a decade ago, to say
nothing of the days when the concept of peacekeeping
was in its inception. Nevertheless, United Nations
peace operations have proved to be a highly adaptive
instrument that contributes much to the resolution of
numerous conflicts. In recent years, the Council and
the General Assembly have thoroughly considered and
passed several important decisions on United Nations
activities aimed at upholding and sustaining peace. The
imultaneous resolutions on sustaining peace (Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262) have become a significant step
forward in the implementation of a conflict-prevention
approach. The conclusions and recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
made us take a fresh look at the nature and challenges
of peacekeeping operations.
In today’s highly volatile world there is a lot of
demand for greater United Nations engagement in the
area of peace and security. In most cases, sustainable
de-escalation and progress in peaceful settlements and
peacebuilding require a robust international security
presence. We fully recognize the critical importance of
peacebuilding architecture in finding effective ways to
support countries emerging from conflict.
To be successful in this endeavour, the United
Nations approach must be based on coherence among

S/PV. 8033

the political, security and development pillars. Enabling
countries to put in place effective and inclusive
national mechanisms and institutions that can address
socioeconomic and political root causes of conflict
must become a priority for the whole United Nations
system. Those include issues that are related to the
promotion and the protection of human rights and to
ensuring that women play an active role at all stages
of peace consolidation. Incorporating human rightsrelated tasks into peacekeeping operation mandates
and human rights components into peace operations
are also essential to prevent conflict, as doing so would
contribute to the de-escalation of and reduced potential
for conflict re-emergence.
When we consider the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding activities, the following elements
are equally important. First, national ownership is an
indispensable condition for the establishment of both
effective and efficient core State capacities, leading
to a more stable and viable State. The purpose of
institution-building is to reduce the dependence of postconflict Governments on the international community
and to promote self-reliance. Yet, the fact that many
post-conflict countries relapse into violence leaves no
doubt about the need for extreme prudence in planning
the transition of responsibilities from the international
community to national authorities, especially in the
security sector.
Secondly, consensus between domestic and
international stakeholders on a broad peacebuilding
agenda is important for the success of institution-building
and peacebuilding endeavours as a whole. If there is a
lack of understanding on either side, there will be little
tangible progress in securing a lasting peace.
Thirdly, given the crucial significance of postconflict institution-building to the success of the
overall peacebuilding efforts, my delegation supports
the approach of integrating the institution-building
perspective, tailored to each country and situation, into
the mandates of respective United Nations missions
from their early stages.
Fourthly, we believe in the transformative power
of relevant regional and subregional organizations in
connection with peacebuilding. Over the past decade,
the role of the African Union in promoting peace
and sustainable development among African States
has increased exponentially. The African Union has
demonstrated its ability to take the lead in the effective

17-2708623/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

resolution of conflicts, and its views and policies on
this matter are of particular value to the United Nations.
Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
is ideally placed to bring together external State and
non-State actors with the aim of securing the creation
of credible, legitimate, accountable and resilient
institutions in countries emerging from conflict.
Therefore, the PBC should play a leading role in enabling
the United Nations system to establish an integrated
approach to institution-building. As an advisory body,
the Commission has a crucial convening role to bridge
security, development and human rights engagements.
The Council should consider it a viable tool at its
disposal when situations are no longer in a “crisis”
stage but are still considered fragile and deserving of
more dedicated, targeted and sustained attention.
That relates also to the consideration of
peacebuilding-related mandates of peacekeeping
and special political missions, as well as to debates
on possible drawdown and termination of missions.
For instance, the idea of inviting representatives
of the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configurations to take part in the Council’s respective
field visits deserves thorough consideration. Such a
practice could contribute to better coordination of the
work done in New York and activities in the field.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank Egypt for organizing today’s
discussion. We hope it will promote an understanding of
the subtleties of Security Council mandates in the areas
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as defining
the boundaries between those two important focuses
of international support. We are grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed, to Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, and
to Mr. Youssef Mahmoud of the Independent High-level
Panel on Peace Operations for their detailed briefings,
which serve as an excellent basis for discussion.
Since the publication of the reports of those two
groups (see S/2015/490 and S/2015/446), Member States
have come a long way in developing specific, consensus
decisions that are embodied in the annual reports of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of
the General Assembly and in resolution 2282 (2016).
While that resolution, on reform of the peacebuilding
architecture, did not change the fundamentals of the work
involved, it outlined the specifics of its various tasks. It
24/70

29/08/2017

affirmed host Governments’ primary responsibility for
identifying and implementing peacebuilding strategies
and clearly established that sustaining peace is a shared
task and responsibility that needs to be fulfilled by the
Government and all other national stakeholders.
The approach to sustaining peace today is often a
very broad one. First and foremost, it is inextricably
linked to post-conflict reconstruction and the prevention
of relapses into conflict. But before that can happen,
it is essential that existing conflicts be settled and a
robust peace assured. For that we need to understand a
conflict’s root causes, each of which has its own genesis
and individual specifics. We believe in establishing
clear tasks for missions aimed at eliminating the causes
that are particular to a conflict. Loading up mandates
with generic functions not only does not improve the
peacekeeping operations’ effectiveness, it increases
their financial cost. As far as we are concerned, there
are specialized United Nations bodies and international
mechanisms for dealing with such issues.
We do not support the policy of expanding the right
of Blue Helmets to use force. While preventive action
is important, excessive interest in it is dangerous, as
is involving peacekeepers in offensive and counterterrorism operations. We do not want peacekeepers
themselves to be dragged into conflicts.
Sustaining peace is impossible without a political
process and national reconciliation, and should
unquestionably be seen as key to peacekeeping
operations. Today we were pleased to hear many
delegations, including the People’s Republic of China,
the United States, France, Sweden and many others,
say that peacekeeping missions’ main goal is helping
to achieve a political settlement. In some cases, there
may be reasons for directing peacekeepers to assist in
addressing issues such as disarmament, demobilization
and integration, security sector reform and so forth. We
cannot support tying tasks that belong to sustaining
peace, peacebuilding and peacekeeping directly to
issues of sustainable development and achievement of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. They
are connected, of course, but not always in a straight
line. Peace by itself does not guarantee development, or
vice versa. In general, we base our understanding of the
concept of sustaining peace, as enshrined in identical
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
the peacebuilding architecture, as a way to eradicate
the root causes of conflicts and bring about national
reconciliation and reconstruction.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for her report on the
contribution of peacekeeping missions to achieving
sustainable peace. We are also grateful to to Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal for their
informative briefings and to the Egyptian presidency for
convening a debate today that has enabled us to explore
the effectiveness, significance and relevance of the
current mandates of United Nations peace operations.
The challenge for peacekeeping operations has to
do with their ability to use the tools they need, tools
whose use must be facilitated through measurable,
clear, coherent and achievable mandates, as is laid out
in the report (S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, without forgetting that the
tools of first resort are preventive diplomacy, strategic
alliances with regional bodies and post-conflict
peacebuilding. Preventive diplomacy is vital and
should be strengthened through mediation, dialogue,
good offices, confidence-building measures and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations itself
regarding State sovereignty, and should not be used as
an instrument for intervention. Such measures, along
with strict regard for civilian populations’ human rights
and dignity, should govern the conduct of peacekeeping
missions, creating ways to achieve connection and
cohesion that can ensure coordination with and the
participation of local communities and civil society
in general.
There should be no military option in conflict
resolution. In that regard, we believe that a mission’s
success depends in part on preventive diplomacy based
on an active political process, and with goals that are
commensurate with its capabilities and resources,
that correspond to the purposes for which they were
conceived, and that are framed by the principles
governing them — above all the consent of the
parties — with a comprehensive strategy capable of
tackling the situation and progressing systematically
towards its primary goal, through a consensus political
process that facilitates peacebuilding and in particular
promotes national ownership.
Success also depends on establishing realistic
deadlines both for peacekeeping operations and other
peacebuilding activities, and on their ability to adapt to
the realities of a particular situation, all of which should
be clearly defined in their mandates, while working
with the communities involved — including women

S/PV. 8033

and young people — to help to build their confidence
in political processes, and with zero tolerance for
sexual violence.
The more than 60 years of experience that the United
Nations has accumulated in peacekeeping operations
have given it invaluable knowledge and experience that
no other body possesses, which is why we know that it is
impossible to fulfil a mandate without a Government’s
trust and active participation. Independence, neutrality
and respect for States and their peoples’ rights must be
observed at all times, because that is how the United
Nations becomes a valid stakeholder in promoting
political processes, coordinating alliances between
States and facilitating the work of staff deployed on
the ground.
We should make greater analytical use of strategic
reviews and the other tools that we possess in order
to monitor, evaluate and verify not only whether a
mission is achieving its goals but also if it has adequate
numbers of troops and, if necessary, whether the
civilian population’s human rights and the purposes
and principles of the Charter are being respected, since
a mission can often end up in a vicious circle of selfpropagating bureaucracies that distort its mandates. In
that regard, it is crucial to ensure that when a peace
operation’s mandate is about to expire, a serious effort
is made to reformulate it and enable its peacebuilding
tasks to be achieved.
Similarly, it is important to work to strengthen
closer strategic alliances with regional and subregional
bodies. We should prioritize developing and deepening
links that incorporate innovative working methods
based on predictable funding, for they are vital to
sustaining peace. One such clear example is the
strategic partnership between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
both committed to developing a structured, equitable
relationship and to strengthening their partnership
with mutual support and continued technical assistance
on the political, security, cross-border and preventive
diplomacy fronts, including the management of
transboundary waters, through mediation and the
exercise of good offices. We are looking forward to the
visit to the African Union headquarters in the coming
days in order to strengthen our partnership and the joint
work of both organizations.
Restoring a post-conflict society requires a
great deal of effort planning and implementing the

17-2708625/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

experience gained on the ground, working together with
Governments to implement agreements between the
parties, demobilization, reintegration, disarmament,
the removal of anti-personnel landmines, economic
development and addressing the causes of the conflict.
All of these are issues that need to be taken into account
in order to promote and consolidate sustainable peace.
The inclusion of society in the peace processes is
key to promoting confidence, given that it can take years
to make this happen. Its inclusion can play an important
role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and in building
peaceful and resilient societies. A clear example of
this is the peace process in Colombia, whose Final
Agreement established measures for the reintegration
of former combatants in civil society, along with the
support of regional organizations and the international
community in general, in order to establish lasting and
sustainable peace.
Finally, Bolivia reaffirms its support to the work
and commitment of peacekeeping operations and thanks
United Nations staff and peacekeeping personnel, as
well as the staff of the troop- and police-contributing
counties, for their sacrifices and hard work. They are
men and women who risk their lives on a daily basis
to build a lasting and sustainable peace in order to
fulfil the principles and objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed; Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Senior
Adviser at the International Peace Institute and
member of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations; and Ambassador Rosenthal, Chair
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, for their
participation and for their very useful briefings.
Over the past decade, we have seen the Security
Council address the unrealistic burdens of peacekeeping
operations without taking into account challenges
that are beyond its capacity or the political situation
on the ground. Therefore, the deployment of some
peacekeeping operations has been merely a symbol
of the inability of the United Nations and the Security
Council to achieve a definitive settlement to conflicts
that have lasted for decades.
26/70

29/08/2017

Although we are all aware that the reform of
peacekeeping operations mandates is unavoidable,
reform efforts have attempted to address technical
and operational deficiencies by guaranteeing units and
equipment, ensuring discipline and proper behaviour
of troops and the physical protection of civilians as
the only criteria of operational efficiency. While these
aspects are very important in promoting the credibility
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations, they are not
enough, in and of themselves, to achieve our goals.
Without a comprehensive vision of how to improve
the situation or a review of the peacekeeping mandate
so it can meet the host country’s needs and the priorities
and deal with the local specificities and without a broad
concept of protection that focuses on State capacitybuilding, we are jeopardizing significant humanitarian
and material resources in peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding efforts. These efforts will diminish and
might even collapse under national and even regional
social, political and economic pressures. Therefore,
guaranteeing the means, the resources and the necessary
troops for United Nations operations creates a secure
political environment in which it is possible to promote
national ownership and efforts aimed at peacebuilding
and achieving a political settlement to disputes. Such
efforts should carried out through programmes aimed
at building State institutions, especially those that
provide services, such as security, justice, education
and health care. Those are the services that make it
possible to preserve the social fabric of society and
relaunch the economy while improving access to work
opportunities, resources and markets.
In that regard, I would like to highlight a number
of elements that we believe are important to that end.
First, it is essential to guarantee a political
framework and solution to a conflict with international
and regional support. Despite the pressures and the
criticisms levied at the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, it goes without saying that
its presence has directly contributed to shedding light
on the degree of humanitarian suffering in Darfur and
it has laid the foundations for national and regional
political efforts to put an end to conflict in the region.
With a view to drawing down the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, it
is important to coordinate efforts with the Sudanese
Government with regard to the length and size of the
United Nations mandate during the transition period,
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

with a focus on the specificities of the situation in
Darfur. That will require us to address the root causes
of the conflict, promote national reconciliation by
encouraging development and restoring citizens’ hope
with regard to their future security and stability. We
must take note of the lessons learned and best practices
of past missions, be they in Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste
or, most recently, in Côte d’Ivoire.
Secondly, a strategic partnership with the host
country that focuses on national ownership and
emphasizes national dialogue, reconciliation and
mutual confidence-building is essential. We must
underscore the importance of national capacitybuilding based on national and local priorities, while
guaranteeing cooperation with national authorities and
building their confidence in United Nations missions.
This is fundamental to the success of the mission.
The success of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire in laying the groundwork for the
Ivorian forces to agree on a national framework for the
settlement of disputes is a good example of the role of
United Nations missions in preserving such frameworks
through coordination with different regional partners
and international stakeholders. Contrarily, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan has experienced
real difficulties in achieving a strategic partnership
as it lacks a common vision that could bring Council
members and regional forces together in order to define
the Mission’s mandate based on the specificities of the
political and security situation in South Sudan.
Thirdly, exit strategies for the mission must be
laid out when the mandate is being established and
benchmarks and timelines must be clearly defined and
regularly reviewed. That would allow the Council to
control and improve mandates based on the situation on
the ground and depending on emerging needs and the
political situation. In that regard, I note the experience
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia and that of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The
mandates of both of these Missions extended perhaps
longer than necessary because of a lack of a clear vision
at the outset, when their mandates were being defined
and troops were being deployed, with regard to the
Missions’ role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
If we want to achieve our goals, we need to coordinate
with our partners within United Nations programmes
and other agencies, and work with international
institutions and bilateral partners. It is key to develop
peacebuilding programmes in order to improve national

S/PV. 8033

mechanisms that would then make it possible to attack
the root causes of conflict and prevent their recurrence.
In that context, we appreciate the increasingly important
role of the Peacebuilding Fund.
Fourthly, we should study the role of peacekeeping
operations in providing a continuum of responses to
conflict situations. That role is important in the context
of ongoing and full coordination with agencies, entities
and programmes of the United Nations system. We
call for a review of missions the in the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in order to better take into account the
political and operational approach that would be most
comprehensive. That review must be considered in
context and based on each mission’s defined framework.
We must promote harmony in developing and
implementing the mandates of peacekeeping operations
in parallel to regional policies, as well as in keep with
the relevant sanctions regimes. Taken together, those
measures constitute a complete mechanism for the
promotion of peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
I will stop here as it relates to the consultative role
of the Peacebuilding Commission, one that has been
increasingly bolstered in order to promote the Security
Council’s capacity to adapt peacekeeping operations to
a comprehensive vision of providing sustaining peace.
It also enables us to address the root causes of conflict.
As a coordinator of that role, Egypt will endeavour to
make the role evolve in order to better meet the needs of
the Council in the upcoming period — especially with
regard to reviewing peacekeeping operations.
Finally, based on our responsibilities as one of the
main troop-contributing countries to peacekeeping
operations, Egypt has proposed to host a ministerial-level
meeting of all troop-contributing countries in 2018.
We would like to work with the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries so
that the meeting can be successful in promoting our
efforts in the area of peacekeeping operations and an
important turning point. In the context of the African
Union, Egypt proposed setting up and hosting a centre
on reconstruction and development in post-conflict
situation — based on our conviction in the importance
of development in sustaining peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to

17-2708627/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all participants that this open
debate will continue through the lunch hour, as we have
a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal for their
critical and thought-provoking briefings. We also thank
the Egyptian delegation for having organized this open
debate, which enables us to continue the dialogue on
the various dimensions of sustaining peace.
Today we analyse the contribution of peacekeeping
operations. Peru believes that such operations can
and must contribute to reaching the general goal of
sustainable peace. The United Nations, including the
Security Council, is called upon to support transitions
in conflict and post-conflict situations and to promote
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, with access to justice for all and
effective and responsible institutions — in line with
the Charter of the United Nations and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, particularly Sustainable
Development Goal 16, which have universal scope.
From the traditional perspective of international
peace and security, we strive for peacekeeping operations
to address and overcome the root causes of conflict.
For example, efforts to create basic infrastructure on
the ground, as conducted by a Peruvian engineering
firm in the Central African Republic, leaves a legacy
that transcends the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. The institutionalization
of those concrete goals must be systematized starting at
the planning stage of peacekeeping operations, which,
in turn, requires renewed cooperation and coordination
among the numerous players called upon to reach said
goals within and outside of the United Nations.
In that regard, the contribution of peacekeeping
operations to sustaining peace must go hand in
hand with the multidimensional processes on the
ground — including military and security aspects,
which, incidentally, must be adequately financed
and supported — but must transcend them to tackle
28/70

29/08/2017

new and complex challenges. The Peacebuilding
Commission is called upon to play an advisory role and,
within its sphere of competence, to contribute to more
comprehensive, effective and efficient approaches.
My delegation stresses the importance of developing
a common political vision to enable integrated action
by all agencies linked to peacekeeping operations,
inter alia troop-contributing countries and regional and
subregional organizations. Above all, the Governments
concerned need to participate in the transition process,
as do other relevant national actors, including women
and youth, as they are the ones who are ultimately
called upon to maintain peace in their countries.
The principles of responsibility and national
ownership and inclusion cannot be ignored. When
the Security Council establishes the mandate for a
peacekeeping operation, it must specifically take that
political perspective into account and define realistic,
concrete and measurable goals for the mission. The
terms of its mandate must be set in accordance with
the general goal of sustainable peace. The ensuing
monitoring should allow the Council to reassess the
information in the light of updated information and
relevant indicators as it relates to the fulfilment of said
goal, which, without a doubt, will enhance the process
and promote pragmatism, integration and flexibility
within the missions, and will empower the actors that
actually deploy on the ground.
In conclusion, Peru, a country that contributes to
peacekeeping operations and that is ready to serve the
international community as a non-permanent member
of the Council, renews — in the current context of
redefining new collective security paradigms — its
commitment to efforts under way to develop more sound
and effective United Nations responses, in line with
the purposes and principles enshrined in the founding
Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
Let me add that it is with some degree of humility
that I address the Chamber today, as one of my first
official actions as Norway’s Ambassador to the United
Nations. I look forward to getting to know everyone in
the coming weeks and months.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Nordic countries would like to commend
Egypt for initiating this debate, which leads up to the
high-level open debate on peace operations to be held
during Ethiopia’s presidency next month.
The concept of sustaining peace marks a paradigm
shift in our approach to prevention, conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It requires more
holistic strategies, while drawing seamlessly on all the
tools at the disposal of the United Nations along the
continuum between conflict and peace. It is consistent
with the reviews conducted over the past few years and
is at the core of Secretary-General’s vision for reform
of the United Nations — a vision to which the Nordic
countries fully subscribe. I would like to focus on three
areas in particular where the Nordic countries believe
the Security Council can contribute to sustainable peace.
First, we believe that the Security Council should
include a long-term perspective in its mission mandates.
Mandates should be based on a joint United Nations
analysis that considers the root causes of a conflict
in order to lay the foundations for lasting peace. In
our view, the recent mandates for the transitions of
the United Nations Missions in Liberia and Haiti
provide interesting lessons that may inspire other
mandate processes.
In Liberia, the mandate charged the Secretariat with
developing a peacebuilding plan in close coordination
with the Government and the United Nations country
team. It specifically emphasized the important
convening role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in developing such a plan, a role that the PBC’s Liberia
configuration has played and will continue to play. In
Haiti, the Council has decided to establish a follow-on
peacekeeping mission — the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti — to ease the transition
as the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
winds down, thereby enabling Haiti to consolidate the
gains it has made towards sustainable peace. Those
two examples offer different lessons that could be
included in a catalogue of best practices for transitions.
We propose that Member States and the Secretariat
develop a catalogue of this kind, which could guide
the Secretariat in drawing up future reports to the
Council and form the basis for well-informed mandate
discussions in the future.
Secondly, United Nations peace operations should
be made more people-centred and inclusive and should
engage more actively with local communities. That

S/PV. 8033

was one of the key recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations. In our
view, more attention should be paid to this aspect
when mandating and designing peace operations.
Missions should be enabled to engage more actively
with local Governments and communities, including
women and young people. The participation of women
must be ensured at all levels. A more people-centred
approach requires close coordination with United
Nations country teams in order to avoid duplication and
maximize results on the ground.
Thirdly, ensuring predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding is crucial. Peacebuilding
should not be dependent on voluntary contributions
alone. When large missions wind down and withdraw,
a large amount of funding and a considerable source
of revenues and economic activity are lost. That may
result in severe economic challenges for the country
concerned, which in turn could undermine the transition
process. Close consultation between the Council and the
PBC is needed in order to reduce the negative economic
consequences of transitions.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
forthcoming report on sustaining peace, which we hope
will include guidance on how revenue gaps of this kind
can be prevented and bridged in future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Egypt for organizing today’s debate on
such a topical issue and for its dynamic and successful
presidency of the Security Council in the month of
August. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud and Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal for their informative briefings.
For more than two years now, the United Nations
has been at a turning point in its existence: exciting
discussions are taking place everywhere, new concepts
are emerging and focusing the attention of the Member
States, and innovative initiatives aimed at streamlining,
optimizing and improving the performance of the
Organization are increasingly taking shape. Those
lively debates show that Member States are aware of
the urgent need to reform the work of the Organization
in order to make sure that it is at the level of addressing
the complex and inextricable challenges that we see
proliferating day in and day out. In fact, we can say
that, after decades of effort and sacrifice on the part

17-2708629/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the international community to bring peace to the
four corners of the globe, it is obvious now that a major
challenge for peace is precisely that it has a very shortlived resilience to tensions and destabilizing trends
in still-fragile countries. That was confirmed by the
three recent reviews on peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security.
This conclusion is therefore clear and obvious:
the efforts made by the United Nations to establish,
maintain and consolidate peace will be in vain if the
sought-after peace is not sustained. And the share of
responsibility assumed by United Nations actors in
cases of lack of peace resilience is very real, as reflected
in the report on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture (see S/2015/490). The fragmentation that
exists among various United Nations organs involved
in the pursuit of peace and the narrow prism through
which peacebuilding has been viewed so far are
examples of this, to name but two forms of dysfunction.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to rectify the lack of interaction among United
Nations bodies. In that regard, there is no need to
recall that sustaining peace, which includes conflict
prevention, gives new impetus to the work of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. The threats to
peace are increasingly multidimensional and constantly
changing. Therefore, United Nations organs are
constantly being called upon to adapt in order to better
respond to new challenges to peace in a timely manner.
The spearhead of United Nations efforts to restore
peace in fragile and conflict-ridden countries are the
peacekeeping operations, which, over the years and
through the efforts and sacrifices of their members,
embody the irreversible commitment of the international
community to protecting suffering populations. When
they have clear, realistic and achievable mandates and
the necessary political support, peacekeeping operations
are one of the most flexible and best-adapted tools that
the United Nations has for meeting the challenges to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The reverse is also true, however. When mandates
are not adapted to situations on the ground, they can
have mixed results and endanger both the populations
to be protected and the contingents in the field.
As the main weak link in this broad continuum of
peace that runs from prevention, conflict resolution
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term
30/70

29/08/2017

development, peacekeeping missions are the main
interested parties in the new global strategy promoted
by the Secretary-General to achieve the desired goal of
sustaining peace. In that regard, I would like to make
the following remarks.
It is key to make sure that the capabilities of
peacekeeping missions are in line with the mandate
and needs of the theatre of operations. Assuming that
there is no standard or pre-established formula for
every situation, each mission has to be considered in
its particular political and security context. Changing
criteria, such as the geographical diversity of a mission
and its development over time, can provide it with
a certain margin of manoeuvre without incurring
additional costs. Putting together an operation is not an
end in and of itself, nor is it the only solution possible.
It is important to make sure that efforts to stabilize and
peacefully settle conflicts are undertaken at the same
time as military operations deployed to protect civilians.
We have to recall that, even if their cost does not
reach even the level of 0.5 per cent of world military
expenditure, the crucial role played by peacebuilding
operations in the establishment of lasting peace is
undeniable. We therefore have to pay greater attention
to peacebuilding not only in countries emerging from
conflict but also in countries that are still fragile. We
need to make sure that efforts be brought together
in order to restore peace, build peace and ultimately
sustain peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and Australia (the
CANZ group).
We are committed to implementing the sustaining
peace resolutions (Security Council resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) and
believe that peacekeeping operations make a key
contribution to sustainable peace. The resolutions
emphasize that sustaining peace must become a shared
task and responsibility. Better reflecting the primacy of
politics was highlighted by the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
as one of the four essential shifts for peace operations
reform. Advancing these goals requires the continued
leadership of the Security Council, the Secretariat
and Member States, and includes a commitment to
improving in three areas on which we will focus today:
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

managing transitions, integrating sustaining peace
with ongoing reform processes, and financing for
peacebuilding. The time for engagement is now.
Failed transitions out of peacekeeping missions
increase the risk of relapse into conflict. Improving
transitions was a key motivator for the sustaining peace
resolutions. The issue is now urgent, particularly given
the scheduled closure in Liberia, the downsizing in
Darfur and the transition in Haiti. Effective transitions
require broad consultation and access to financing
to ensure that resourcing and policy approaches
are appropriate.
In the spirit of more inclusive working methods, the
Council should engage closely with the Secretariat and
the Peacebuilding Commission, which should in turn
engage across the United Nations system and outside
it, with the international financial institutions, civil
society and others. We commend the assessment and
planning for ongoing peacebuilding needs in Liberia,
noting that capacity-mapping efforts reveal a troubling
capacity cliff in the United Nations country teams’
ability to take on key tasks. That needs to be addressed.
Secondly, increasing predictable, sustained
financing for peacebuilding must be a high priority
if we want the pivot to prevention to achieve its
potential. Better coordination with other peacebuilding
contributors — including United Nations agencies,
the international financial institutions, regional and
bilateral partners, and donors — is crucial. This is
especially the case when operating environments
are fluid.
Donors also have a key role to play in addressing
the fragmentation of United Nations peacebuilding
financing. By requesting joint analysis and contributing
to pooled and unearmarked funds, donors can
powerfully incentivise coordinated and coherent United
Nations peacebuilding efforts. We reiterate our call for
ambitious options to be put forward for predictable
and sustained financing, including on assessed and
voluntary contributions. In addition to rationalizing
existing resources for peacebuilding, we must further
empower the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
to coordinate and engage more broadly in order to
access funding and conduct joint analyses.
We must also focus on increasing women’s
participation in peacebuilding. We commend the
Peacebuilding Fund for allocating 20 per cent to
women’s empowerment projects in 2016, and call for

S/PV. 8033

continued efforts and increased financing to support
women in actively participating.
Thirdly, we urge continued efforts to align reform
processes with the sustaining peace perspective. It is
essential that the current range of reform processes
contribute to improving the ability of the United
Nations system as a whole, including peacekeeping
operations specifically, to build and sustain peace.
Those responsible for reform processes should fully
absorb and apply the sustaining peace resolutions in
their work.
We urge the Council, the Secretariat, funds
and programmes and all Member States to support
reforms and retain the focus on why the reforms are
being pursued. The Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference, to be held in Vancouver, Canada, in
November, will be a good opportunity to advance
this perspective.
In closing, CANZ strongly supports implementation
of sustaining peace and recognizes the vital role of
United Nations peacekeeping missions in achieving
this. We are committed to reform efforts that are
coherent, coordinated and lead to effective United
Nations action, including on peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by thanking you, Sir, and the delegation
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for convening this
open debate on the potential contribution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to the overarching
goal of sustaining peace, and for our concept paper
(S/2017/692, annex).
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed; Mr. Yousef Mahmoud, as a member
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations; and in particular my friend and compatriot
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal.
Peacekeeping is one of the pre-eminent
responsibilities of the United Nations. The Blue Helmets
are the hope of civilian populations that face and suffer
the serious consequences of conflicts. Peace missions
have mandates of a unique character, the essential
purpose of which is to protect civilians and to ensure
peace according to the specific context of each country.
We therefore welcome any initiative that encourages

17-2708631/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and strengthens the relationship of the Council with the
Human Rights Council and its mechanisms.
Taking into account the fact that peacekeeping
operations do not always address the root causes
of conflict, we believe that their design must
comprehensively and coherently address conditions
on the ground and the specific characteristics of
the population in order to better plan and efficiently
coordinate all efforts to use political, social and
development tools based on successful experiences
and lessons learned. Every effort to that end requires
a deep and authentic knowledge of the situation
on the ground — as well noted this morning by
Mr. Mahmoud — particularly national ownership and
respect for national sovereignty, as reflected in the
preambular paragraphs of resolution 2282 (2016).
My delegation is convinced that peacekeeping
operations focused on fostering sustainable peace and
conflict prevention will allow us to move systematically
towards a comprehensive reconstruction of both the
social fabric and the elements that are conducive to the
integral development of the population in question in
order to achieve true and lasting peace, which is not
only the absence of conflict but also the opportunity
to build the conditions of an inclusive national agenda,
focused on development and respect for human rights.
It is appropriate to recall the important role the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture can and
should play in providing sufficient assistance and
knowledge to allow the Security Council to determine
the conditions required by the country hosting a
peacekeeping operation in order to avoid unnecessary
prolongation of the mission’s mandate or the stagnation
of the peace process. Experience has shown that
without a well-planned integration, implementation and
finalization strategy, the risks of relapse or prolongation
in a conflict situation can be high as well as costly. It is
therefore important that, in planning for the transition
of a mission, it be carried out in consultation with
and with the support of the host country, including
taking into consideration ways of minimizing potential
collateral effects of the mission.
We advocate and recognize the importance of the
allocation of sufficient resources for peacebuilding
components
within
peacekeeping
operations,
including during the transition and downsizing
phases, so as to support the stability and continuity of
peacebuilding activities.
32/70

29/08/2017

Lastly, the Security Council has the responsibility
to determine the existence of any threat to peace,
breach of the peace or act of aggression and to make
recommendations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Guatemala hopes that the new
budget cuts that some members of the Council are
promoting will not affect the implementation of
sustainable peace in the host countries of missions
where a transition is under way. In view of its powers,
or rather its responsibilities, we urge the Security
Council to include the concept of sustainable peace and
to focus on implementing its recommendations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this open debate
on a matter to which we attach great importance,
taking into account the fact that 88 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel deployed in the field come
from non-aligned countries.
At the outset, we would like to convey, on behalf of
the States members of the Movement, our best wishes
to the delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt for
a successful month in the conduct of the work of the
Council, as well as our appreciation for its efforts in
preparing the concept paper (S/2017/692, annex) for
this meeting. We would also like to acknowledge the
diligence with which the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China carried out the work of this organ
in July.
Likewise, we should like to thank Her Excellency
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Senior Adviser at the
International Peace Institute; and Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, former Chair of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the Review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture, for their valuable briefings.
The States members of the Movement reiterate
their commitment to the promotion of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in accordance with Article 2
and Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as with relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law as a whole, in order to contribute to
strengthening international peace and security and
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to save future generations from the scourge of war,
including by strengthening the role of the United
Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, confidence-building,
national reconciliation, post-conflict peacebuilding,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development.
In that regard, we stress that, in the context of
a comprehensive approach and the objective of a
lasting peace and security, the implementation of all
tasks mandated to peacekeeping operations should be
supported and accompanied by a parallel, comprehensive
and inclusive peace process that is well planned and
carefully designed and based on national ownership
and the support of the international community, as well
as the consent and compliance of the parties concerned.
In that respect, I would refer to resolution 2086 (2013),
which was welcomed by the Movement, with its
particular focus on multidimensional peacekeeping as
an important contribution to pursuing a comprehensive,
coherent and integrated approach to multidimensional
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding.
At the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in September 2016 on Margarita island,
Venezuela, the Heads of State and Government stressed
that United Nations peacekeeping operations must not
be used as a substitute for addressing the root causes
of conflict, which should be addressed in a coherent,
well-planned, coordinated and comprehensive manner,
together with other political, social, economic and
developmental instruments. They further stressed
that due consideration should be given by the United
Nations to the manner in which those efforts can be
carried out from the early stage of United Nations
engagement in post-conflict situations and continue
without interruption after the departure of peacekeeping
operations, so as to ensure a smooth transition to lasting
peace and security and sustainable development. In that
context, they stressed the need to improve synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities so
as to attain the overall objective of sustainable peace.
Our position is of great relevance, taking
into account that, in most cases, the structural
causes of conflicts include, among others, poverty,
hunger, inequalities — including those related to
gender — violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, injustice, lack of jobs and access to
education, poor accountability and mismanagement
of natural resources, all of which are core elements of

S/PV. 8033

a comprehensive approach specifically to achieving
sustainable peace.
On that occasion, the Heads of State and Government
also reaffirmed the Movement’s principled position on
peacekeeping operations, which must be carried out
with strict adherence to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. They also
emphasized that respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of States, as well
as non-intervention in internal affairs, are key elements
of joint efforts in the promotion of international peace
and security. In that regard, they reiterated that respect
for the basic principles of peacekeeping — namely, the
consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of force
except in self-defence — is essential to the success of
peacekeeping operations.
Preserving, promoting, achieving and maintaining
international peace and security should remain key
priorities of the United Nations agenda, which is why
the international community must spare no effort in
the fields of conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
Therefore, preventing the outbreak, continuation or
recurrence of conflict is a collective responsibility. Most
important of all, however, it is a national responsibility
that could at times benefit from the objective, impartial
and supportive assistance that the United Nations is
able to provide, upon request and in partnership with
regional and subregional organizations and other
relevant actors, as appropriate.
Moreover, while recognizing that there are various
tools available to the international community and
the United Nations for ensuring the maintenance of
international peace and security, including preventive
diplomacy, the Non-Aligned Movement stresses the
importance of using such tools in good faith, and
not as a tool for interfering in the internal affairs of
Member States, in strict compliance with the principles
of international law concerning friendly relations and
cooperation among States, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. We also emphasize the
need to include and involve all sectors of society in
peace processes, including women and youth, who can
play an important role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts and in building peaceful and resilient societies.
The Non-Aligned Movement has taken note of the
Secretary-General’s peace and security architecture
reform initiative, which has a particular focus on

17-2708633/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

enhancing the meaningful interface between United
Nations political efforts and peacekeeping operations
on the ground. The need to change compartmentalized
thinking within the Organization must not be
minimized, including in order for peacekeeping
mandates and operations to be well calibrated with the
broader political and development objectives necessary
for sustaining peace.
In that connection, the States members of the
Movement reiterate the importance they attach to the
deliberations and report of the annual substantive
session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which is the only United Nations forum
mandated to comprehensively review the whole
question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
and refer to the observations and recommendations
reached through consensus in this year’s report on
the potential contribution of peacekeeping operations
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In that regard,
we recognize the need for further awareness-raising of
personnel deployed in peacekeeping missions about the
evolving policy discussions and approaches regarding
the field. The Movement also stresses the need for a
structural and predictable approach to the triangular
consultations among the Security Council, the troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat,
with a view to leveraging the potential of peacekeeping
mandates and operations for sustaining peace.
To conclude, the Non-Aligned Movement looks
forward to the Secretary-General’s report on sustaining
peace with specific recommendations on, inter alia,
how peacekeeping operations can better serve the
comprehensive approach of sustaining peace, including
during transitions. The Movement wishes to see creative
and forward-looking recommendations, particularly on
increased, sustainable and predictable resources for
sustaining peace, including by enhancing the efficiency
of peacekeeping operations, as part of the broad-based
framework for sustaining peace in response to the
shifting realities on the ground.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Meyer (Brazil): I thank Egypt for convening
today’s important open debate on peacekeeping and
sustaining peace.
I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Mahmoud and Ambassador Rosenthal
34/70

29/08/2017

for their informative briefings and leadership in those
two relevant areas.
The role of United Nations peacekeeping operations
has evolved dramatically over the years. Their new tasks
include addressing the political, security, humanitarian
and development dimensions of complex crises, as well
as ensuring the implementation of comprehensive peace
agreements. Brazil supports a strategy that takes into
account the entire peace continuum, from prevention,
conflict resolution and peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and long-term development. Today’s operations have
moved from the traditional military models of ceasefire
observation to become multidimensional, combining
military, civilian and political aspects that strive to
promote stability in the aftermath of conflict.
The Security Council must ensure that peacekeeping
operations are fully resourced and entrusted with the
appropriate mandate for the specific environment in
which they are deployed. It must also ensure that they
are adequately equipped to protect themselves and
discharge their mandates. The link between policy
formulation and implementation on the ground, as
well as consultations among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, is also paramount to achieving success.
Development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Therefore,
sustaining peace should flow through the three pillars
of United Nations engagement at all stages of conflict.
In all its dimensions, sustaining peace needs continued
international attention and assistance. Peacekeeping
operations have a clear and relevant role in that regard.
Preventing the relapse into conflict is also fundamental
to peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General’s vision
on prevention states, prevention should permeate
everything we do and sustaining peace is essential to
long-term prevention. Peacekeeping operations are
situated within the process of sustaining peace across
the conflict cycle.
The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (HIPPO), which carried out a review of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
made a number of convergent conclusions with the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture. They agreed on
the primacy of politics, which recognized that peace
operations are a tool to support a political process
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that must be conceived and planned in support of the
broader objective of obtaining political solutions.
The Panel also addressed lessons from past
peacekeeping operations in sustaining peace and
recommended that mission budgets should include
the pragmatic resources necessary for mandated tasks
to support the sustaining of peace. Programmatic
peacebuilding activities in peacekeeping operations
mandates should not depend solely on voluntary
funds. Community violence reduction activities and
quick impact projects are tangible examples of how
peacekeeping actions can address issues, such as
poverty, the exclusion of young people from the labour
market, gender inequality, institutional weaknesses and
disputes over land and natural resources. The report of
the HIPPO (S/2015/446) recommends that peacebuilding
objectives be incorporated into mission mandates at the
earliest possible stage of a peacekeeping operation.
Brazil has been supporting the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the framework that birthed
the concept of sustaining peace, since the creation
of the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission since 2007, and Chair of
the Organizational Committee of the Commission from
2014 to 2015. We have been promoting, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, sustaining peace initiatives, such
as community violence reduction and quick impact
projects in different ways during the past decade,
including through the implementation of projects on
the ground, such as through the scope of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau,
support via the allocation of resources in the Fifth
Committee and the synergies between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping in the work of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.
The sustaining peace approach adds considerable
value to peacekeeping missions, providing tools for
peacekeepers to act as early peacebuilders, beyond
overcoming the misconception of sequencing between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Brazil hopes that
sustaining peace will be duly considered in as many
United Nations peacekeeping missions as possible,
supported by an adequate allocation of resources and
strengthened coordination with the peacebuilding
architecture, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission, while allowing for the continued

S/PV. 8033

implementation of strategic activities, which are crucial
to sustaining peace and to ensuring a smooth transition
from a traditional peacekeeping operation to either a
special political mission or United Nations Country
Team. Brazil remains fully committed to those efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for inviting us to today’s
open debate, and for the concept paper (S/2017/692,
annex), which provides the background for today’s
important discussion.
My country shares the vision surrounding the
need to adjust the structure of peacekeeping missions
to ensure that they are effective and can provide an
appropriate response to the current dynamics of armed
conflicts. The majority of conflicts are no longer
international; they now have diverse origins and
connotations, as outlined by resolution 2282 (2016).
Like those who spoke before me, in particular
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, I would like to reiterate
our belief that we are moving in the right direction in
the crucial task of pooling our efforts to contribute
to international peacebuilding and security. In a very
different and specific context and with the support of
the Security Council and of the entire Organization, my
country has focused all of the Government’s political
will on achieving sustainable and lasting peace. The
lessons learned in brokering the peace agreement and
from its first special political mission, now nearing
completion, which the Security Council approved in
January 2016, allow us to categorically state that the
success of such a major undertaking depends on a
mission whose concept, structure and development
consistently responds to the political and social situation
on the ground, and not on predetermined formulas to
which everyone must conform.
We also believe that, in our case, national ownership
has been a determining factor in achieving success,
which today’s concept paper deems to be essential.
As mentioned on other occasions at the Security
Council and in other forums, the process conducted
in Colombia, through a new tripartite mechanism
with regional support from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the United Nations,
the guerrilla armed forces and the Government, along
with participation of communities, victims, young
people and women, provides lessons that we believe

17-2708635/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

can be analysed and considered in other contexts with
complexities that require bold structures, which are
underpinned by greater national capacities, possess a
clear exit strategy, involve all stakeholders concerned
and demand that a more relevant and effective role
be played by the Peacebuilding Commission, which
requires the tools necessary to carry out such a
critical mission. Only in this way will their design not
be reduced to the containment of conflicts but to the
prevention of their recurrence.
As Secretary-General António Guterres has
repeatedly said, conflict prevention must be one of the
fundamental pillars of the work of the United Nations,
and it is essential to incorporate aspects of economic
development, social cohesion, gender equality and
human rights, among others, in such a way that they
translate into a culture of conflict prevention, based on
risk management, to achieve sustainable peace.
In conclusion, the work of prevention and
sustainable peace, which are two principles that we
have been able to take from the three reports; the joint
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262; as well as the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals for reform should result in a
strengthened budget that provides the necessary tools
to execute this task to which we are all committed.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate.
It has been acknowledged for a long time now
that the flagship activity of the United Nations — its
peacekeeping operations — is facing severe challenges
and is not able to achieve the desired result of bringing
sustainable peace to the areas of its deployment.
A series of studies, including the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446), have pointed out the primacy of politics;
the need for regular consultations between the Council,
the troop-contributing nations and the Secretariat;
improved mandate design and implementation; meeting
capability requirements for hostile, asymmetric
environments; as well as addressing important elements
for sustaining peace for better results in peacekeeping
operations. This is because the nature of peacekeeping
has changed substantially, with modern armed conflicts
taking place within a State and involving non-State
36/70

29/08/2017

actors and international terrorist networks. The sheer
number of briefings and open debates that continue to
be held on this issue in the Security Council indicate
that we are grappling with the complexity of issues
involved. Operational and logistic issues aside, there is
an obvious lack of appropriate investment in political
dialogue and a huge mismatch between resource
allocation for peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The numerous long-standing chronic armed
conflict situations have led to serious deliberations
here at the United Nations, especially over the past
couple of years, on clarifying the concept of sustaining
peace, culminating in the adoption of the landmark
identical General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016). However, it
is still not clear how this is to be aligned. The United
Nations agencies that have a major role in implementing
the sustaining peace agenda are outside the Security
Council and have little funding support. We all are
aware that fewer than 1 per cent of the funds allocated
to peacekeeping are available for peacebuilding
efforts. While the normative acknowledgement of the
challenges and possible solutions exist, that appears
to be mere lip service when it comes to providing the
required resources.
The long, extended peacekeeping missions that go
on for decades and elusive political solutions remind
us of the need to focus on long-term investment in
sustainable development, institution-building and
inclusive political processes. The ongoing transitions
in Haiti and Liberia are useful cases for the ongoing
discussions on sustaining peace at the United Nations.
The ability of the United Nations to invest long term
in institution-building and sustainable development in
these countries would turn them into examples of how
to successfully sustain peace.
The current peacekeeping mandates include some
elements to restore and rebuild the legitimacy of the
State authority in order to prevent the relapse into
the conflict and lay the foundations for achieving
sustainable peace. However, the challenges in this
process include a lack of genuine effort to understand
the priorities of the host State and properly incorporate
the same into the mandate; and a huge difference
between ambitions, capacities and resources.
We may consider whether allocation of an
appropriate percentage of funds from the peacekeeping
budget to activities related to peacebuilding and
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sustaining peace in those situations, could be an option
that would allow us to move forward efforts to achieve
sustainable peace in the various intra-State conflicts
we are facing. This is in the context of the pressure on
the already meagre resources available for the United
Nations development system.
There is a broad and clear agreement on the need
for reform. We appreciate the focus of the SecretaryGeneral on greater collaboration across the three
pillars of United Nations work so that resources can
be reoriented to build capacity to prevent relapses
into conflict. We have noted the intention to co-locate
the departments of political affairs and peacekeeping
operations for closer coordination. We also look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s reform
proposals in the area of peace and security.
We hope that our discussions can move forward
our collectively efforts to contribute to the goal of
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
now would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
Since the 2015 review processes on the United
Nations peace operations and peacebuilding
architecture, there have been renewed efforts to
strengthen the Organization’s capacity to respond to
international crises in a more effective way. Turkey
will continue to support these efforts. Turkey values
and contributes to the peaceful settlement of disputes at
the regional and international levels. We see great merit
and necessity in making political solutions a priority
for both conflict prevention and resolution. We also
play an active role in international peacekeeping under
both the blue banner of the United Nations and the
umbrella of different international security institutions.
We consider mediation to be a key tool that is worthy
of greater investment and that should be more widely
utilized in order to bring a peaceful political end to
conflicts, as well as to address the root causes thereof.
We agree that there is a need for a more coherent
and integrated strategy that will ultimately enable
the United Nations to be more effective at conflict

S/PV. 8033

prevention. Mediation should play a central role in this
strategy, in line with the Secretary-General’s surge
in peace diplomacy initiative. Turkey, as a friend of
sustaining peace, adheres to the overarching objective
of the United Nations towards genuine peace, which
can only be accomplished through a strong sense of
ownership by its Member States. In fact, “sustaining
peace” encompasses a wide array of activities and
different stages, which the United Nations is already
engaged in regarding ongoing conflict prevention
and management initiatives. Sustainable development
goals, the protection and the promotion of human
rights and the rule of law are among those pathways
where collective endeavours can pave the way towards
sustaining peace.
The real potential of sustaining peace lies with the
comprehensive approach, coherence and coordination
among relevant actors, as well as acting as one. In order
to increase the effectiveness of efforts to sustain peace,
the United Nations should develop more integrated
missions on the ground that are able to build capacity
for the host nations and to develop partnerships with
relevant regional and international organizations.
The United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
with its broader scope, should play a more active
role in conflict prevention. Turkey is pleased to see
the Peacebuilding Commission taking on many files
in addition to its traditional configurations with a
particular focus on prevention, and we will continue
to support the Commission through its voluntary
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.
On the other hand, the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as well as special political missions, are
perhaps the most influential assets currently available
in the field. We acknowledge that peacekeeping
operations have been continuously evolving as a
result of the changing character and dimensions of
the challenges and the threats on the ground. We also
acknowledge that there are growing needs for these
missions for peacebuilding purposes — in particular
when it comes to mission transitions.
Finally, we concur that the United Nations should
be able to respond to all current challenges and deliver
with respect to the increasing demands. That, however,
should start with crafting clear and unambiguous
mandates. Those mandates should be, in the first place,
achievable and in full conformity with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

17-2708637/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

29/08/2017

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.

the youth dimension is positively integrated into the
Commission’s activities.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank Egypt for organizing today’s debate.

I would also like to stress the importance of the
link between mediation, including at the local level,
and peacekeeping operations. Belgium supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts to increase mediation
expertise in missions and strengthen partnerships with
local and national mediation actors. The use of mixed
military, police and civilian teams, including for human
rights, is an important tool in that regard. It enables
missions to increase their contact with local authorities,
traditional and religious leaders and other relevant
actors on the ground, in order to prevent local tensions
from fomenting conflict and to consolidate peace more
positively through local reconciliation.

Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I will focus on three aspects: first, integrating a
long-term vision for a mission from its start; secondly,
the importance of ensuring that all support is inclusive,
especially with regard to the central role of women and
young people; and, lastly, the importance of keeping the
root causes of conflicts in view at every stage of action.
A lasting peace requires an overall vision. The
objectives to be attained should be defined at the very
beginning of an intervention in a country so as to
enable peace operations to withdraw as soon as those
objectives have been met. In that context, as soon as a
mission is launched it must begin to provide the tools
that will later enable the country to manage its security
alone. A reliable security sector is an important aspect
of sustaining peace. In many situations on the Security
Council’s agenda, the security sector must be reformed
in order to strengthen a country’s capacity to respond
to challenges to peace. At the beginning of next year,
based on its experiences in this area, including in Mali,
the Central African Republic and Somalia, Belgium
plans to launch an analysis drawn from the lessons
it has learned. Where it is possible, we welcome and
encourage more regular use by peacekeepers of joint
patrols with the local armed forces.
My second point concerns the role of women and
young people in creating lasting peace, which demands
everyone’s participation in the decision-making
process, women as well as men. Too often, important
decisions in peace processes are still made by groups
of men alone. If we are to ensure that women’s specific
needs and aspirations are taken into consideration, we
must enable them to participate in making decisions
about issues that are likely to have an impact on their
lives. Resolution 1325 (2000) paved the way in this area,
and Belgium is pleased to be launching its third action
plan on women and peace and security. Resolution 2250
(2015), on youth and peace and security, complements
it, underlining the importance of young people in efforts
to promote peace and security. In that regard, equal
access to an inclusive education and to decent jobs,
for example, are decisive factors. As the Peacebuilding
Commission’s youth focal point, Belgium ensures that
38/70

My third point is that we believe it is important
to pay particular attention to the root causes that give
rise to conflicts. Peacekeeping operations’ mediation
and reconciliation activities, as I have said, are a key
element. Humanitarian and development interventions,
programmatic spending and rapid-impact projects
should be organized simultaneously with a view
to making the peace dividend for the population a
tangible thing while targeting those root causes as far
as possible. The aim is to support the authorities in
recreating a strong social contract through which the
State can provide basic services. Apart from that, the
various trafficking activities of armed groups often end
up becoming a conflict’s raison d’être. Peacekeeping
operations could play a more significant and proactive
role in combating such trafficking. Lastly, cooperation
with the country teams is crucial. Their work on
fundamental issues such as governance, the judicial
system, elections and transitional justice is essential to
sustaining peace and complements the peacekeeping
operations’ efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to improve the work of the
Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations and to translate the approach of resolution
2282 (2016) into concrete action. My delegation looks
forward with interest to the report on peace and
security reform and the new proposals it will make to
go even further in implementing the recommendations
of the reports of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture (S/2015/490) in order to
achieve lasting peace.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Egypt for convening today’s timely
debate. Faced with the evolution of armed conflicts
and the changing nature of new challenges to peace
and development, the United Nations has become
increasingly aware of the urgent need to change the
focus on the achievement of its ultimate raison d’être and
purpose, maintaining international peace and security.
Unfortunately, the United Nations has devoted
much of its human and financial resources to managing
conflicts rather than preventing them. We therefore urge
the Security Council to devote this and other meetings
to the consideration of prevention as central to action
in the United Nations system and to sustainable peace
as a goal and process. There can be no peace without
development or respect for human rights. And it is
difficult to have development without peace.
The Security Council and General Assembly’s
adoption of their historic resolutions 2282 (2016)
and 70/262 demonstrate that both the Assembly
and the Council are already committed to guiding
the Organization’s responses through the concept
of sustaining peace, which the Secretary-General’s
programme of reform also addresses. As Chair of the
Group of Friends for Sustainable Peace, Mexico would
like to continue working with the Secretary-General
and the members of the United Nations towards a
greater understanding of the potential of this systemic
and conceptual challenge to the fragmentation of the
work of the Organization, which calls for the active
and coherent participation of the principal organs
of the United Nations, as well as the Secretariat and
its specialized agencies, funds, programmes and
operations on the ground.
The wide range of tools available to the United
Nations in order to implement this concept includes
efforts that range from preventive diplomacy to
peacebuilding, along with the design of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.However, we
must take greater advantage of the involvement of the
Secretary-General, directly or through the country
teams in the field, the Special Representatives, and
exploit the possibility represented by the SecretaryGeneral’s request for advisory opinions to the
International Court of Justice as valuable instruments
within the framework of the purposes of the Charter.

S/PV. 8033

The Security Council must also continue to ensure
that the mandates of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions are sufficiently flexible and
tailored to the reality and the needs on the ground and
that they address all post-conflict phases and contribute
to sustainable peace in a consistent and multisectoral
way. It is essential to strengthen the interrelation and
coordination between the Security Council, troopcontributing countries, financial contributors, host
States, regional organizations, relevant United Nations
system agencies, national authorities and civil society.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s reform
proposal, which he is currently working on, will be
translated into a sustainable peace architecture that
improves its effectiveness in preventing, maintaining
and consolidating international peace and security. To
do this, it must have the logistical, political, financial
and staff resources to fulfil ever more robust and
multidimensional mandates. We advocate a genuine
institutional change that rests on the pillars of
transparency, inclusiveness, accountability and greater
political, financial and logistical support for United
Nations peace operations.
Sustainable peace has provided peacekeeping
operations and special political missions with a new
narrative and clearer legitimacy, since the close
relationship between prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding is intimately linked to development
and compliance with the 2030 Agenda. We therefore
urge the Security Council to continue to ensure that
its actions to achieve peace are anchored in the major
United Nations agreements.
We are facing a paradigm shift in the Organization
more than 70 years after its founding. We must address
the crises at the root and look at their root causes. We
must invest in communities and in prevention and not
simply in managing conflicts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

17-2708639/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Council has clearly defined that sustaining
peace involves all stages of the conflict cycle and should
flow through all three pillars of the United Nations
engagement. Today, we are faced with a rising number
of violent conflicts around the world. Crisis situations
tend to last longer, are driving human insecurity
on a vast scale, have become increasingly complex
and volatile, and most of them take place in contexts
that have experienced conflict before. The failure to
sustain peace is at the heart of the question calling for
unprecedented international cooperation and action.
Tackling rising global insecurity is a pressing
imperative. How do we craft a more coherent and more
effective response across the conflict continuum? How
do we mainstream sustaining peace across the United
Nations action, including its peacekeeping operations?
First, our priority should be to pursue political
solutions. The peace and security reviews of 2015 have
underlined that conflict prevention and resolution is
an inherently political and comprehensive process in
which preventive foreign policy plays a pivotal role.
Peace can be sustained only through locally owned
comprehensive agreements rooted in broad, deep and
durable regional and international partnerships.
The EU reiterates the need to invest in upstream
conflict prevention while also planning for sustaining
peace beyond peacekeeping engagement, recognizing
that peacekeeping and special political missions
remain at the core of the United Nations mandate. The
right policy mix of conflict prevention, mediation,
building and strengthening resilience, peacekeeping,
stabilization,
peacebuilding
and
humanitarian
assistance must serve the objective of sustaining peace.
Peacekeeping operations must be and must be seen as a
key ingredient of the policy mix available to the United
Nations.

29/08/2017

Security Policy. Our Global Strategy emphasizes the
importance of acting promptly on prevention, while
also responding responsibly and decisively to crises,
investing in the resilience of States and societies, and
avoiding premature disengagement when a new crisis
erupts.
The Global Strategy also promises that the EU will
engage in a practical and principled way in sustaining
peace, taking an integrated approach to conflict and
crises. As conflicts have multiple dimensions — from
security to gender, from governance to the economy — it
remains essential, both for the European Union and the
United Nations, to take a multidimensional approach
to their prevention or resolution through the use of all
available policies and instruments.
The Council and the General Assembly have both
agreed that sustaining peace is the joint responsibility of
Governments and societies and should be supported by
the international community. With the EU’s integrated
approach and resilience policy, we will become a
more effective actor in our own right and partner
in international action, including with the United
Nations and its peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping
operations must form an organic part of a coherent and
integrated United Nations response. In this context, the
Council should ensure that longer-term peacebuilding
is included in mission mandates, along with reflections
on how to design transitions and strengthen the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. Better
integration and collaboration between peace operations,
sustainable development policies and United Nations
country teams is also an absolute priority.

Peacekeeping is a unique and invaluable feature
of the United Nations. Peacekeeping mandates must
evolve consistently in line with the context and changing
needs on the ground. Operations and special political
missions must remain flexible and open to adaptation
throughout their life cycle to best deliver stabilization
and peacebuilding.

Thirdly, the EU reconfirms its support to the
Secretary-General’s ambition to create a wellcoordinated institutional structure to provide a holistic
United Nations Headquarters approach to crisis
management and sustaining peace. The Secretariat
must act as one, building upon the lessons of the past
years and past reforms, while taking into account
the specificities of all the facets of its work on the
ground. We also advocate that field deployments and
decision-making on the ground should correspond to
operational objectives.

Secondly, the Council’s ambition for sustaining
peace and the Secretary-General’s broad vision on
conflict prevention fully resonate with the European
approach to security, and in particular with the
Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and

Lastly, let me address today’s topic from the
perspective of the ever closer partnership between
the EU and the United Nations in crisis management.
This partnership is highlighted explicitly in our Global
Strategy. The EU has been very active in the field of

40/70

17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peace and security, and it has been engaged in an ever
deepening collaboration between our two organizations
to continue to ensure an efficient strategic cooperation
and coherent action on the ground, and also to ensure
that scarce resources are used in the most effective
way. Our joint EU-United Nations conflict prevention
dialogue is helping strengthen our joint approach, and
the EU continues to be a major supporter of United
Nations mediation capacities.
Operational cooperation between the United
Nations and the EU is reaching new heights in Mali,
in the Central African Republic and in other situations.
Whenever the EU and the United Nations are both present
on the ground, cooperation between our respective
missions is established from the outset. In addition to
joint analysis and information-sharing between our two
organizations, we increasingly associate each other to
the strategic reviews of our respective missions and
operations to ensure that we work coherently.
The imperative of sustaining peace runs across
the complete cycle of our engagement. Peacekeeping
represents a crucial lynchpin. What we need most is
to translate this recognition into action. For its part,
the EU will continue to strive towards a strong and
continuously evolving partnership with the United
Nations in promoting peacekeeping in the overall
context of sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate on a topic that not only
addresses United Nations peacekeeping operations, but
also focuses on the broader shift of the United Nations
towards the goal of preventing conflicts and sustaining
peace.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
United Nations peacekeeping operations play an
essential role in securing peace and stability globally
and the Blue Helmets who have served and are serving
across the world deserve our highest appreciation. There
is no doubt that peacekeeping missions have made real
difference on the ground. As research shows, compared
to the predeployment period, peacekeeping reduces the
number of civilians killed by more than 90 per cent.
However, as we witness more complex, volatile and
longer-lasting crises each passing year, there is a real

S/PV. 8033

need to look at the ways of tackling the instabilities in
the world both before they have turned into a full blown
armed conflict and also after the weapons have been
put down. Preventive measures and striving for political
solutions are key, and we fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts in that regard. Equally important is
giving attention to the post-conflict transition so as
to enable sustainable peace. The mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations should therefore
become more concrete and robust, especially by
including tangible targets and an exit strategy, while
bearing in mind the need to protect civilians and assure
the sustainability of the rule of law, as well as the
respect for human rights and international law.
To achieve sustainable peace, it is important that all
actors work together to resolve the conflict. Sustainable
peace can be achieved only if we have a thorough and
broad understanding of the conflicts, the different actors
and the key players. That includes adding specialized
units to United Nations peacekeeping missions where
necessary. Sometimes a small specialized unit, such
as an intelligence-gathering unit, can make a huge
difference in terms of the mission’s size or duration on
the ground.
Participating in United Nations peacekeeping has
always been important for Estonia. In recent years,
we have significantly increased our participation in
peacekeeping operations and are currently contributing
to three missions — the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
Furthermore, Estonia is currently a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and we fully support
a broader focus for the Commission, which must take
a regional approach, address cross-cutting issues and
serve as a bridge between the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
In conclusion, we see more robust and adaptive
mandates, firm and decisive actions, less duplication and
fragmentation, more innovative solutions and emphasis
on the partnerships at the regional and international
levels as essential to achieving lasting peace. Also, let
me emphasize once more the importance of prevention
when it comes to sustaining peace. Estonia is fully
committed to that cause and sees that as one of the key
issues in our endeavour to become an elected member
of the Council for the period 2020-2021.

17-2708641/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
delegation of Egypt for convening this meeting.
For decades, the Security Council has deployed
peacekeeping missions to help countries navigate the
difficult path from conflict to peace. From the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) on our borders, to peacekeeping operations
across Africa and around the world, Israel has firsthand experience with peacekeeping operations
and fully supports their efforts. Israel has learned,
however, that such support is worthwhile only if
those forces are effective. That will be accomplished
only if the international community insists on the full
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
As the Council is currently discussing the renewal
of UNIFIL’s mandate, which was updated in the wake
of Hizbullah’s attack on Israel and the second Lebanon
war of 2006, now is an appropriate time to review the
situation in southern Lebanon. In adopting resolution
1701 (2006), 11 years ago, the Security Council
wisely decided to significantly enhance UNIFIL’s
mandate — with the goal of preventing the recurrence
of conflict. That resolution authorizes UNIFIL to take
all necessary actions to ensure that its area of operations
is not utilized for hostile activities. That, however, is
not the case.
Despite UNIFIL’s presence on the ground, we have
noticed a disturbing trend. Hizbullah, the internationally
designated terrorist organization, supported and
funded by Iran, has increased its arsenal of missiles and
rockets tenfold and stockpiled sophisticated weapons.
It deliberately installs those weapons in villages and
towns, exploiting Lebanese civilians as human shields.
It has even attempted to disguise its military activities
under the banner of the so-called non-governmental
organization Green Without Borders.

29/08/2017

Hizbullah’s military build-up threatens the entire
region. While Israel strongly supports UNIFIL, it is
UNIFIL’s utmost responsibility to address the unlawful
activities taking place in southern Lebanon and assist
the Lebanese Government in finally extending its
control over its entire territory. The Security Council
must guarantee the complete fulfilment of UNIFIL’s
mandate and should remain fully informed on the real
situation on the ground, including obstructions and
challenges to the implementation of the mandate. Those
provisions are in the interests of Israel, Lebanon and
the region as a whole.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
affirm Israel’s support for UNDOF, whose forces are
gradually returning to United Nations positions in
the area of separation. Israel appreciates UNDOF’s
important contribution to maintaining stability in
the region and will continue to support and assist its
mission.
Israel understands both the importance and the
challenges of peacekeeping. Peacekeeping missions
have experienced more than 100 fatalities almost every
year for the past 14 years, due in part to the absence
of basic needs and supplies. If we expect peacekeeping
missions to execute their mandates properly, we must
provide them with the necessary equipment, training
and medical-response capabilities.
We are proud to work with the United Nations
to improve the Organization’s ability to protect
peacekeepers. Israel supports the United Nations
Medical Services Division’s reforms on the
standardization of medical care, field hospitals and
lifesaving first-aid training for peacekeeping troops.
Those steps will minimize casualties. Through our
partnerships with the United Nations, we will continue
providing the innovative technologies required to
confront the challenges of peacekeeping.

“Ever since 2006, Hizbullah has been growing
stronger ... [and] much more sophisticated in every
aspect — capabilities, military strategies and in
numbers”.

But we must remember that the technologies
themselves are not enough. Without both operational
and conceptual training, peacekeepers cannot use those
technologies to their fullest potential or maximize
their capabilities. We therefore support United Nations
efforts to improve training, such as the United Nations
Signals Academy in Entebbe, and we look forward
to lending our knowledge and contributing from our
expertise to assist peacekeepers’ training.

The evidence of those activities shows the recurrence of
Hizbullah’s blatant violations of resolution 1701 (2006).

Let me conclude by reiterating Israel’s commitment
to continuing to support peacekeeping operations

The head of that terrorist organization, Hassan
Nasrallah, boasted again just a few weeks ago,

42/70

17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

worldwide and improving their capabilities on the
ground. However, we must also hold them accountable
to their mandates.
Israel is encouraged by Secretary-General
Guterres’ comments during his official visit to Israel
this week, where he stated that he would do everything
in his capacity to make sure that UNIFIL fully meets
its mandate. I call on the Security Council members to
do the same.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by conveying
Pakistan’s appreciation to Egypt for arranging this
open debate today. This discussion is both timely and
relevant. It comes as we review and consider the reform
of the peace and security architecture of the United
Nations and examine ways of enhancing the efficacy
and effectiveness of tools of sustainable peace. United
Nations peacekeeping has always been the most costeffective tool for the maintenance of international
peace and security. As we all know, the fundamental
purpose of peacekeeping is to keep the peace, help
resolve conflicts and restore order.
Sustaining peace envisages conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping, post-conflict
peacebuilding
and
development
as
essential
components of one seamless process and as stages along
a continuum. Pakistan has always believed that and
been an advocate of that approach. It is no coincidence
that 12 of the 22 paragraphs of resolution 2086 (2013),
on multidimensional peacekeeping, adopted during
Pakistan’s presidency of the Council, refer to those
concepts.
Peacekeeping is the pivot on which we build on the
dividends of preventive diplomacy and promote postconflict peace and nationbuilding. As one of the world’s
top troop contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
over the past six decades, Pakistan can say from its
experience and the expertise it has acquired that the
realization of that objective requires mandates with
realistic tasks, the flexibility to adapt to changes on
the ground and a clear exit strategy. We need to ensure
that peacekeeping missions are effectively deployed
and that their operations are relevant to the realities
on ground, with clearly identified priorities, adequate
sequencing and, of course, well-equipped human and
material resources.

S/PV. 8033

When lives are at risk — of peacekeepers as well
as those they are responsible for protecting — actual
requirements should drive peacekeeping, not narrow
cost considerations. A lack of adequate resources
results inevitably in non-implementation of the very
mandates that we fashion for our Blue Helmets. We
should be talking about enhancing capabilities, not
across-the-board cuts in peacekeeping budgets.
We believe in the full implementation of mandates,
but they require communication between those who
conceive and write mandates and those who implement
them on the ground. To achieve that we need to,
first, reinforce interaction among key stakeholders;
secondly, enhance information flow and exchange in
all directions and at all stages; and, thirdly, improve
capacities to generate accurate and objective analysis
and assessments and then channel them into the
decision-making processes. Obviously, consultation
with troop-contributing countries is essential for all
three tasks.
Effective partnership with troop contributors,
which are the Security Council’s eyes and ears on
the ground, should extend from deployment and
operational aspects to a role in decision-making and
policy formulation. The Council itself must drive that
partnership. Dialogue is critical. It must take place on
a sustained and continuing basis. A one-off meeting at
the time of the renewal of a mandate does not really
serve that purpose.
There is need for a fuller interface between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities through the
early engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) as part of exit and transition strategies. The
PBC should promote coherent peacebuilding activities
along with the provision of timely, adequate and
sustained financing. Greater convergence between
the perspectives of development partners and host
countries, based primarily on the priorities of the
latter, is also essential. The objective should be
the development — and not the replacement — of
national capacities.
An ominous gap in peacebuilding strategies
is often the failure to comprehend and address the
root causes of conflicts. Eradicating poverty and
unemployment, ensuring socioeconomic development
and justice, addressing inter-State and intra-State
issues and resolving political disputes all require more
focused attention.

17-2708643/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

29/08/2017

Finally, let me say that, if we are really serious
about making United Nations peacekeeping a
catalyst for peace and wish to empower it to respond
effectively to the conflicts of today and contribute to
the overarching goal of sustaining peace, then realities
on the ground rather than political expediency should
guide the Council’s decisions. Sustaining peace
requires investing in peace. Assessing mandates is
welcome, but such assessments should be intended to
analyse the impact of missions in order to improve the
results. Saving lives, restoring order and maintaning
international peace and security should remain our
overarching objective.

Secondly,
well-coordinated
and
sequenced
international engagement is crucial for sustaining
peace. Countries have relapsed into conflict due to
the premature withdrawal of international attention.
We have failed to recognize that the withdrawal of
peacekeeping troops cannot mark the end of engagement
by the United Nations and the international community.
Therefore, United Nations engagement, of which
peace operations are an organic part, requires detailed
planning, benchmarks and monitoring mechanisms.
What it needs is a truly integrated approach — in
thinking and structure — and adequate and flexible
resources. That has to be recognized from the outset.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.

Let us take the example of Mali, where the United
Nations is present with a peacekeeping force, supports
mediation, advances stabilization, promotes human
rights and facilitates peacebuilding, in close collaboration
with regional organizations and Member States. The
peacekeeping mission in the country — the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) — is charged with
activities contributing towards longer-term sustaining
peace objectives, not just fulfilling necessary and
immediate security needs. Germany supports such
an integrated, holistic approach and has aligned its
engagement in Mali accordingly: German troops and
police serve in MINUSMA and German police are
active in the European Union Training Mission, laying
the groundwork for Malian troops to be able to reassume
full responsibility for security. Our national stabilization
measures, including civilian measures, amount to a
€32 million commitment and fund a wide variety of
projects. Effective United Nations coordination in all
areas that promote sustaining peace — not just with
regard to peacekeeping — including with donors and
regional and subregional organizations, such as the EU
and the Group of Five for the Sahel, remains crucial to
achieving our political objectives.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany thanks Egypt
for convening today’s important and timely debate
and fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU). The concept of sustaining peace presents
a tremendous opportunity, and we are encouraged
that it is gaining traction. Much more needs to be
done, however: we need to focus on the entire peace
continuum and adapt our instruments, including
United Nations peacekeeping, accordingly. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s preventive approach
and concur with his demand for a strategic shift. As a
complement to the EU statement, I would like to focus
on two main points.
First, the Security Council must find better ways
to promote sustainable political solutions to crises from
the outset. Drivers of conflict are multidimensional, and
so are the solutions. That implies that peace missions
alone cannot bring about peace; they can, however,
play their part in the broader context. Lessons drawn
from the past have shown that sound conflict analysis is
critically important for developing a political strategy
and for conflict resolution. While addressing structural
causes and underlying grievances we must also look
at the true drivers of entire conflict cycles, not only
at fragmented snapshots. In that context, Germany
would very much like to see the Council draw on
existing information from within the United Nations
system, namely, its field presences, its mechanisms and
procedures. Such integrated analysis would enable the
Council to better define strategic objectives for conflict
resolution and to design smart mandates in order to
more effectively use the different instruments.
44/70

Making the transition from a military to a police
presence, from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
from crisis to stability requires careful attention from
the Council and the international community. After the
conclusion of peacekeeping missions in Liberia and
Haiti, for example, effective peacebuilding is now key
to a successful transition phase.
Let me note briefly that Germany is the largest
contributor to the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
and the Department of Political Affairs trust fund, and
we have made significant contributions to a host of
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations Development Programme stabilization
facilities in conflict settings — for example, in Iraq.
With regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
we would like to see its advisory function to the
Security Council strengthened. For the United Nations
system, coordination between the field, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, the head of
the development team and the relevant Headquarters
entities is important for ensuring that the strategic
objectives and the instruments deployed are fully
aligned. The future position and role of Resident
Coordinators should also be designed to fully support
the sustaining peace agenda.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Germany’s support
for the Secretary-General’s reform agenda, which
is paving the way to make the United Nations fit for
sustaining peace. As States Members of the United
Nations, we must support him in that endeavour and
play our own part in contributing to sustaining peace.
Germany certainly stands ready to do so.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
welcomes this opportunity to discuss the role of
peacekeeping in the context of the broader United
Nations efforts to sustain peace. We support the
initiatives of the Secretary-General to strengthen
the focus of the United Nations on prevention and its
ability to sustain peace. Peacekeeping operations under
the authority of the Security Council can make a vital
contribution to those efforts. Today’s debate should
therefore feed into the broader agenda of making the
United Nations fit for purpose in order to achieve
our jointly agreed goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
Liechtenstein supports General Assembly resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), as
they provide a basis for a more comprehensive approach
to sustaining peace, spanning the entire conflict cycle
and encompassing all three pillars of the United Nations,
including human rights and development. Peacekeeping
operations can make an important contribution to the
achievement of the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular SDG 16.
Acting through its peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations should place stronger emphasis on enabling
and strengthening the rule of law and its institutions
at the national and regional levels. In the framework

S/PV. 8033

of the review of the peacebuilding architecture, both
the Council and the General Assembly committed to
a comprehensive approach to transitional justice as
an important prerequisite for consolidating peace
and preventing conflicts and relapse into violence.
A thorough translation of that commitment into
peacekeeping mandates should therefore be a matter of
priority for the Council.
Deterrence is a key preventive tool and among
the main achievements of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), the central criminal justice institution.
The ICC remains a court of last resort, while the
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
atrocity crimes remains with States. Fighting impunity
is essential to strengthening the rule of law and
its institutions, as set out in SDG 16. Joining and
cooperating with the ICC is therefore a practical example
of implementing SDG 16. It is therefore particularly
important that the Security Council, acting through its
peacekeeping mandates, supports the work of the Court
by ensuring full cooperation and coherence of action,
including by sharing information and assisting States
in protecting witnesses and executing arrest warrants.
The Council has a responsibility to take action
to end and prevent mass atrocity crimes. The code
of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, which to date has the support of
113 States, is a strong expression of the willingness of
the United Nations membership to hold the Council
accountable with regard to that responsibility. The
potential for early and preventive action by the United
Nations is particularly acute in situations in which
peacekeeping operations are already on the ground.
Accordingly, there is an expectation within the
international community that the Security Council
will consistently equip peacekeeping mandates with
the necessary means and flexibility to act decisively in
such situations.
At the same time, there is also a growing sense
of responsibility in the General Assembly should
the Security Council fail to prevent or end mass
atrocities in a timely manner. The establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 is a manifestation of that
responsibility. Liechtenstein congratulates the newly
appointed Head of the Mechanism, Ms. Marchi-Uhel,

17-2708645/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and calls on States to support the Mechanism’s work
both politically and financially.
The 2015 report (see S/2015/446) by the HighLevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations called
for renewed resolve on the part of United Nations peace
operations personnel to engage with, serve and protect
the people whom they have been mandated to assist.
That call applies in particular to the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, both in
its protection and participation pillars, as well as to a
vigorous mainstreaming of human rights and gender
equality throughout the peacekeeping architecture.
Liechtenstein is encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
commitment to that cause and expects the Security
Council to implement its own standards in that area
more consistently.
We also call on the Security Council to ensure
stricter accountability in cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse by members of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, whether civilian or military. The United
Nations cannot tolerate, or be perceived as tolerating,
any form of such misconduct or criminal behaviour
among its ranks without proportionate consequences.
While we acknowledge existing efforts in that regard,
we continue to see both the need and potential for the
United Nations to take a qualitative step forward.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Egyptian presidency for convening this open debate
on a highly important topic, and thanks the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their respective briefings.
We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Venezuela on behalf of Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The seminal joint resolutions by the Security
Council and General Assembly on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, adopted last year, outlined
sustaining peace as among the activities that, among
others, prevent the outbreak, escalation and recurrence
of conflict, end hostilities and help move towards
recovery, reconstruction and development. Achieving
sustainable peace critically requires the support and
participation from all the relevant stakeholders.
It is therefore vital that there first be no ambiguity:
United Nations peacekeeping is part and parcel of
46/70

29/08/2017

the essential tools and activities aimed at achieving
sustainable peace. From deterrence against hostilities
and ensuring that peace processes are supported
and civilians safeguarded to enabling elections,
Statebuilding and reform, the role of Blue Helmets
is indispensable. All United Nations entities should
ensure that nothing — even inadvertently — detracts
from support for peacekeeping.
Secondly, following the 2015 reviews, as the United
Nations increases the focus on prevention, political
diplomacy and mediation, there is a profound need to
better integrate those functions with United Nations
peacekeeping. The 2015 reviews pointed to some gaps in
that regard. As such, we hope that the recommendations
in the reports of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations will be addressed effectively.
Thirdly, cooperation and partnerships between the
United Nations and Member States, as well as regional
and subregional organizations, is also crucial. Indonesia
encourages regional solutions to conflicts and supports
the strengthening of partnerships both at the strategic
and operational levels.
Fourthly, even with the best of intentions to integrate,
success will be elusive if peacekeeping mandates are
not clear, realistic and supported adequately. As one
of the largest troop- and police-contributing countries,
Indonesia is strongly convinced that the Council has
a very important responsibility to work collaboratively
with the troop- and police-contributing countries, host
countries and the Secretariat so that such mandates are
actualized with the required synergy and ownership.
That entails that, throughout the various mission stages,
the Council should consult meaningfully and regularly
with all the relevant peacekeeping stakeholders.
Fifthly, all that I have mentioned cannot happen
if the Secretariat shies away from changing the status
quo. Indonesia supports the recommendation of the
report (see S/2015/446) by the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations requiring that the SecretaryGeneral develop options for restructuring the Secretariat
peace and security architecture so as to strengthen
leadership and management. We also strongly support
doing away with the silo mindset, which can impede the
United Nations.
At the same time, we underline synergy-building
among the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the main Committees, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Economic and Social Council, as well as
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the relevant United Nations agencies and departments.
A system-wide, coordinated approach that eschews
unnecessary duplication and wasteful competition must
be promoted. Peace is best ensured on the ground when
various activities take place in a seamless manner. That
should be reflected by the United Nations entities.
Sixthly, on a related point, the PBC, with more
than a decade of rich experience, is well suited to
provide advice to the Security Council as well as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, especially as
new peace challenges emerge and during the review
and development of exit strategies. In that regard, the
PBC’s advice is very useful, particularly with regard to
the integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery.
Last but not least, to enable sustaining peace and
sustainable development, it is very important that the
peacebuilding component in peacekeeping missions,
as well as the special political missions, are well
supported financially and politically. We also need
to provide options for the adequate resourcing of
peacebuilding activities by the United Nations country
teams. Moreover, enhanced financial and material
support with regard to training must be afforded to
conflict-affected countries to help them undertake their
national peacebuilding and development programmes
in a sustained manner.
In the context of peacekeeping, Indonesia’s
position remains unwavering. The basic principles
of United Nations peacekeeping remain relevant,
vital and applicable. Despite the changing context of
peacekeeping, those principles are indispensable for the
success and credibility of all peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping mandates should adapt to current realities
and be well-calibrated without impinging on the basic
principles, as I said previously.
Indonesia ranks today as one of the
largest contributors among the 127 troop- and
police-contributing countries, with a robust number of
2,715 peacekeepers deployed in nine United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In line with its road map vision
of providing 4,000 peacekeepers between 2015-2019,
Indonesia will continue its steadfast commitment
to strengthen its contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping. As of yesterday, I received an update
that an additional battalion of peacekeepers is being
prepared to support United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and will be deployed appropriately.

S/PV. 8033

Lastly, we will continue to lend a hand to making
the world a much safer place in our own humble way.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa) My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Arabic
Republic of Egypt for your leadership of the Security
Council during the past month. The debate on the
theme “United Nations peacekeeping operations:
their potential contribution to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace” is important and timely.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
In April 2016, the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted ground-breaking parallel resolutions
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture.
Those parallel resolutions on sustaining peace are
regarded as a comprehensive statement on the role of
the United Nations in peacebuilding and prevention,
and are directly linked to efforts towards peace and
security, human rights and sustainable development.
Furthermore, the resolutions stress the fact that there
is a conceptual shift from peacebuilding to sustaining
peace, which is both transformative and forward
thinking. In practical terms, peacebuilding is no longer
restricted to post-conflict situations, but applies to all
phases — before the conflict, during the conflict and at
the cessation of a conflict. In essence, the resolutions
are the first to explicitly link peacebuilding and
prevention, and they underscore the essential role that
sustaining peace plays.
More emphasis on conflict prevention means
recognizing the primacy of politics in the pacific
settlement of disputes. The relevance of investing in
structures such as early-warning systems, instead of
reacting to outbreaks of violence, is pertinent. The
full implementation of the resolutions will result in
less emphasis on militarized responses to conflicts in
Africa and elsewhere. Instead, it will promote more
political engagement, which we believe will result in
effective peacebuilding.
Together with the Slovak Republic, South Africa
co-chairs the United Nations Group of Friends on
Security Sector Reform. It is within the milieu of
sustaining peace that we have experienced how relevant

17-2708647/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and complimentary such reform has become, taking
into consideration the Secretary-General’s emphasis
on preventative approaches to sustaining peace. The
promotion of a culture of prevention to stop conflicts
before they occur complements the objective of the
African Union (AU) to elevate the critical importance
of preventive diplomacy. Given the excessive cost and
limited success of conflict management, a shift is
required to focus more on pre-emptive action that will
allow for sustainable peace and an environment within
which reconciliation and institution-building can
thrive. In essence, the United Nations must move away
from managing conflict towards laying the necessary
groundwork for an inclusive dialogue, peaceful
transition and long-term sustainable peace.
The African Union’s Peace and Security
Architecture focuses on conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding, which are all
fundamental to the AU’s aspiration of silencing the
guns by 2020. The African Union and the continent’s
subregional organizations have deployed a great deal
of effort to develop and operationalize the African
Standby Force and its rapid deployment capacity, which
will impact directly on the process of peacebuilding
and sustainable peace.
The recent implementation of the joint United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced Partnerships in
Peace and Security reflects the AU’s commitment to
the framework’s four key action areas, namely, first,
prevention and mediating conflict and sustaining
peace; secondly, responding to conflict; thirdly,
addressing root causes; and, fourthly, the continuous
review and enhancement of the partnership. At the
same time, my delegation reiterates its call for the use
of United Nations-assessed contributions to secure
predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for
AU-led peace-support operations authorized by the
Security Council.
Adequate gender representation within the United
Nations peacekeeping structures should continue
to be an important objective in our search for more
effective and efficient peacebuilding processes. The
need for women peacekeepers is more urgent than
ever, as women are often better placed to carry out a
number of crucial peacekeeping tasks, especially with
regard to allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation
and providing safe environments for women to voice
their safety and security concerns. In that regard, South
Africa welcomes the appointment by Secretary-General
48/70

29/08/2017

António Guterres of the first United Nations Victims’
Rights Advocate, which aims at addressing accusations
of sexual exploitation by international peacekeepers.
In conclusion, the idea of peacebuilding is strongly
based on the understanding that peace cannot exist
without development and that development cannot
thrive without peace and stability. We believe that notion
should underpin the approach of the United Nations
to fulfilling its central mandate of the maintenance
of international peace and security, which is strongly
dependent upon a prosperous and peaceful Africa.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Nason (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
The challenges to our peace and security have
never been greater or more complex. Our responses
need to match those challenges. The people we serve
expect us to take the lead in dealing with the violent
conflicts, humanitarian crises, migration flows and
climate-related emergencies they face on a day-to-day
basis. We simply must be up to the task. Sustaining
peace is a core responsibility. It is part of what we are.
I represent a country for which peacekeeping is a
part of our DNA. Having participated continuously in
peace-support operations since 1958, Ireland addresses
the members of the Security Council as a dedicated
and committed contributor of troops to important
United Nations missions. Today, we have deployments
to six United Nations missions across the Middle East,
Africa and Europe, with substantial contributions to
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. Our
experience has taught us that mandates and missions do
not lend themselves to a one-size-fits-all approach. The
challenges are complex and evolving; our responses
must also be.
We believe that the landmark adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development offers us a unique
opportunity. We need to seize it in order to realize
the ambition of the United Nations to improve core
mandates and responses.
The long-term vision for sustaining peace rests on
developing a capacity to build inclusive and resilient
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

States. We need effective institutions capable of
engaging with their people. We have a responsibility
to deliver long-term leadership, ownership and
accountability. We need to keep faith with the task.
We commend Secretary-General Guterres for putting
conflict prevention at the core of his mandate. We
simply cannot succeed unless we address the root
causes.
Ireland shares the view that believing in the United
Nations means investing in it, notably in its peacekeeping,
mediation, peacebuilding and humanitarian functions.
The European Union’s Global Strategy on Foreign
and Security Policy and its Common Security and
Defence Policy can and will enhance United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, particularly
through capacity-building missions in fragile settings.
Ireland will be an active contributor.
We know there is no easy fix. Every conflict has
unique characteristics. As a peacekeeping contributor,
Ireland believes that mandates should be designed to
reflect the multiplicity of factors that drive conflict
and fragility. Our operations must be responsive to the
changing situations on the ground. It is crucial that our
peacekeepers in the field engage meaningfully and in
an inclusive manner with local communities. Mandates
should also factor in the political, humanitarian and
developmental contexts.
We are learning that humanitarian and development
assistance programming, in their turn, must be tailored
to situations of conflict, especially where crises are
protracted. We must all work to support common
outcomes from our interventions.
We know that people are less likely to turn
to violence when their rights are being respected.
Taking a human rights perspective across the nexus of
development, humanitarian and peacebuilding efforts
will therefore increase our chances of success and be
instrumental in addressing drivers of conflict.

S/PV. 8033

risk. We must prepare for long-term time frames and be
committed to sustained engagement. The drawdown of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the transition
of the United Nations presence in that country represent
a test case for the United Nations system in applying
the sustaining peace approach. Ireland has long
supported the people of Liberia, and we are committed
to working with Government, United Nations and civil
partners there.
In conclusion, even as a newcomer here today,
I know that debates in the Chamber increasingly
recognize that our complex world demands a United
Nations that equips itself to face that complexity. In the
past, the walls dividing the three pillars of the United
Nations cast shadows on our efforts to build sustainable
peace. Let us resolve today that we have an overarching
responsibility to the people whom we represent to be
more effective and coherent — or, in other words, to
overcome those barriers to sustain peace. We have no
greater challenge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Egyptian presidency for convening
this open debate.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their valuable insights
and recommendations.

Mandates must recognize and respond to the links
among conflict, peace and gender equality. We also
know that cannot succeed unless we address the specific
needs of women and children. Time and again, we have
seen that the full participation and representation of
women in decision-making serves to improve prospects
for success in our peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

Bangladesh attaches importance to its value-driven
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We underscore the need for pursing
peacekeeping mandates within a broader political
process for resolving conflicts and seeking lasting
peace. We therefore subscribe to the comprehensive
and coordinated response to the entire continuum of
conflicts through the engagement of all three pillars
of the United Nations. From that perspective, United
Nations peacekeeping missions have a critical role to
play in the broader goal and process of sustaining peace.
Against that policy approach, we wish to underscore
the five following points.

Sustainable development in conflict-affected
countries and regions means that we must also accept

First, it is amply supported by evidence that United
Nations peacekeeping operations serve a critical

17-2708649/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

purpose in maintaining international peace and security,
including by protecting civilians, in most cases. It is
therefore crucial that peacekeeping mandates focus on
areas where the missions concerned can realistically
achieve the desired results with the resources at their
disposal. It may often prove counterproductive to keep
increasing the length of Security Council resolutions
without giving a clear, focused and strategic direction to
the missions with regard to their potential contributions
to the overarching aim of sustaining peace.
Secondly, as a troop- and police-contributing
country, we often find ourselves in constrained
circumstances to keep our personnel deployed on the
ground and apprised about conflict analysis and the
broader political processes at play, owing to a lack of
timely information and coordination. We remain seized
of the issue of developing a regular and systematic
approach to triangular consultations among the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat so as to address those gaps. We believe
that such an institutional mechanism would lead to
qualitative change in mandate design and review.
Thirdly, peacekeeping missions need to be
sensitized to the fact that it is not only their traditional
peacebuilding tasks that relate to sustaining peace.
Peacekeeping missions can effectively establish the
basis — in tandem with the national authorities and
the communities that they serve — for contributing
to the broader objective of sustaining peace and
development through an integrated and sequential
approach to mandate delivery. Seamless country
coordination with the United Nations entities engaged
on the ground remains critical for transitions during
mission drawdown and exit. The advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission for complementing the
Security Council’s work in that regard also need not be
overly emphasized.
Fourthly, the design and implementation of
peacekeeping mandates are underpinned by a set of
principles pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations.
It is fundamental for the perceived integrity and
credibility of peacekeeping missions that their mandates
align with those principles. Furthermore, peacekeeping
mandates need to be achievable in consideration of
the expertise and resources available to peacekeeping
missions. We suggest that challenges beyond the
capacity of peacekeeping missions be addressed
through other competent means, without risking the
credibility and security of peacekeeping personnel.
50/70

29/08/2017

Fifthly, the issue of predictable and sustainable
resources for peacekeeping missions remains a priority
for their continued efficiency and effectiveness. We
acknowledge the potential merit of the SecretaryGeneral’s nine-point reform agenda in streamlining
resource deployment with clear and achievable
mandates. We look forward to bold, ambitious and
forward-looking recommendations on financing for
sustaining peace in the Secretary-General’s report,
which should also take into consideration the potential
contributions of peacekeeping missions to that effect.
This open debate has been a good opportunity
for the Security Council, along with the broader
membership, to revisit the possibilities for further
enhancing the performance and contribution of
peacekeeping operations in the broader context of
the reform of the United Nations peace and security
architecture. The overarching recognition of the
primacy of politics in sustaining peace makes it
evident that a coherent and coordinated application of
the various tools available to the United Nations can
also help enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations in specific situations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this timely and important debate. In
honour of Egypt’s presidency of the Security Council,
let me try to say this in Arabic:
(spoke in Arabic)
I thank you very much, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union and welcomes, Sir, your excellent concept paper
(S/2017/692, annex) for this debate. Furthermore, in
the context of the split-term with Italy in the Council,
let me also endorse the statement made by my Italian
colleague earlier today.
I shall address three topics today: first, the need
to get the mandate right; secondly, the need for
benchmarks to measure progress; and, thirdly, the need
to strengthen force generation.
With regard to the subject of the right mandate,
I should like to draw an analogy between medical
treatment, on the one hand, and peacekeeping
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

operations, on the other. Prevention is always better
than needing a cure, but once somebody falls ill, the
right prescription is required. Mandates need to be
crafted with equal surgical precision. There is no one
remedy for all ills. A United Nations mission must
be based upon a careful diagnosis of the situation at
hand, whether a small and focused political mission
or a full-fledged peace operation. As stated in the
first paragraph of the concept note, current security
challenges “necessitate a more robust, coherent and
comprehensive United Nations approach”. Once
a mission has begun, adaptations to the mandate
may be necessary, depending on changing needs on
the ground. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is a good case
in point illustrating the United Nations flexibility,
which it showed, by changing the geographical focus
the moment at which the security situation in central
part of Mali worsened. In that context, let me highlight
that the Government of Mali should do more to bring
security, stability and development to the northern part
of the country.
My second point concerns benchmarks. To an
important extent, in continuing with my metaphor,
the responsibility for one’s health lies with the patient,
and the responsibility for sustaining peace equally
lies with the host nation. Furthermore, United Nations
missions have an important role to play in enabling host
nations to recover and prevent relapse. We therefore
need an integrated approach, as was mentioned in the
concept note, entailing a coherent United Nations with
comprehensive delivery by all pillars of the United
Nations system. In our view, the Council should enable a
well-managed exit and help prevent relapse. Therefore,
mandates must include clearly defined political and
governance benchmarks against which the success of
a mandate can be measured. Such benchmarks could
include inclusive institutions, human rights, the status
of women, the protection of civilians and countering
human trafficking, where appropriate. In our view, the
Security Council should be firm with host nations that
are not cooperating with the United Nations, and even
firmer with those that attack their own citizens and
deliberately obstruct the work of the United Nations.
That is simply unacceptable. Host nations must be held
accountable. A case in point is South Sudan, where that
problem is persistent.
In continuing with my metaphor, I will address
my third topic — force generation. Just like a medical

S/PV. 8033

doctor, the peacekeeper needs the right instruments.
Peace operations must be as robust as needed to fulfil
their mandate. We therefore must modernize United
Nations peace operations. Our missions now often lack
the means, the quality and the capacity to carry out
their jobs effectively. We send out Blue Helmets without
proper protection, while knowing full well that they run
a high risk of being attacked. Medical transportation
and facilities and force protection are not always up to
standard. One of our most important priorities should
be to strengthen force generation and to encourage
more countries to pledge more troops and capacity. The
Council should also intensify action with the troopcontributing countries (TCCs), which our colleague
from Bangladesh just pointed out. We underline that
point. Furthermore, we call on those TCCs that have
not done so to subscribe to the Kigali Principles for
peacekeeping. We pay tribute to Rwanda’s leadership
in that regard.
We are one of the hosts of the United Nations
peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting to be held
in Vancouver in November, to which we look forward.
We hope that it will give this process an extra boost.
Furthermore, we support the United Nations and the
development of rotation schemes. That should make
it possible for TCCs to provide missions with highend capabilities for a predetermined period. We pay
tribute to the work of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in that respect, for instance on helicopter
rotation in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Peace operations need to have enablers and state-ofthe-art equipment in order to conduct some of today’s
most difficult operations. In that regard, let me highlight
the enhanced use of information sources in MINUSMA
initiated by the Netherlands, among others.
In conclusion, sustaining peace requires our
continued efforts, politically and financially, from the
start of a mission to its very end and beyond — from
preventive care to daily care and after care. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands wholeheartedly supports
efforts to modernize United Nations peacekeeping. We
stand ready to join the Council in doing its part as of
1 January 2018.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): I would like to start
by congratulating the Egyptian presidency of the

17-2708651/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Security Council for organizing today’s important and
timely debate.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.
For more than 70 years, the United Nations has
responded to evolving peace and security challenges
by developing and adopting a wide range of tools and
instruments. Today it continues to contribute greatly to
the consolidation of peace and conflict prevention.
The 2015 reviews, which were focused on
peacekeeping operations and the peacebuilding
architecture, were all inspired by the urgent need
to strengthen the coherence of the United Nations
system as part of renewed efforts to effectively
address new threats and challenges to international
peace and security. Cyprus agrees with the common
patterns that emerged from the different reviews
and supports the call of the Secretary-General for a
comprehensive, modern and effective operational peace
architecture that encompasses prevention, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and long-term
development — the peace continuum, adapted to the
unique circumstances of each conflict or country.
Since the 1960s, Cyprus has continuously benefited
from United Nations involvement, with the aim of
achieving peace and the reunification of the island,
through the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) and the good offices mission of
the Secretary-General. UNFICYP is an example of an
effective peacekeeping operation. Its continuation is
indispensable for as long as a settlement to the Cyprus
problem has not been found.
First, based on Cyprus’ long-standing experience,
the most important priority is to stop the conflict and to
ensure it does not erupt again. However, bringing about
sustainable peace and preventing conflict are equally
important. Secondly, addressing the root causes of the
conflict should serve as the basis for United Nations
involvement. Thirdly, any review of peacekeeping
operations should be guided by the situation on the
ground. Fourthly, objectivity and impartiality are key
principles in ensuring the credibility and efficiency of
the United Nations.
It is certain that the situation in Cyprus and
prospects for peace would now be much worse had it
not been for UNFICYP’s continued presence and the
52/70

29/08/2017

United Nations involvement throughout the years.
As long as Cyprus remains under illegal military
occupation, with the presence of thousands of heavily
armed troops rendering the occupied area one of the
most densely militarized areas of the world, it is clear
that UNFICYP’s presence will be absolutely necessary.
At the same time, the United Nations remains the forum
through which a settlement can be achieved, and it
should be at the forefront of all efforts.
Cyprus remains committed to reunification, as
any alternative to that does not serve the interests of
the people of Cyprus, Greek-Cypriots and TurkishCypriots alike. We are ready to do our utmost in
order to overcome the deadlock and pave the way to
a comprehensive settlement that will at last reunify
Cyprus as a viable, functional State, in line with
Security Council resolutions, international law and
the European Union acquis. We are most grateful to
the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts and his
personal involvement, and for the Security Council’s
strong signal of unity and support.
Recognizing the need to review peacekeeping
operations on a regular basis in order to optimize their
effectiveness and efficiency, the Government of Cyprus
gave its consent to resolution 2369 (2017), adopted in
July, which provides for a strategic review of UNFICYP
within its existing mandate. Preserving the mandate is
a prerequisite acknowledged by the Security Council
in that resolution, since the situation on the ground
remains unchanged. In that regard, we expect that the
strategic review will take place in close cooperation
with the host country, the Republic of Cyprus.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Cyprus’
commitment to work with all States Members of the
United Nations for an enhanced peace architecture that
will ensure increased effectiveness with optimal use of
all available tools and resources.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): Allow me to express
our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening today’s open
debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations and
their potential contribution to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace, which is indeed timely.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy SecretaryGeneral; Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Senior Adviser at
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the International Peace Institute; and Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal, former Chair of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, for their briefings and
invaluable insights on today’s topic.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
I would also like to reaffirm Malaysia’s support
for the central role played by the United Nations,
particularly by the Security Council, in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are very mindful
of the daunting responsibilities and expectations placed
on the United Nations, in particular on the Council. My
delegation views that positively, as it demonstrates the
desire of the international community for the United
Nations and the Council to do more, ultimately, to
secure durable and sustainable peace in conflictaffected countries.
My delegation believes that there is no one-size-fitsall approach in peacekeeping because each mission is
unique. Therefore, in our collective efforts to enhance
and improve the situation in the various peacekeeping
missions, we need to take into account the different
missions’ components, situation, environment and
challenges, including the relevant coordination among
the various stakeholders in the field. Indeed, the active
participation of host countries is an important component
when it comes to the success of any mission. Therefore,
in our view, it is timely for the Security Council and the
relevant host countries to shift from the concept of a
Government approach to a citizens approach.
Security and development are not mutually
exclusive; they always go hand in hand. Without
peace and security, countries will not be able to focus
their resources on their socioeconomic development
programmes for the well-being of their people.
Therefore, continuous efforts are needed to develop
peacekeeping operations with a more holistic and
comprehensive strategic approach that involves
the community. In that regard, Malaysia is willing
to share its experience, in particular in peacekeeping
training with a focus on winning the hearts and minds
of the local population.
My delegation supports the efforts of the Council
and the United Nations in their engagement with all
stakeholders, including youth and women, with a view

S/PV. 8033

to achieving equal access to quality education and
leadership training programmes. We also support the
roles of youth and women as mediators in sustaining
peace. We remain mindful that it is the responsibility
of all Member States to ensure the development of their
own socioeconomic development plans in our joint
efforts to achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals. Peacekeepers in the field can provide relevant
assistance and, wherever possible, facilitate the host
country’s process of achieving peace and sustainability.
Finally, Malaysia would like to pay tribute to the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers — to the devoted men
and women who have served and to those who are now
serving with unwavering dedication and distinction in
our joint endeavours to maintain international peace
and security. Some paid with their lives towards such
noble efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important open debate and for
submitting a concept note (S/2017/692, annex) on the
topic under discussion.
Azerbaijan associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier today on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make some
remarks in our national capacity.
Peacekeeping is a unique mechanism and an
indispensable tool for our collective actions to maintain
international peace and security. Despite shortcomings,
it is evident that peacekeeping and peacekeepers have
delivered results, contributed to reducing tensions and
ensured that peacebuilding processes in different parts
of the world moved forward.
Coherence among peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development is important. That
interconnection was explicitly acknowledged by
the Security Council in resolution 2086 (2013), as
well as in the 2030 Agenda and, most recently, in
the resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture. By preventing the recurrence of violence,
supporting and enabling critical tasks in certain areas
and assisting host countries in developing their postconflict reconstruction strategies, multidimensional
peacekeeping operations establish necessary foundations
for successful peacebuilding processes.

17-2708653/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

29/08/2017

The effectiveness of peacekeeping, its role in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
its contribution to an orderly transition to reconstruction
and development in an inclusive manner require further
reinforcement of the centrality of underlying elements
that form the basis of peacekeeping. I would like to
focus on some of them.

affected as a result of large-scale ethnic expulsion is
a prerequisite for the legitimacy and sustainability of
peace. It is therefore important that in such situations
peacekeepers create the necessary conditions for, and
serve as the guarantors of, the full, safe and dignified
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes and properties.

First, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
must be clear, realistic and achievable, and must be
tailored and constantly adapted to the realities on the
ground. Secondly, the principles of the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate must
be observed at all times. Further efforts are needed
towards overcoming uncertainties about the legal
basis for the use of force in peacekeeping. Thirdly,
the Governments of countries emerging from conflict
bear primary responsibility for identifying their needs
and implementing post-conflict development agendas.
Therefore, multidimensional peacekeeping operations
should support the efforts of host countries to that end.

As a country suffering from the scourge of war and
being situated in proximity to other conflicts, Azerbaijan
will continue its efforts towards establishing lasting
peace and stability in the region of South Caucasus and
beyond, on the basis of the generally accepted norms
and principles of international law and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

Peacekeeping is a partnership, and its success
depends on the continued cooperation, goodwill
and commitment of Member States to strengthen the
Organization and improve its efficiency so that it can
better deliver on the universally shared principles and
ideals and respond to the needs of those affected by
armed conflicts. International law requires not just an
outcome in preventing or resolving conflicts, but that
such an outcome be accompanied by a process that is
consistent with particular norms.

In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
Egypt for its timely initiative of convening this
open debate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): Let me begin by commending
the delegation of Egypt for convening this open debate
on a very important subject. My appreciation also
goes to the Deputy Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their insightful expositions on the topic of
our discussion.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf on the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

It is critical that the mandate of any peacekeeping
operation explicitly uphold the principles of political
independence, sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and non-intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of States. Peacekeeping
must not be used to sustain the status quo created as a
result of a violation of those fundamental norms and
principles of international law. Nor can it be used to
consolidate unlawful situations extant at the moment
when hostilities were suspended. That understanding
must be ensured throughout the whole cycle of
peacekeeping operations.

United Nations peacekeeping operations constitute
one of the veritable tools at the disposal of the
Organization for performing one of its three critical
founding objectives, namely, maintaining peace and
security and promoting human rights and development.
It has become imperative to note that those three
objectives are mutually dependent and reinforcing. In
that regard, resolution 2282 (2016) rightly states, inter
alia, that sustaining peace encompasses activities aimed
at preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, addressing root causes,
assisting parties to conflict to end hostilities, ensuring
national reconciliation and moving towards recovery,
reconstruction and development.

Particular attention should be paid to the issues
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The protection of civilians must remain a priority.
In some situations of armed conflict, the restoration
of the demographic composition of the population

The doctrine of sustaining peace is becoming a
new paradigm in conflict management, so that even
peacekeeping operations are adapting to many of its
precepts. The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations identified four strategic shifts required for

54/70

17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the United Nations to successfully adapt to the changing
nature of conflict. Those consist of the following: a
political approach, a continuum of options ranging from
the deployment of Special Envoys to the deployment
of peacekeeping operations, partnerships with regional
organizations in order to fully exploit the comparative
advantages of each organization and a field-focused
and people-centred approach to peacekeeping.
The doctrine of prevention in peacekeeping
operations is not just about stopping conflicts
from happening or escalating, it is about continued
engagement from the early signs of conflict to the
post-recovery phase. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding
have therefore become so interwoven that they may be
considered simultaneously at each conflict phase. Even
where there is yet no need for the deployment of force,
the threat of force as a deterrent may dissuade parties
from abandoning an existing peace process.
There is need to recognize that no two conflicts
are the same, and therefore a one-size-fits-all approach
will always be misleading. In that regard, the analytical
framework for a peacekeeping mandate needs to be
exclusively unique to the conflict and to its environment.
Effective collaboration with regional arrangements in
the drafting of peacekeeping mandates is invaluable,
considering the obvious advantages that such regional
bodies have, including deeper insight on the conflict.
The environment, the people and their culture and
sensitivities; as well as the history of similar situations
also play their parts.
A phased mandate process would also be beneficial,
as it has the potential of making room for an assessment
of the phase of the conflict and what needs to be done
in the next phase. It is also useful to understand the
dynamics of the conflict in order to determine what new
mandate elements would bring improved results, and
so on. The complexity of contemporary conflicts also
informs the need for improved situational awareness;
and for the protection of civilians under imminent
threat of violence.
A critical element in sustaining peace is the
opportunity for reconciliation. Peace initiatives that
allow stakeholders to freely initiate and conclude
negotiations based on give-and-take concessions, are
most likely to attain enduring levels of compromise and
stability. A situation where parties are encouraged to
sign peace agreements drafted in foreign capitals, with
presumed knowledge of the issues, and of solutions that

S/PV. 8033

are presumably suitable and acceptable to the parties,
may not achieve the desired results.
A very important component of the sustaining
peace agenda is the engagement of civil society. In
the past, the restriction of peace negotiations to armed
parties has proven to be fatally flawed, as those parties
may have limited, short-sighted political objectives that
do not lead to a sustained peace. The involvement of
young people, women, religious and community leaders
has intrinsic value that supports peace on a continued
basis. In that regard, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) would be very helpful to sustaining peace.
At this juncture, I need to stress the need to respect
the sovereignty of States, which is a fundamental
principle under the Charter of the United Nations. Host
States must buy into the peace process before they can
have a meaningful chance of success. Achieving that
buy-in requires great tact on the part of the international
community. On the part of host States, statesmanship
will be the key to embracing processes that would
yield peace, stability, development and justice on a
sustainable basis. A successful peacekeeping mandate
must therefore consider the following factors: effective
collaboration with host States, civil society, conflicting
parties and community leaders; the insight and
support of regional arrangements; the goal of genuine
reconciliation; the conflict dynamics; and respect for
State sovereignty reciprocated by State support for the
peace process.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that, in view of
the significant role of peacekeepers, it is imperative for
all concerned to make efforts to ensure the safety of
all peacekeepers.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
continuing the series of open debates in the Security
Council over the past few months, addressing different
aspects of sustaining peace.
I would also like to state that Slovakia fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.
The United Nations is embarking on a process of
major reform that is bound to revitalize the Organization
in all three pillars of its work. The maintenance of
international peace and security stands at the very core

17-2708655/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the United Nations. It is not a coincidence that it
has been anchored in the very first section of Article
1 of the Charter of the United Nations. Building on
the spirit and upholding the principles of the Charter,
we shall continue to aspire to high goals. Breaking the
conflict cycles and arriving at sustainable solutions
also mean that we need to continually evolve and adapt,
in particular the ways and means that we have in our
United Nations toolbox.
Peacekeeping missions represent the flagship
activity of the United Nations, but they should not be
mistaken as a goal in itself. In each and every scenario,
we need an overarching strategy that aims at achieving
a sustainable solution grounded in a firm political
agreement. Slovakia has been an active troop- and
police-contributing country, having so far served in 19
United Nations missions with more than 7,500 men and
women. Currently, our men and women in military and
police uniforms wear the blue helmets in Cyprus, in
the Golan Heights and in Haiti. We intend to continue
in this endeavour and actively engage in peacekeeping
operations in the years to come.
Peacekeeping missions are a very valuable tool
that needs to be employed with utmost attention
and responsibility. We need to make sure that the
peacekeeping operations will continue to restore the
hope of the people and promote the credibility of the
United Nations — not the opposite. We highly commend
and subscribe to such initiatives as the Kigali Principles
and the upcoming voluntary compact to eliminate
sexual exploitation and abuse. Being a peacekeeper
means being accountable and holding yourself to the
highest standards.
We need aspirational goals and sustainable solutions
and, for that, we need adaptable mandates — that is
using our tools in an effective way at a given moment
and under specific circumstances. The mandates need
to evolve and adapt so as to reflect operational and
political realities on the ground. We shall always keep
in mind the entire continuum of the conflict cycle,
thinking one step ahead, but also looking one step back.
That means that before we engage in a peacekeeping
effort, we need to know why the conflict broke out, why
the prevention endeavour did not work out, and also how
we plan to arrive at a sustainable, long-term, durable
solution. In other words, we need to ask questions such
as the following: what are the benchmarks of progress?
And, what is our exit strategy?
56/70

29/08/2017

Peacekeeping represents only one of the ingredients
of the recipe for a sustainable solution. Maintaining
peace and security is a complex endeavour, where
various strands of United Nations assistance have
their relevant place. We cannot overemphasize the
importance of internal United Nations coordination. To
do so, peace operations need to be part of an integrated
approach. Missions must be linked to other available
instruments for promoting peace, security and stability,
including integrated planning, and implementation and
assessment to ensure consistency and coherence. The
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
made important recommendations on reforming and
strengthening United Nations peace operations through
an effective political strategy, improved design and
implementation of mandates and enhanced partnerships
to make them much more effective, agile and responsive
to the current realities.
For over 10 years now, Slovakia has identified
security sector reform as one of the key elements for
effective conflict prevention and successful postconflict rehabilitation and stabilization. The lessons
learned from many peace operations and missions
clearly show that a nationally led and inclusive security
sector reform process can progressively deal with
the root causes of insecurity and fragility and create
an enabling environment for sustainable peace and
development to prevail. In addition, security sector
reform is directly linked to the protection of civilians
and the rule of law — two other critical tasks that have
become an integral part of almost every peace operation.
There is also a close linkage with peacebuilding.
In conclusion, let me say that it is clear that in the
current security environment the United Nations can
no longer solely rely on traditional methods to counter
emerging threats and challenges. We need to continue
being innovative, to adjust and remain flexible. We
need to face the new challenges before spoilers disrupt
delicate peace processes, before we risk losing even
more Blue Helmets and, more importantly, before peace
on the ground is endangered.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate on how peacekeeping
operations can better contribute to sustaining peace. I
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

would also like to thank all the briefers for their very
informative and enlightening statements.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are one
of the most important political innovations we have in
our collective efforts to maintain international peace
and security. After decades of sweat and toil, the Blue
Helmets have earned their place as a symbol of hope
and freedom for millions of people across the globe.
But as United Nations peacekeeping missions operate
in increasingly complex and challenging environments,
many have been questioning whether they are fit for
purpose in effectively responding to that growing
complexity. It is in that context that the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(HIPPO) (see S/2015/446) highlighted the critical
importance of conflict prevention and sustaining peace,
while calling for four essential shifts in the design and
delivery of United Nations peace operations — namely,
the primacy of politics, responsive operations, stronger
partnerships and field-focused and people-centred
approaches. The Republic of Korea, as co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of HIPPO, together with Norway and
Ethiopia, is pleased to note that the recent debate on
peace-operations reform continues to focus around the
HIPPO recommendations.
I sincerely hope that the ongoing peace-operations
reforms, alongside those of the Organization’s
management and development systems, will help peace
operations deliver more effectively on the ground. They
should focus not just on restructuring the Secretariat
but, more importantly, on changing the culture, so
that the United Nations system can overcome its silo
problem and work more coherently and strategically.
The reforms’ ultimate objective should be to focus
on strengthening synergy among the three pillars of
the United Nations, substantively and operationally.
Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight the
following four points.
First, the Secretariat and Member States must
significantly increase their investment in analysis,
strategy and planning, which will lead to more
effective design of missions. We welcome, in that
regard, the Council’s increased efforts to establish
sequenced and prioritized mandates. In particular, the
Secretariat should improve the analysis it provides so
that the Council can fully understand the dynamics on
the ground when establishing and adjusting mission
mandates. In close consultations with missions, the
United Nations country teams and other relevant

S/PV. 8033

actors, it should undertake regular joint assessments
with host Governments, focusing on every dimension
of the three United Nations pillars, in order to build and
sustain peace.
Secondly, based on that enhanced analysis, a
comprehensive political strategy or road map should
be developed that takes into account the entire
peace continuum from prevention and peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and long-term development.
Peacekeeping missions’ mandates should be designed to
be part of that broader political strategy, laying out the
bigger picture of the engagement of the United Nations
in building and sustaining peace. That comprehensive
strategy would also serve as a basis for the Council and
the Secretariat to decide on a clear division of labour
between the mission, the country team and the other
relevant entities, from the mission’s launch until its
drawdown. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
is well placed to provide qualitative advice to the
Council in following up on the implementation of the
peacebuilding component of the comprehensive strategy.
In that regard, it will be particularly important to
ensure that the Council determines the extent of the
peacebuilding activities that should be carried out
by the peacekeeping mission as part of its mandate,
which should take into consideration the calls we
are hearing for less ambitious and more manageable
mandates. Member States should also deliberate
on ways to better secure programmatic funding for
peacebuilding activities — including scaled-up support
for the Peacebuilding Fund — whether those activities
are implemented by missions, country teams or other
relevant partners.
Thirdly, the comprehensive strategy for sustaining
peace should reflect on strategic partnerships with
relevant stakeholders outside the United Nations. Given
the complex, multifaceted nature of today’s challenges,
and the continued insufficient funding and capacity of
the United Nations, sustainable peace and development
simply cannot be achieved by the United Nations
system alone. With regard to peacekeeping missions,
strategic partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union (AU),
should be mapped out. Such organizations have a far
better understanding of the situation on the ground, as
well as greater political influence. In that regard, we
look forward to the high-level debate on peacekeeping
to be convened in the Council by Ethiopia next month
with a view to exploring ways for the United Nations to

17-2708657/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

enhance its support of AU-led peace-support operations.
Where peacebuilding activities are concerned, the
comprehensive strategy should address the issue of
strengthening partnerships not only with regional and
subregional organizations but also with international
financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the
African Development Bank, as well as civil society and
the private sector.
The PBC could also play an increasingly important
role in building partnerships with relevant stakeholders.
It can use its unique convening power to mobilize
relevant actors. In fact, as Chair of the PBC for this
year, I have been focusing on strengthening the PBC’s
partnerships with relevant stakeholders. A case in
point is the agreement between the Commission and
the World Bank to hold a dialogue on an annual basis,
which was announced in June on the occasion of the
PBC’s annual session. Later this year, in my capacity
as PBC Chair, I also plan to visit the African Union and
the African Development Bank with interested PBC
members in order to explore ways to further strengthen
our partnerships.
Fourthly, it is critically important to respect a host
Government’s national ownership and its priorities for
building and sustaining peace at every stage of a mission,
from planning to implementation and transition. At
the same time, missions should work closely with host
Governments and other relevant entities, including the
PBC, to strengthen the capacity of State institutions
with a long-term vision. In that regard, it should be
noted that the mandates of peacekeeping operations
often overlook the social mechanisms and informal
institutions that are readily available to serve as a
basis for sustainable peace, such as the role that can be
played by elders and religious and traditional leaders,
as well as by traditional justice systems. Efforts to
sustain peace should build on such existing institutions
and on the resilience and reconciliation processes of
local communities.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
Republic of Korea is committed to strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping operations with a view to
contributing to sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of the
Council for organizing today’s important debate.
58/70

29/08/2017

Our conceptual approach to preventing conflict and
sustaining peace has evolved considerably over the past
few years. In order to achieve conditions conducive to
lasting peace, we should take a fresh look at how to get
the best results from our peace operations. I will focus
on two institutional issues that we believe are crucial to
the Council’s efforts to maintain lasting peace.
First, a single strategy bringing the various peace
operations together is best suited to addressing the
multidimensional complexity of current conflicts, which
require a whole range of tools. The sequential approach
to the conflict cycle, which is based on divisions
between special political missions, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, followed by development,
has too often resulted in failure. From the outset, and
without any interruption, peace-operation mandates
should include a full spectrum of appropriate responses,
which will make for smoother transitions between the
various phases of missions. Such an approach would
also align better with the Secretary-General’s vision
for prevention, integrating all the United Nations
pillars — peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights — on the same plane. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes the Peacebuilding Commission’s
important role as an intergovernmental advisory body
to the Council. Through its reporting and engagement,
the Commission gives effective support to the
Council’s efforts to prevent conflicts from breaking out
or recurring.
With regard to the issue of financing, if the
Security Council is to fully take on its central role
in preventing and peacefully resolving conflicts, it
must be able to make full use of the various tools at
its disposal. However, they cannot be really effective if
they are underfunded or lack the necessary political and
administrative support. Starting off with an inadequate
budget frequently results in higher costs down the
road. Switzerland therefore urges all Member States
to support funding for the entire cycle of measures for
dealing with conflict, especially conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.
I should like to conclude by presenting a concrete
example of the positive impact that peacekeeping
mandates can have on security in a specific context.
The safe and secure management of ammunition
is a crucial element in the context of various United
Nations missions. The proliferation of ammunition
from unsecured stockpiles can fuel other armed
conflicts. Unsecured ammunition can be looted
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

or misused. There are components in improvised
explosive devices that threaten the lives of civilians
and United Nations peacekeepers. There is a clear link
between safely managing the life cycle of conventional
ammunition and maintaining international security and
sustaining peace.
Switzerland is actively supporting the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in assisting the Malian
authorities with the management of their ammunition
stockpiles. It encourages the Security Council to
include, when appropriate, the principle of safe and
secure ammunition management in future mandates.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Today’s meeting and some
of the points raised by today’s briefers highlight the
diverse challenges across the peacekeeping realm
and point to the need for a more robust, coherent and
comprehensive approach. Determining how to improve
our approach to peacekeeping will be particularly
important for us in the immediate future in light of
the currently proposed reform of the United Nations
system. To ensure that peace is sustained, the following
elements are crucial.
First, we need a change in mindset from reactive
to proactive. The concept of sustaining peace, adopted
by the General Assembly and Security Council in
April 2016, represents a fundamental shift in how
we think about peace and how we address conflicts.
It urges us to view peacebuilding more holistically
as part of the peace continuum that spans from
conflict prevention and resolution to laying down the
foundations for sustainable peace. Achieving the goal
of sustaining peace is therefore a long-term process
and a comprehensive approach that covers the periods
before, during and after the conflict. For peace to take
root and grow in strength, efforts for sustaining peace
cannot solely depend on peace and security operations
but require an approach that ensures the well-being
of the local population, as well as maintains and
promotes their political and social rights. Therefore,
sustaining peace is both an enabler and an outcome of
sustainable development.
Secondly, sustaining peace relies on national
ownership. We believe that for any community to
achieve the goal of sustaining peace, the journey
must always be led by the people. Inclusive national

S/PV. 8033

ownership is therefore a prerequisite for successful
peacebuilding and durable peace. This must begin
with genuine dialogue and inclusive participation
from the entire society in governance structures and
the economy. In particular, mandates of peacekeeping
operations must be realistic and tailored made to each
local context. Their implementation must be conducted
in a participatory manner that takes into account
national and local perspectives. This is necessary to
instil a sense of ownership in the local institutions and
population, as well as to restore their legitimacy in the
process of achieving and sustaining peace.
Advancing, in the local context, the women
and peace and security agenda is also crucial in
strengthening national ownership and moving the
international community towards the paradigm of
sustaining peace. Women’s participation is politically
indispensable and necessary also for the operational
effectiveness of the whole process.
Last but not least, it is the quality of peacekeeping
operations that determines their effectiveness in
achieving the goal of sustaining peace. In this regard, I
wish to touch upon three particular aspects.
First, identifying the right types of capabilities
is crucial for delivering effective peace operations
and achieving the goal of sustaining peace. We must
ensure that peacekeepers are equipped with the exact
knowledge, skills and attitudes that are required for the
performance of their duties.
Secondly, transition towards an exit strategy must
be properly managed. For this purpose, careful mission
transition planning and post-mission United Nations
support should be in place from an early stage. It is also
important that missions’ mandates are aligned with and
supportive of national priorities. This can be achieved
only by restoring what is in disrepair and needs fixing,
and by analysing, understanding and utilizing existing
mechanisms in society to build up positive resilience
and drivers of peace.
Finally, we must enhance regional and subregional
organizations’ capacities, as they are essential both in
the context of our collective response to international
peace and security challenges, and in our efforts to
achieve the goal of sustaining peace in the respective
region. We must also encourage enhanced exchanges of
views and dialogue between regional and subregional
organizations and the Security Council, as well as

17-2708659/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

29/08/2017

other United Nations bodies, in order to ensure synergy
and complementarity.

participation in NATO-led operations in Kosovo
and Afghanistan.

The Kingdom of Thailand’s fundamental peacekeeping
philosophy is that the issues of security, human rights
and development are all linked together. We stand
ready to continue and to increase our support to United
Nations peacekeeping in a sustainable manner and
closely aligned to the sustaining peace perspective. For
these reasons, the Kingdom of Thailand appreciates
the Secretary-General’s efforts in proposing and
reconceptualizing a more comprehensive approach
to preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace. We
look forward to working closely with all stakeholders
to implement these crucial concepts that we believe
are complementary to the current peace and security
architecture and the overall United Nations agenda.

We want to also highlight the importance of the
United Nations support to regional organizations
and arrangements. In this context, we welcome the
expanding cooperation of the United Nations with
the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO).
Within the CSTO, Armenia has been investing its
experience in the strengthening of the preparedness
for peacekeeping. During our presidency in the CSTO
over the past year, we attached priority to the expansion
of such cooperation between the Organization and the
United Nations and we will continue supporting closer
working interactions between the two secretariats.

Let me conclude with a simple appeal. We all need
to work better together. We need to adapt to changes and
be open-minded. We have to calibrate our ambitions to
our strengths and needs, to enhance and modernize our
capacities, and to stay relevant in order to achieve the
goal of sustaining peace more effectively.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Egyptian
presidency for organizing today’s open debate and for
the concept paper (S/2017/692, annex). We also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Senior Advisor at the International Peace Institute
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal
for their comprehensive presentations and for sharing
their vision on how to make peacekeeping operations
more effective and fit for the current challenges that we
face in many parts of the world.
Armenia highly values the contributions that
peacekeepers and peacekeeping missions make
towards sustaining peace and security worldwide. Over
the years, Armenia has developed solid foundations
for involvement in peacekeeping missions and our
engagement in the area of international peacekeeping
has gradually expanded. Currently, Armenia is an
active contributor to international peace and security,
and has accumulated considerable experience in the
field. Since 2014, Armenia has contributed a platoon
of 32 servicemen to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and six shifts have already been
rotated. Armenia’s contribution to international peace
and security is also reflected by its long-standing
60/70

Armenia will maintain the current level of
involvement in Lebanon and Mali and we are ready and
have the capacity to increase the number of troops in
UNIFIL and to provide additional staff at the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We stand by the commitment we
undertook in that connection at the summit on United
Nations peacekeeping in September 2015.
Armenia is planning to register a role-2 field
hospital and an engineering unit equipped to counter
improvised explosive devices in the United Nations
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and
make them available to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We are working closely with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in order to facilitate the
process of preparedness and deployment.
The peaceful resolution of conflicts on the basis
of the norms and principles of international law and
within internationally agreed mandates is of particular
significance. Only through comprehensive and
genuine dialogue between the parties to conflicts and
adherence to previously reached agreements will it be
possible to avoid any escalation of the situation on the
ground and pave the way for a political solution and
reconciliation between people. Prevention and earlywarning mechanisms should be at the forefront of peace
initiatives. Special attention should be paid to the earlywarning signs emanating from the parties to conflicts.
In conclusion, Armenia supports reform efforts
that are aimed at enhancing the effectiveness and
operational capabilities of peacekeeping operations
and streamlining the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture. We will continue to forge stronger
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

cooperation with the United Nations so as to be able to
contribute to international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
successful chairmanship of the Security Council this
month and thank you for convening this timely session
on United Nations peacekeeping operations and their
potential contribution to sustaining peace. Our thanks
go also to the Deputy Secretary-General, the Senior
Adviser at the International Peace Institute and the
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture for their informative
briefings on this important topic.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Peace and security are the prerequisites for
sustainable development and vice-versa. We are now
implementing the two important United Nations agendas
for sustaining peace and sustainable development.
It is our common understanding that peacekeeping
operations need to be reformed so as to adapt to the new,
changing and complex security challenges and to better
realize our goal of a world of sustainable peace — a
much needed factor for socioeconomic development.
First and foremost, we should increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping missions.
It is necessary to clearly define the mandates of each
mission according to the unique context in each country
and the adequacy of our resources. Viet Nam commends
recent reviews on peace operations, especially the
greater focus on preventive diplomacy and mediation.

S/PV. 8033

countries in areas such as policy formulation and
decision-making on the mission mandates. Importantly,
every effort by peacekeeping missions to assist national
Governments in sustaining peace must be made with
the consent of the parties involved. We also underline
the importance of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, given their significant
stakes and practical experience on the ground.
While the multidimensional and integrated aspects
of peacekeeping operations should be emphasized
in prospective reform measures, any peacekeeping
operation must be carried out in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
respecting the basic principles of political impartiality,
non-intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign
States, the consent of the parties and the non-use of force
except in self-defence and in defence of the mandate. At
the same time, safety and security, as well as the conduct
and discipline of United Nations personnel, must be
better ensured and promoted through comprehensive
policies and commitments, predeployment training and
the development of new cost-effective technologies.
In recent years, Viet Nam has joined hands with
the international community and has proactively
participated in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
We commit to contributing more liaison officers and
to preparing for the future deployment of a level-2
hospital to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
in line with United Nations standards and requirements.
We look forward to the continued assistance and
cooperation of the Secretariat and Member States in
those endeavours.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.

Interconnection and coherence between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are crucial. Peacekeeping must be
accompanied by the promotion of economic recovery,
reintegration and capacity-building in order to address
the root causes of conflicts, rebuild the social fabric
and cohesion, and ensure a smooth transition to lasting
peace and security. We therefore call for enhanced
coordination between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the development of longterm policies for sustaining peace.

Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks Egypt for organizing this open
debate on a topic to which Argentina attaches
particular importance, given its triple status as a
troop- and police-contributing country to United
Nations peace missions, an active promoter of the
concept of sustainable peace and current member of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and the other speakers for
their briefings to the Security Council this morning.

Likewise, we believe in the need for more
inclusive consultations between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing

From the outset, Argentina has embraced the
Organization’s new emphasis on conflict prevention,
as well as the development of the concept of

17-2708661/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sustainable peace or sustaining peace. In that context,
peacekeeping operations (PKOs) have acquired new
potential in the continuum of responses associated
with prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The
development of PKOs in the broad area of sustainable
peace is the last step of the evolution initiated in the
1990s, when new complex multidimensional missions
were added to traditional missions, as reflected in their
mandates, as a result of an ever-increasing number
of factors linked to peacebuilding — in particular in
the area of the promotion and protection of human
rights, the rebuilding of rule-of-law institutions and the
consolidation of democracy.
In that regard, Argentina believes that this has been
one of the most notable developments in peace missions
in recent years and is essential in order to avoid relapse
into conflict and to enable missions to act as a platform
for sustainable development. That trend has led to
peacekeepers becoming early peacebuilders, which
has been acknowledged by the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations since
the beginning of the decade, as reflected in its annual
report, and by the Security Council in resolution 2086
(2013) — which Argentina had the honour to negotiate
and co-sponsor in its last action as a non-permanent
member of this organ.
More recently, and on the basis of the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, chaired by Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal (S/2015/490), the substantially identical,
parallel General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture have assigned PKOs
and special political missions a prominent role in the
comprehensive strategy for peacekeeping.
The new narrative of sustainable peace involves
redefining the Organization’s peace operations, putting
greater emphasis on prevention and taking special note
of the fact that such missions constitute a political
instrument to be used in the framework of processes
aimed at sustaining peace before, during and after
conflict. In that regard, Argentina reiterates — in
line with the aforementioned parallel resolutions of
the Assembly and the Council — the need to seek,
on a regular basis, the specific advice and input of
the Peacebuilding Commission, harnessing thereby
that body’s more long-term perspective and vision,
which is essential for our efforts to properly reflect
sustaining peace when it comes to establishing,
62/70

29/08/2017

reviewing and ultimately drawing down peacekeeping
operations, as well as in setting the mandates of special
political missions.
In particular, we must work to guarantee that
transitions from one mission to another or to a country
teams proceed in such a way that sustaining peace
is neither disrupted or weakened. To that end, it is
important to ensure the continuity and stability of
peacebuilding programmes, personnel and resources
during the various stages of United Nations activities
in host countries, always in close consultation and
coordination with those countries. In this regard,
Argentina recognizes the example of the Joint Transition
Plan of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the United Nations country team
in Haiti, which describes the gaps in peacebuilding
arising from the withdrawal of MINUSTAH and
which will make it necessary for the new mission, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
the country team and the donor community continue to
provide support. We are also confident that the second
special political mission to verify the peace process in
Colombia will continue to support the country on its
path to sustainable peace.
With respect to the particular issue of sufficient
funding for peacebuilding activities by United Nations
country teams and for peacebuilding components of
peace operations, including during the transition and
reduction stages of the missions, Argentina looks
forward to receiving the options that the SecretaryGeneral will present in his report prior to the highlevel meeting on peacekeeping and peacebuilding
to be held during the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly.
Finally, in line with the parallel resolutions of
the Assembly and the Council on sustainable peace,
Argentina reiterates the need for greater coordination,
coherence and integration in the peacebuilding tasks
of peacekeeping operations, country teams and
national and international development actors, in
order to ensure greater effectiveness and efficiency in
their implementation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and also for
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

convening today’s important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations are at the heart of the
United Nations, which is as much about peacemaking
and peace enforcement, as it is about peacekeeping.
There is no better cause than preventing violent
conflicts. It is about saving lives and livelihoods. It
is about bringing hopes to the vanquished. It is about
creating conditions to empower communities to enable
their children to realize their dreams and let them
dream new dreams.
The Maldives wishes to submit to the Security
Council in today’s open debate that it is of profound
importance to construct an analytical framework
in which the Council is able to consider the
changes needed in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Such a framework could be
created by establishing, at the inception level, a greater
coordination and operational coherence between
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
country team on the ground.
The designing stage of any peacekeeping operation
should take full account of the unique historical,
political and economic circumstances of the situation,
using the most relevant analytical tools available. Any
such analysis should produce the correct diagnosis of
the underlying causes of the conflict. The visible signs
we see and hear about a conflict, might, at times, be
the symptoms of an underlying set of issues. As such,
identifying the underlying causes that led to the conflict
in the first place should be the goal of even the earliest
diagnosis of the conflict situation.
Situations can give rise to conflicts that become
intractable over time, quite often because of
systemic failures. Such failures might be the result
of the decaying of a social fabric that had held the
communities together for centuries, or it might be the
gradual weakening of the State’s capacity to govern and
maintain order. Any peacekeeping operation, in any
inter-State conflict or intra-State conflict, should aim
to build the capacity of the State, first of all, to govern,
and then to foster a governing order that is rooted in
the principles of democracy, good governance and
inclusive development.
Building the capacity of the State is also important
in developing an institutional architecture that would
help to create a shared vision for the country and to
mobilize and sustain support for such a vision. If there

S/PV. 8033

is one thing that peacekeeping operations can do to help
countries create and sustain peace, it is to build a set
of institutions that can inspire national unity, deliver
a peace dividend to every corner of the country, and
cultivate and foster a culture of peace, respect and
tolerance in the country concerned.
The Maldives believes that the Security Council,
in close collaboration with other agencies in the United
Nations system, can inspire and lead in bringing
the necessary reforms to peacekeeping missions, in
designing such operations and in implementing the set
of strategies that will sustain peace. Women and men in
every corner of the world look to the Security Council
for leadership; we in the Maldives have full faith that
the Council will not fail in providing that leadership.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Chile.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Egypt for convening today’s debate,
and we listened with great interest to the statements
of the speakers who preceded us. We are particularly
grateful to have heard Ambassador Rosenthal, with
his experience in development and in peacebuilding
and his emphasis on the fact that the three pillars must
be integrated.
Faced with conflicts and their terrible consequences,
we have a responsibility to act in a timely, efficient and
relevant manner, deploying coherent efforts to counter
political, economic, social or cultural situations that are
generally at the root of the conflicts to be prevented.
We are convinced that conflict prevention is the
most effective means of addressing its human and
financial costs. We therefore support the achievement
of the sustaining peace objective set forth in General
Assembly resolution 70/262 through an integrated and
multidimensional strategy within the framework of the
preventive vision promoted by the Secretary-General.
Sustaining peace will benefit from strategies for
planning, evaluation and withdrawal of peacekeeping
operations tailored to the appropriate interaction
between all stakeholders — namely, the host country,
United Nations staff, local civil society and national
contingents in close dialogue with regional and
international actors — under the principle of national
ownership that you mentioned in your statement earlier,
Mr. President.

17-2708663/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The design of strategies in this direction should
take into account, among other things, the state of play
of defence institutions, critical infrastructures, such
as schools and hospitals, which is a subject that the
Council has been addressing — we note in particular
resolution 2286 (2016) — disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, including that of children, security
reform, strengthening of the rule of law, the human
rights institutional framework, national security
and the participation of civil society. We emphasize
in this regard the relevant role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in promoting stability and social cohesion,
in cooperation with the Security Council and Economic
and Social Council, among others.
Sustaining peace can also be facilitated by
proper use of crisis management tools, which range
from mediation and the deployment of an operation
to sanctions regimes. The missions in Côte d’Ivoire
and Liberia, which worked jointly on the issue of
cross-border cooperation, provide concrete examples
of integrated planning and withdrawal that bare
further study.
Peacekeeping operations must be periodically
reviewed to assess their contribution to sustaining
peace, it being the responsibility of the Security
Council to analyse whether or not the tasks entrusted
to a given mission and the general concept of a mission
are consistent not just with the political reality and
the operational needs on the ground, but also with
its purpose.
The declaration issued by the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference that
took place in London in 2016 reiterated the importance
of the role of women in peacebuilding and conflict
resolution, including the need for their greater
participation at all mission levels. In that regard, we
welcome the Senior Women Talent Pipeline for United
Nations Peace Operations, set up under the umbrella
of the Department of Field Support. We call for that
initiative to be expanded.
The planning of missions with the goal of sustaining
peace requires effective logistical preparation of
the critical capacities and operational tools that are
available through appropriate operational means, within
the framework of a mandate that enhances security and
protects vulnerable civilians. It should include child
protection advisers, gender advisers and other advisers,
who are all crucial when it comes to sustaining peace.
64/70

29/08/2017

In that connection, we would point to resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2250 (2015).
In addition, personnel deployed to peacekeeping
missions should be properly trained and committed to
upholding the highest possible standards of conduct in
the framework of the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse, thereby fostering the
necessary conditions for sustainable and lasting peace.
It is vital that we dedicate resources to sustaining
peace; for, notwithstanding the consensus reached
achieved with General Assembly resolution 70/262,
Member States have not sufficiently contributed
to those tasks as compared to those devoted to the
deployment of troops. We are concerned that the
United Nations Development Programme Conflict
Prevention and Recovery Thematic Trust Fund and the
Peacebuilding Fund, to which Chile and other States
contribute, receive less than a 3 per cent share of the
overall peacekeeping budget.
We would like to reiterate our commitment to the
sustaining peace agenda and call for the United Nations
system to develop a shared and practical vision of the
concept and the values that underpin it.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to all those
United Nations staff who are currently deployed in
the field and who contribute day in and day out to the
building of peace. We hope that in the future they will
be able to contribute in the same way to sustaining
peace under this innovative concept. Once again, we
especially thank the delegation of Egypt for its excellent
work during its presidency of the Council and for the
transparency with which it has led its work.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to commend
the presidency of your brotherly country, Egypt, of the
Security Council for this month. I also thank you, Sir,
for the initiative to hold this important open debate on
a topic that is at the core of the goals of the Charter
of the United Nations, and also for circulating the
concept note (S/2017/692, annex ). I commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
for his presidency of the Council during the previous
month. And I thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohamed for her valuable briefing, as well as
Mr. Mahmoud and Mr. Rosenthal. The State of Kuwait
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

stands behind the Secretary-General in his efforts to
support peacekeeping operations and to develop those
operations in line with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In that regard, I would like to build on what
has been said today regarding how peacekeeping
operations can contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. That requres, first,
considering innovative preventive diplomacy practices
in line with resolution 2086 (2013), which stresses the
importance of monitoring and defining functions and
challenges facing peacebuilding during the inception
of the mission. That is important because we must also
mobilize all support from our national and regional
institutions and from all social segments, including
women and children, in order to start building peace
without postponing it until the post-conflict phase.
As such, and guided by resolution 2282 (2016),
which provides a great number of tools to sustain
peace, supporting the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission will bridge the gap between the end of
peacekeeping operations and the start of planning for
peacebuilding through a smooth transition that ensures
the sustainability of peace and better cooperation with
national institutions in the concerned States. Such
an approach should also help us reduce the cost of
peacekeeping operations.
Establishing peacekeeping operations in line with
concepts and on the basis of resolutions 2086 (2013) and
2282 (2016) would allow the United Nations achieve a
more comprehensive assessessment of missions and to
define the challenges they face. Therefore, this could
enable us to come up with innovative solutions that
improve the performance of missions and their financial
efficiency, without prejudice to their ability to confront
all challenges facing their mandates. Continued
cooperation and consultation with relevant States
and focusing on their needs and wishes would help
inevitably lead to greater efficiency in the performance
of peacekeeping operations, whether in peacebuilding
or peacekeeping.
Taking into consideration the needs of host
countries in a way that corresponds to their challenges
and the realities on the ground effectively contributes

S/PV. 8033

to adapting the mandates of peacekeeping operations to
those developments and enhances the ability of relevant
States to design and devise mission mandates and exit
strategies. After that, the international community,
the international financial institutions and donor
countries will be able to play their role in supporting
reconstruction and development efforts.
I would be remiss if I failed to commend the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in support of peacekeeping operations
on the continent while enhancing and the national role
and responsibility of the African States in their region.
The growing cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is an example to follow when
considering other forms of cooperation with other
regional organizations.
In that regard, I recall that my country took part
in the United Nations Operation in Somalia II. But
our most extensive experience, which lasted for more
than 12 years, was hosting the United Nations IraqKuwait Observation Mission, where the State of Kuwait
cooperated with the Mission and the Organization in
order to achieve its goals and its mandate until we
managed, in consultation with Iraq, the Mission and
troop-contributing countries, in 2003, to agree on
withdrawing the Mission after it achieved its mandate,
as part of a process that included the host country,
troop-contributing countries and the Security Council.
The State of Kuwait looks forward to taking part
in constructive deliberations in the Council regarding
peacekeeping operations and their reform this year,
as well as over the next two years as a member of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
others in congratulating the Arab Republic of Egypt
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. We also commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
open debate today on the topic “United Nations
peacekeeping operations: their potential contribution
to the overarching goal of sustaining peace”. We also
thank today’s briefers for the invaluable insights they
have shared with us on this subject.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian

17-2708665/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
It is the considered view of my delegation that
United Nations peacekeeping operations play a critical
role in building and sustaining peace and international
security. Over the years, peacekeeping has proven to be
the most effective tool employed by the United Nations
to provide transitional support to war-torn countries.
It has also provided such countries an opportunity to
transition from conflict to sustainable peace.
However, we acknowledge that the scope, objectives
and nature of peacekeeping have been highly dynamic
and have evolved over the years, in parallel with the
changes in the nature of conflicts, thereby making the
success of any operation less guaranteed. In that sense,
my delegation welcomes the fact that one of the main
focuses of Secretary-General António Guterres’ term of
office has been the review of peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and the involvement of women and
children in conflict.
It is our view that the full participation of women
is essential to the success of any peace process. We
therefore agree that it is the responsibility of the United
Nations to ensure that political solutions promote
preventive approaches, mainstream human rights and
foster inclusive engagement and empowerment of
women and girls.
In our support for resolution 2282 (2016) on postconflict peacebuilding, we wish to emphasize that in
order to bring about sustainable peace in a society
emerging from conflict, some of the key activities
should be efforts to prevent the escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict. We therefore support a wide
range of activities that extend from conflict prevention
to the maintenance of sustainable peace and are included
within the scope of United Nations peace operations.
Addressing the root causes, building the foundations
for peaceful, inclusive societies, assisting parties to end
hostilities, ensuring national reconciliation and working
towards recovery, reconstruction and development
are critical to preventing and resolving conflict. Such
efforts should, therefore, be the number-one priority
for us as the international community. Peacekeeping
in itself should complement existing national, regional
and international efforts aimed at advancing and
encouraging dialogue and national reconciliation and
strengthen national capacities and institutions for
sustaining peace.
66/70

29/08/2017

As for Botswana, our desire to see peace prevail in
our region and beyond has been one of the key objectives
of our foreign policy. We have and remain actively
involved in efforts to bring about sustainable peace
in countries in our subregion and beyond. Botswana
has in the past provided military and police personnel
to United Nations and other multilateral operations
in countries such as Somalia, Rwanda, Mozambique,
Lesotho and Darfur, to mention just a few.
Although Botswana is not a troop- or
police-contributing country, we have, over the years,
faithfully maintained our contributions to the United
Nations regular budget, as well as the peacekeeping
budget, as a testament to our unwavering commitment
to the United Nations system and to contributing, in our
own small way, to the maintenance of international peace
and stability. Furthermore, in view of our own values
and principles relating to democracy, good governance,
accountability and strong institutions, Botswana has
also been instrumental in promoting dialogue. The
country played a leading role in mediation efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mozambique and
Lesotho, to mention only a few.
Botswana also continues to share its experiences
and knowledge on those issues, as is evident in our
involvement in South Sudan. Members of the Council
will recall that our former President, His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, who is a familiar figure in the
Council in his capacity as Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission on South Sudan, is making
a significant contribution to facilitate the resolution
of the conflict in that country. My Government also
provides significant support to election observation
in our region, including supporting political, and
development activities that focus on the smooth transfer
of power and contribute to sustainable peace.
We also recognize ongoing efforts and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union through the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which was recently signed by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Botswana’s
commitment to playing its part and to our unwavering
support for efforts by the international community
aimed at the promotion and protection of international
peace and security.
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me,
at the outset, on behalf of the Haitian Government, to
congratulate the delegation of the Government of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, which is serving this month
as President of the Security Council, for its initiative in
convening this open debate on the potential contribution
of peacekeeping operations to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace. The issue is indeed important.
In a constantly changing world confronted with
global threats and complex and changing security
issues, the nature of peacekeeping operations, their
relevance, cost, effectiveness and objectives have
rightly raised a number of questions. Many critics have
denounced — not without reason — the mismanagement
of some missions, in particular the inflated costs and
staffing, and the multiplication of tasks unrelated to
the fundamental objectives. Others, on the other hand,
severely criticize what they perceive as the artificial
politicization of peacekeeping, with too much attention
being placed on certain issues.
Nevertheless, there can be no denying that
peacekeeping operations are an excellent tool for
conflict management and have proven their necessity
over the past five decades. Incidentally, Mr. António
Guterres rightly underscored that the United Nations
Blue Helmets represent an investment for global peace,
security and prosperity. Nevertheless, they are not a
perfect tool and have clearly shown their limitations.
Reforms have been proposed and initiated so as to
remedy such problems. However, we must admit that
a great deal remains to be done to ensure that such
operations are properly adapted to the complexity of the
new challenges, new threats to international peace and
security, the various contexts in which they are deployed
and to the difficult and often hostile environments in
which they are called upon to intervene. Updates are
all the more necessary, as the success stories, however
undeniable and spectacular they may be, cannot hide the
fact that there are what some consider to be half-success
stories or even resounding failures that, furthermore,
sometimes cast a shadow on the credibility, the image
and the moral authority of the United Nations.
Among the ever-increasing voices rising from all
sides — even here within the Security Council — calling
for a new doctrinal approach to peacekeeping, we note
in particular that of the Secretary-General, who has

S/PV. 8033

affirmed that genuine, strategic reform of peacekeeping
operations is necessary. Clearly, new avenues for the
future must be explored.
The concept paper (S/2017/692, annex) prepared
by the Egyptian presidency of the Security Council has
outlined some very interesting approaches. Some of the
proposals that have emerged in efforts to achieve the
goal of sustaining peace share several characteristics.
We consider three of those elements to be essential.
The first is the principle of accountability,
which should guide all aspects of a United Nations
peacebuilding operation. Secondly, the role of the
Security Council must be strengthened so as to enable
it to fulfil its fundamental mission as a core instrument
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, one that is
capable of providing appropriate collective responses
consistent with its mandate, particularly in situations
where gross violations of human rights, atrocities
or serious violations of humanitarian law have been
committed. Thirdly, sustaining peace cannot only
involve the prevention of the outbreak, intensification,
continuation or resurgence of conflicts, as the concept
paper has clearly reminded us. Peacekeeping will
necessarily be incomplete if it does not also include
activities dealing with the root causes of conflict.
In the case of my country, Haiti, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which has
been working for some 13 years, is coming to an end.
The Haitian Government and the Security Council have
agreed. The foundation for political and institutional
stability in Haiti has been consolidated. For the first time
in decades, a peaceful, credible and inclusive electoral
process has made it possible to fill all elective posts
at all levels of governance. Through MINUSTAH, the
United Nations has largely contributed to that outcome.
Guided by that shared vision, the Haitian Government
and the United Nations are working together to establish
a new framework for strategic cooperation that will
reflect the new reality on the ground. Among others,
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
must illustrate that new partnership.
On behalf of the Haitian delegation, I would like to
conclude with four observations.
First, to us it seems essential that, in learning
from recent past lessons, the Security Council fully
reappropriate its mission of safeguarding and sustaining
peace, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. In particular, the Council must eliminate

17-2708667/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the institutional bottlenecks which, all too often in
recent years, have undermined and even paralysed its
work aimed at fully discharging its role as the main
peacekeeping authority.
Secondly, the debate on sustaining peace cannot
ignore the question of extreme poverty, which plays a role
with which we are all too familiar in many intra-State
conflicts. Fratricidal civil wars often have their roots in
economic misery, social injustice, political oppression,
marginalization and exclusion. It is imperative to afford
more substantial assistance to developing countries
in the throws of conflict or in the post-conflict phase
of reconstruction and peacebuilding so that they can
break the vicious circle of poverty. If we fail to do so,
“sustaining peace” will remain empty words.
Thirdly, under no circumstances can the United
Nations shirk its responsibilities, in particular that
of respecting and promoting the rights of those it is
called upon to protect. In that regard, we welcome
the proposal submitted to States Members by the
Secretary-General that aims to end impunity and
provides for the appointment of advocates of victims’
rights within the framework of the Organization’s
peacekeeping activities. So as to be fully in line with the
human rights norms that the United Nations has as an
essential mission to promote, that approach — we truly
hope — must cover all cases of human rights violations
and moral and material damages that a mission might
have caused.
Finally, the objective of sustaining peace is
inseparable from that of the sustainable development.
The Republic of Haiti reiterates its support for
a vision of sustaining peace, which, faced with
today’s challenges — to paraphrase the SecretaryGeneral — calls for global responses that allow for
confronting the root causes of conflicts and combine
peace, sustainable development and human rights. It is
therefore incumbent upon the international community
to meet that challenge through the implementation of
mechanisms built upon collective solidarity, which are
essential to achieving the goal of sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
68/70

29/08/2017

Seventy-one years ago, General Carlos P. Romulo
addressed the General Assembly and said,
“We are not here to make the peace, but to
build for peace. We are not here to avenge the
injuries of the past, but to fulfil humanity’s hopes
for the future. We are not here to reap and divide
the harvest of victory, but to make ready the hearts
and minds of men for the seeds of peace.” (A/PV.41,
p. 18)
We are all here today not only to meet head on
the challenges to peace, but also to answer the call for
sustaining and investing in peace. Peacekeeping remains
the flagship agenda of the United Nations enterprise.
For 50 years, the Philippines has consistently played
an important role in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in countries that are too numerous for me to
list here. The Philippines’ participation demonstrates
the country’s enduring commitment to work with key
actors and stakeholders to ensure peace and stability in
the affected areas.
With regard to the deployment of Filipino
peacekeepers, the Philippines has consistently
observed the following parameters: the sole prerogative
of the Philippine President to decide on Philippine
participation; the authority of the Security Council; a
clear and achievable mandate; a definite time frame
and exit strategy; and the consent of the receiving State.
Allow me to provide the Philippines’ recommendations
on key elements of today’s open debate.
Concerning the overall policy framework, the
Philippines reiterates its strong support for the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that peacekeeping
operations will need to be politically adept in identifying
options to support coherent, international strategies for
negotiated settlements, while building collaborative
partnerships with key stakeholders in each conflict
context. We believe that more effort must be invested in
local political solutions to conflicts, with peacekeeping
in support.
With regard to conduct and discipline, viewed in the
context of the protection of civilians, the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse must be addressed aggressively
through the following measures: robust pre-deployment
and in-mission training programmes that underscore
leadership responsibility and accountability throughout
the chain of command; appropriate information sharing
in connection with context-specific responses to cases;
and innovative capacity-building initiatives based on
17-27086

29/08/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

best practices in overcoming a culture of impunity.
The Philippines strongly supports the new policy on
the protection of children in armed conflicts and hopes
that the mandate will be mainstreamed into United
Nations operations.
With regard to safety and security, we cannot
emphasize enough the importance of ensuring the
safety and security of peacekeepers, while protecting
civilians and building protective environments. The
Philippines recommends that peacekeeping missions
work more closely with local communities and
non-governmental organizations.
With regard to strengthening operational capacity,
the Philippines supports calls by Member States for
the Secretariat to be more transparent in selecting
contingents from troop- and police-contributing
countries. The Philippines stands in solidarity with
the community of responsible nations and remains
steadfastly committed to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, cognizant of their strategic
contributions to sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Fiji.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): I express Fiji’s gratitude and
to you, Sir, and to the delegation of Egypt for convening
this debate.
Fiji aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Since its admission to the United Nations in
1970, Fiji has had at the heart of its foreign policy a
strong commitment to the United Nations and its
peacekeeping operations. The primary motivation in
Fiji’s contribution of peacekeeping personnel to the
United Nations is the determination to play our full
part as a responsible signatory to the Charter of the
United Nations. For many small States such as Fiji,
the international rule of law, peace and security are
guarantees for independence and equity. It is also the
basis for a stable platform for achieving human rights
and our development aspirations.
Approximately 70 years since the first United
Nations peacekeeping mission was established and
peacekeepers were deployed, peacekeeping remains
as important as ever. The nature of conflicts has
evolved as has the role of peacekeepers. Peacekeepers
are now asked to become much more involved and

S/PV. 8033

essentially act as nation builders, thereby partaking in
multidimensional peacekeeping. The civilian, military
and police peacekeepers are expected to perform such
tasks as monitoring elections, building a civilian police
force, distributing humanitarian aid and reforming the
justice system, among others. That is in sharp contrast
to the type of peacekeeping activities that the United
Nations was originally designed to handle.
Therefore, an important element to sustaining peace
are the rules that govern United Nations peacekeepers.
The cardinal rules that were applicable and effective
during traditional peacekeeping days may therefore
need to be reviewed so as to respond to evolving new
security threats and meet the situation on the ground.
That is essential to ensuring that peacekeepers are
not harmed, while very much keeping with the same
approach of introducing new requirements, such as
those related to sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel to ensure that peacekeepers do no
harm to others.
United Nations peacekeeping mandates need
to be clear. When the United Nations conducted an
assessment on the Somalia peacekeeping mission, it
concluded that the mandate was “vague and was open
to myriad interpretations”. The mandate of a mission is
one of the critical aspects of any operation. The success
of any mission can be assessed through the achievement
of the objective. It is therefore imperative to have clear
goals in order to avoid ambiguity, or worse still the loss
of innocent lives should a conflict worsen.
That demands that there be effective collaboration
and structured consultation among the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat in order to leverage the potential of
peacekeeping mandates and operations for sustaining
peace. Equally important is the need to sensitize
military, police and civilian personnel deployed in
peacekeeping missions about the evolving policy
discussions and approaches to peacekeeping. United
Nations peacekeeping missions need to have the right
leadership and competent personnel in order to give
credibility to the United Nations peacekeeping efforts
and deliver on their mandates. Equally, how the United
Nations equips its peacekeepers in terms of resources
during deployment is crucial to the success of a mission.
In conclusion, peacebuilding and sustaining peace
are best achieved when it they are mainstreamed in
society. The involvement of broader stakeholders

17-2708669/70

S/PV.8033

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in peacebuilding efforts is an important factor in
sustaining peace. Therefore, the engagement of
minorities, women, youth, civil society organizations
and faith-based groups, among others, can provide a
stable platform for sustaining peace. After all, everyone
is a contributor to peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

70/70

29/08/2017

I should like to thank the members of the Security
Council, as well as non-members and our briefers
today, whose contributions afforded us a more in-depth
look at peacekeeping operations in order to make them
more effective and ensure that they are able to draw
on all the tools available to us in the United Nations to
bring about sustained peace. We will continue our joint
efforts with other Council members and countries to
achieve that goal.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

17-27086
