A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/65
9 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 65
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/50/585 and Corr.1)]
50/65.

Comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/70 of 16 December 1993 and 49/70 of
15 December 1994, in which the entire international community supported the
multilateral negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty,
Reaffirming that a comprehensive nuclear-test ban is one of the highest
priority objectives of the international community in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation,
Convinced that the most effective way to achieve an end to nuclear
testing is through the conclusion of a universal and internationally and
effectively verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty that will attract
the adherence of all States and will contribute to the prevention of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects, to the process of nuclear
disarmament and therefore to the enhancement of international peace and
security,
Noting the aspirations expressed by the parties to the 1963 Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water 1/
to seek to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear
weapons for all time, which are recalled in the preamble to the 1968 Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 2/

1/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964.

2/

Ibid., vol. 729, No. 10485.

96-76033

/...

A/RES/50/65
Page 2

Welcoming the further elaboration of the rolling text in the Ad Hoc
Committee on a Nuclear Test Ban of the Conference on Disarmament, as reflected
in the report of the Conference and its appendix, 3/ and the decision of the
Conference to continue its work in inter-sessional meetings,
1.
Welcomes the continuing efforts in the multilateral negotiations
on a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty in the Ad Hoc Committee on a
Nuclear Test Ban of the Conference on Disarmament, the significant
contributions to the rolling text made by States participating in those
negotiations and progress in key areas;
2.
Calls upon all States participating in the Conference on
Disarmament, in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to conclude, as a task
of the highest priority, a universal and multilaterally and effectively
verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty which contributes to nuclear
disarmament and the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all
its aspects, so as to enable its signature by the outset of the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly;
3.
Also calls upon participants in the Conference on Disarmament to
advance work on the basis of the rolling text during the inter-sessional
negotiating period so as to proceed to the final phase of the negotiations at
the beginning of 1996;
4.
Further calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to re-establish
the Ad Hoc Committee at the commencement of its 1996 session, and to renew its
mandate in order to complete the final text of the treaty as soon as possible
in 1996;
5.
Urges all States to support the multilateral negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament for a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty and
their prompt conclusion;
6.
Declares its readiness to resume consideration of this item, as
necessary, before its fifty-first session in order to endorse the text of a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision to the
Conference on Disarmament of adequate administrative, substantive and
conference support services for these negotiations;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session an item entitled "Implementation of the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban
treaty".
90th plenary meeting
12 December 1995

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Supplement No. 27 (A/50/27), sect. III.A.
