5

;

1

UNITED NA TIONS

&~IXITY~~UNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2217’”

MEETING:

18 APRIL

APft2 2 1988

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/22 17) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoptionoftheagenda

.. ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. .. ... ..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (S/13888 and Corr.1 and Add.l-3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2217

P

I

1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters corn-bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

t

2217th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 18 April 1980, at 7.45 p.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio MUROZ LED0 (Mexico).

Republic) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
ization) took the places reservedfor
the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

‘2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Fiji and Saudi Arabia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (SlAgendaJ2217)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/l3888 and Cot-r.1 and Add.l-3)
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Vunibobo
(Fiji) and Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of Council members to documents Sl138881Add.2 and 3, which contain
the texts of two addenda to the special report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The members of the
Council have before them document S/13897, which
contains the text of a draft resolution sponsored by
Tunisia.

was called to order at 7.55 p.m.
Adoption

Liberation Organthem at the side of

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from tbe Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13888 and
Corr.1 and Add.13)

4. I call upon Mr. Brian Urquhart , Under-SecretaryGeneral for Special Political Affairs, who will make a
statement in accordance with rule 22 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
Mr. URQUHART
(Under-Secretary-General for
Special Political Affairs): Before giving the Council
a brief account of today’s tragic events, I think it
necessary briefly to recall the sequence of events
leading up to this tragedy. These events have been
reported to the Council in some detail in previous
reports.

5.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2222th to 2225th meetings], I invite the
representative of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table, and I invite the representatives of Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, the Netherlands, Nigeria, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

On 6 April, the de facto forces moved armoured
vehicles into At-Tiri in the Irish sector of UNIFIL
and tired mortars and heavy machine guns at the
Irish contingent.

6.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. TuCni (Lebanon) took a place at the Council table and Mr. Mulloy
(Ireland), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. La Rocca (Italy),
Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Scheltema (Netherlands),
Mr. Clark (Nigeria),
Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab

7. On 7 April, the fire on the Irish contingent continued intensely, and one Irish soldier was wounded
and later died. Two other Irish soldiers were wounded
at the same time. On that occasion, the Irish con1

tingent returned controlled
fire. On the same day,
nine Irish soldiers were taken as hostages to the
village of Saffa Al-Hawa.

Forces informed Force Commander General Erskine
that the captive soldiers had been’killed.
Some two
and a half hours later, the bodies of the soldiers were
brought to Naqoura after being handed over to the
United Nations observers.

8. On 8 April, the de facto forces threatened to kill
those nine Irish soldiers unless the Irish contingent
withdrew from its positions at At-Tiri. After intensive
efforts, however, those hostages were released at
nightfall.

14. This murder of unarmed soldiers can only be
described as a killing in cold blood, following on
repeated threats by the de facto forces against the lives
of members of UNIFIL,
and especially those of the
Irish contingent.

9. On 10 April, the defucto forces fired in the same
area at a vehicle carrying the Deputy Force Commander, Brigadier-General
Nilsen of Norway, and
others.

15. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
As a result of consultations held among the members
of the Council, I have been authorized, as President
of the Security Council,
to make the following
statement, which has been agreed upon by all the
members of the Council:

10. On 12 April, there was further firing by the
de facto forces at At-Tiri, in which one Fijian soldier
was killed. The Irish troops in At-Tiri returned the
fire, and in that exchange one militia soldier was killed
and two wounded. Again, threats of reprisals were
made by Major Haddad. On that same day, the de facto
forces took four Irish soldiers hostage from a post in
the enclave. As members of the Council will recall,
on that same day also UNIFIL
headquarters was
shelled extensively and very widespread damage was
caused.

“I am authorized by the Security Council to make
the following statement, on behalf of its members,
pending action on the resolution which the Security
Council is considering on the over-all situation in
Lebanon and on the acts of hostility against Lebanon, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization [UNTSO J.

11. On 13 April, the de facto forces demanded that
the villagers of At-Tiri pay 40,000 Lebanese pounds,
apparently as compensation
for the soldier who had
been killed, or that they deliver the bodies of two
Irish soldiers, and this demand was repeated in
various forms later on.

“The members
of the Security Council are
shocked and outraged at the report that the Council
has received on the attacks on the Force and the
cold-blooded
murder of peace-keeping soldiers by
the de facto forces.
“This unprecedented, barbaric act against a peacekeeping force is a direct challenge to and defiance
of the authority of the Security Council and to
the mission of the United Nations in maintaining
international
peace and security.

12. The situation remained tense on 14 and 15 April,
and on 17 April there was an attack on OP Hin, and
the other observation posts which are on the border
were also under siege. After very intensive efforts it
was finally arranged that these observation
posts
should be relieved and resupplied. At OP Ras, however, the Irish soldiers who had been there remained
until the area could be checked for mines.

“The Security Council strongly condemns all
those who share in the responsibility
for this outrageous act. The Council reaffirms its intention to
take such determined action as the situation calls
for to enable the Force to take immediate and total
control of its entire area of operation up to the
internationally
recognized boundaries.

13. That brings me to today, when, as the Council
will see in the reports we issued this morning in
documents W388WAdd.2
and 3, three Irish soldiers
were stopped by the de facto forces on their way to
OP Ras. They were separated from the others with
them; one was taken to an adjoining field and shot
in the abdomen and legs. He was subsequently
evacuated to the Norwegian
hospital in Naqoura,
where he was operated on. The other two soldiers
were taken captive and led away. Every effort was
then made to negotiate their release. In a report
received from Naqoura in the middle of the morning,
New York time, we were informed that those two
soldiers were being held. by the de facto forces.
Brigadier-General
Levran of the Israel Defence Forces
assured our people in Naqoura of their well-being at
that time and indicated that all efforts were being made
to secure their release. At about 12.30 p.m., New York
time, Lieutenant-Colonel
Gal of the Israel Defence

“The Council extends its deep-felt condolences to
the Government
of Ireland and the families of the
victims.
“The Council also commends the valiant action
of the commanders and soldiers of the Force, and
the courage of the United Nations observers under
the most adverse circumstances.”
16. The first speaker is the representative of Ireland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
17. Mr. MULLOY
(Ireland): I note with appreciation
the statement that you, Mr. President, have just made
on behalf of the Council.
2

18. It is indeed with great regret that I must address,
the Council ,this evening. As the members of the
Council are already aware, two Irish soldiers serving
with UNIFIL
weremurdered today by Major Haddad’s
so-called de facto forces. A third lies wounded in
Naqoura.

24. I want to express the condolences and deep
sympathy of my Government to the bereaved families
of the two Irish soldiers and to the Irish Government.
I also strongly and unequivocally
condemn all those
who in any way share the responsibility
for this most
outrageous act.

19. I must express to the Council the grief of the
Government and the people of Ireland. I feel I must
also say, and I speak with due restraint, that those who
support the de facto forces of Major Haddad must now
reflect most seriously on the responsibility
they bear
for the chain of events which led to the murder of
unarmed Irish soldiers serving the cause of peace with
the United Nations.

25. On behalf of the Norwegian Government, I must
also appeal strongly to Israel to stop immediately
and
totally all support for the so-called de facto forces of
Major Haddad.
26. The present situation is totally unacceptable and
calls for concrete action from the entire world community. The whole credibility
of the United Nations
in the vital area of peace-keeping is at stake.

20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative
of Lebanon,
on whom I now call.

27. Mr. HUSSON
(France) (interpretation
from
French): As my delegation already indicated in its
statement on 14 April [2213th meeting], my country
is extremely concerned over the rapid deterioration
in the situation in south Lebanon because of the
inadmissible behaviour of the de facto forces towards
UNIFIL
and the repeated military interventions
by
Israel in this area. The very serious events of recent
hours have but confirmed my delegation’s opinion on
this matter and explain the full support given by my
delegation, along with all the members of the Council,
to the statement which you, Mr. President, have just
made.

21. Mr. TURN1 (Lebanon): When this morning my
delegation pressed for a Council meeting, we were not
aware-we were miles away from thinking-that
this
day would go down as probably the most sorrowful
and tragic in the history of peace-keeping. I have no
words to describe what has happened. However, the
Council, in its statement which you, Mr. President,
have just read out, is, I think, expressing the feelings
of all of us.
22. In my country, Lebanon, we tend to look at
what has happened with both great sorrow and great
anger: great sorrow because we very deeply regret and
feel in our blood and flesh that soldiers who have come
to our country to prevent people from being killed
should themselves be the victims of cold-blooded
murder; great anger because, like other Member
States, particularly members of this Council, we had
been building high hopes on the mission of the peacekeeping force and the authority of the Council. We
want the Council to know-and
here I speak on behalf
of my country, my President, my Government
and
my people-that
the tragic events that happened today
can only serve to consolidate our faith in the capacity
of the Council to react with strength and vigour and
also to reflect the feelings of the world conscience.
We think that what we are -performing this evening
must be shrouded in great solemnity, and, therefore,
while addressing my thanks to the Council and my
most heartfelt condolences to the Irish Government,
the Force and the families of the victims, I want to
say that I am waiving at present any further questions
that I had to put before the Council concerning the
draft resolution and also the barbarous attack that took
place this morning against yet another village in my
country.

28. The facts presented to us this evening by the
Under-Secretary-General
for Special Political Affairs
can only give rise to indignation and contempt. They
are unprecedented
in the history of peace-keeping
forces. It is intolerable
for uncontrolled
elements
directly to engage UNIFIL
and execute in cold blood
Irish soldiers who had made themselves available in
the service of peace.
29. My delegation wishes to say to the Irish authorities that it is deeply moved at the cowardly assassination of two of their soldiers. We extend our deepest
sympathy to them and to the families of the victims.
30. The tragic events that have just occurred once
again show how absolutely indispensable it is for all
parties concerned, in particular Israel, to co-operate
fully and completely with UNIFIL
in the exercise of
its mandate. UNIFIL
must be able to operate throughout the whole of its area of operation, which extends
to the Israeli-Lebanese
border.
31. The deterioration
of the situation in Lebanon
must elicit a firm reaction from the Council. It is the
Council which decided on the creation of UNIFIL
and approved the mandate of that Force. It is urgent
that the present deterioration
of the situation be
reversed. The credibility
of the Council and of .the
Organization is involved here.

23. Mr. ALGARD
(Norway): We are shocked and
outraged over the developments just reported to us
by the Under-Secretary-General.
Such a cold-blooded
murder of men serving the United Nations in the cause
of peace demands determined concrete action by the
Council.

32. As the French delegation emphasized on 14 April,
the French Government
has always criticized and
3

condemned all acts of terrorism and violence of whatever kind. Such acts only emphasize the urgency of
the need for a negotiated and balanced settlement in
the region.

40. That is all I have to say, and I thank you,
Mr. President, for having given me the opportunity to
speak before the Council.
41. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Italy, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

33. As a contributor to UNIFIL, my country believes
that it must be able to use force whenever it deems
necessary in order strictly to carry out the mandate
given to it by the Council. Such action would be in
keeping with the provisions of the report that established the Force, which specify that self-defence
would include “resistance to attempts by forceful
means to prevent it from discharging its duties”
[S112611 of 19 March

42. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): My delegation has asked
to speak a second time in this debate to express the
outrage of my Government at the events which took
place in southern Lebanon earlier today. The coldblooded murder of two members of the Irish battalion
serving with UNIFIL and the wounding of a third
by the de facto forces of Major Haddad are not only
barbarous and utterly condemnable acts but acts that
show that the escalation of violence by those irresponsible elements has reached a level which cannot
be further tolerated. While expressing our deep condolences to the Government of Ireland and to the
families of the victims, we urge this Council to take the
strong action that those events require,

1978, para. 4 (d)].

34. In conclusion, my delegation also wishes to pay a
tribute to the courage and discipline that the soldiers
and officers of the Force and the observers of UNTSO
have shown under such circumstances. Finally, we
congratulate the Secretary-General and his colleagues
for the intense efforts they have made to reduce the
tension.
35. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

43. We also reiterate our request to the Government
of Israel immediately to discontinue its support of the
de facto forces and actively to co-operate in disbanding
them. The only effective means of preventing the
recurrence of events like those which are currently
taking place in southern Lebanon is to create the
conditions for the deployment of UNIFIL in all its
area of operation. We therefore urge the Government of
Israel to give its full co-operation to the achievement
of this goal.

36. Mr. SCHELTEMA (Netherlands): My delegation has the sad duty of speaking once again in this
debate in order to present our condolences to the
Government of Ireland. We have just learned, and it
has now been confirmed by the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Urquhart, that two members of the
Irish contingent have been killed in cold blood by the
de facto forces of Major Haddad and that one Irish
soldier has been wounded. The summary execution
of members of a peace-keeping force of the United
Nations is a most appalling act which is virtually
without precedent in history. Those who have perpetrated this crime must be held accountable. The
activities of the so-called Christian militia itself must
be condemned in the strongest terms.

Mr. CHEN Chu (interpretation from Chinese):
Having listened to the reports of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Lebanon and the statements made
by the representative of Lebanon, and having taken
note of the recent events, the Chinese delegation is
seriously concerned at the development of the situation in Lebanon.

44.

45, Since the evening of 8 April, the Israeli authorities have once again openly sent their troops to invade
southern Lebanon and incite the Lebanese secessionist
forces to create incidents and provoke conflicts. As
a result, great losses in lives and property have been
inflicted on the Lebanese people and the personnel of
UNIFIL has suffered distressing casualties. All this
has led to a serious deterioration of the situation in
southern Lebanon. These new Israeli acts of aggression have not only violated the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon but have
also gravely endangered peace in the Middle East
and in the whole world.

37. To this statement, I should like to add that our
deep sympathy is extended to the Government of
Ireland and, of course, to the relatives of the victims.
38. Earlier in this debate my delegation impressed
upon Israel the absolute necessity of calling a halt to
Haddad’s irresponsible acts. The recent tragic events
underscore the urgency of this call, which has also
been made by other speakers in the debate.
39. I wish to make this point once again. My Govemment urges Israel to desist from further co-operation
with the de facto forces. UNIFIL must be allowed, as
a matter of urgency, to extend its control over the
whole area of operation in southern Lebanon. Unless
the Israeli Government agrees to assume its responsibility in this regard, the execution of UNIFIL’s mandate will become, we fear, an unattainable objective.

46. What is more serious is that at the time of the
.Council’s deliberation on Israel’s aggression against
Lebanon, the Israeli authorities once again launched
an armed incursion into Lebanon on the evening of
17 April, brutally killing innocent local inhabitants.
4

Today, the Lebanese secessionist forces supported
by Israel have again flagrantly attacked and killed
UNIFIL personnel. The Chinese delegation is deeply
shocked by this and expresses its strong indignation
at and condemnation of it. This is another crime
committed by the Israeli authorities.

stage. We condemn this cowardly murder of individuals engaged at the Council’s request in the highest
calling of the United Nations, the cause of peace. We
hope that their comrades, even in the midst of their
grief, will be strengthened in their determination to
carry out the mandate entrusted to them. We have
nothing but admiration for the high sense of duty that
these men and officers have demonstrated in the’ most
difficult of circumstances. The Government and
people of the United States join in extending our
condolences to the families of those’ dead heroes and
to the Government and people of Ireland.

47. Over a long period, the Israeli authorities have
always attempted to divide Lebanon and annihilate the
Palestinian people, who are waging a struggle for
national liberation. In southern Lebanon, they have
instigated secessionist forces to set up a separatist rule
to obstruct the Lebanese Government in the exercise
of its sovereignty. Although the United Nations and
the Security Council have repeatedly adopted resolutions condemning Israel’s acts of aggression and
calling upon it to stop its aggression against Lebanon,
the Israeli authorities have always turned a deaf ear to
all this and have become even more intransigent
in pursuing their policies of aggression and expansion.
The recent incursions into Lebanon have further
revealed the reactionary stand of the Israeli authorities
and their persistent hostility to the Palestinian and
Arab peoples; these incursious have also shown that
the Israelis are pursuing their policies of aggression
and expansion and have revealed their arrogant
defiance of the United Nations and the Security
Council. These new crimes committed by the Israeli
authorities against the Lebanese and Palestinian
peoples cannot but arouse strong condemnation and
opposition from ail justice-upholding and peaceloving countries and peoples and from ail fair-minded
pubIic opinion.

50. Mr. FUTSCHER

PEREIRA (Portugal) (interThe serious news received
today from southern Lebanon, and which has just
been confirmed, prompts us to intervene to convey to
the Government of Ireland and to the families of the
victims our heartfelt condolences in the bereavement
which has been so brutally and irresponsibly inflicted
upon the contingent so generously made available
by that country to the peace-keeping Force in the
region. So that peace should not become a subject
of derision in southern Lebanon and equally so that the
work being done by UNIFIL should not be in vain or
doomed to failure, the Council owes it to itself most
categorically to condemn the attack on the Irish
contingent and all those responsible for it; and it must
ensure that UNIFIL can henceforward fully carry out
its mandate in the conditions required by its terms of
reference.

pretation

French):

51. The unprecedented challenge which this crinie
represents, not only to the Force but to the whole
international community which the Force embodies,
requires us to adopt an unequivocal position whose
solemn import can fully be understood, with all its
consequences.

48. The Chinese Government and people strongly
condemn Israel’s criminal acts of aggression against
Lebanon and they firmly support the Lebanese
Government and people in their just struggle to restore
the exercise of their State sovereignty in southern
Lebanon and to defend their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We firmly support the
Palestinian and Arab peoples in their just struggle to
regain their national rights and recover their lost territories. In our view, the Council should uphold justice,
defend the purposes and principles of the Charter and,
in addition to sternly condemning Israel’s acts of
aggression, should take practical and effective measures to stop its incursions into Lebanon and should
call upon Israel immediately to withdraw all its aggressor troops from Lebanon. The Council should
reaffirm that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon should be scrupulously
respected and should tolerate no violation. The Council should firmly support the just struggle of the
Lebanese and other Arab peoples against aggression
and the just struggle of the Palestinian people to
regain their national rights.

52. Our feelings at this moment are not only of
indignation and-bitterness but also of determin&ion
--determination to prevent a recurrence of such
intolerable incidents as those which gave rise to this
morning’s tragic news, which was the culmination of
a long process of deterioration in a situation in. the
face of which the Council cannot fail to pronounce
itself with a severity commensurate with the facts.
53. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian). Today we
have learned of new manifestations of Israel’s aggressive policy towards Lebanon. The Council was
informed of a regular armed attack by the Haddad
separatists, who are in the service of Israel, against
the United Nations forces in Lebanon. This provocation by the separatists led to the outrageous murder
of two Irish soldiers and to the serious wounding
of a third.. We wish to emphasize the ctiminal nature
of these acts and to transmit through the delegation
of Ireland to those concerned our sympathies over the
death of the two soldiers.

49. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of
America): The mindless horror of executing innocent
men serving the cause of peace is as dark and despicable an act as any that can be imagined on the world
.

from

5

54. At the same time, we have learned of the attack
by Israeli armed forces on the Lebanese town of
Sarafand, which resulted in the death of 15 peaceful
inhabitants, including women and children.

reiterates its full readiness to stand behind any
initiative which would strengthen the means at
UNIFIL’s disposal and, more particularly, increase
the Force’s capacity to strike back in self-defence.
Niger requests the Council to confront Israel with its
responsibilities, inter aliu, by requiring it to cease all
intervention in Lebanese territory. This implies its
immediate and unconditional cessation of any collaboration with Haddad’s separatist forces.

55. All these acts of provocation by Israel, whether
carried out directly or by surrogates, are a flagrant
violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and of the
fundamental principles of the Charter, which Israel
pledged to respect when it joined the Organization.

61. Niger once again expresses its grief at the tragic
loss of two Irish soldiers, but it remains convinced
that the blood of these valiant soldiers will serve the
cause of peace. We hope that the people and Govemment of Ireland will accept the renewed expression
of our sincere condolences.

56. There is special indignation at the fact that all
this is taking place precisely at a time when the Council is considering the question of Israel’s aggressive
acts against Lebanon and that of the provocative
acts carried out by Israel, through the separatists,
against the United Nations forces. It is clear that those
who determine Israel’s policies feel that they can act
with complete impunity because of the position of
some Western States members of the Council which
will not ahow the Council to adopt any effective
measures against Israeli aggression.

62. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): My delegation is speaking
for the second time in this debate to express our shock
and indignation at the news received today from
southern Lebanon. The kidnapping and cold-blooded
murder of two Irish soldiers and the wounding of a
third by the rebel forces of Major Haddad are both
outrageous and reprehensible. Jamaica joins other
delegations in strongly condemning these barbaric
acts, which constitute a direct challenge to the
Security Council, which created UNIFIL, and on
whose behalf UNIFIL acts.

57. The criminal acts carried out today in Lebanon
once more confirm the rightness of those who have
urged, and are urging, the Council not only decidedly
to condemn the undisguised aggression of Israel
against Lebanon but also to adopt the most effective
measures to end that aggression.

63. These tragic events, which are without precedent
in the history of United Nations peace-keeping operations, demonstrate the gravity of the situation in
southern Lebanon and the need for the Council to act
forcefully and with determination to eliminate the
dangers facing UNIFIL and bring the lawless activities
of the Haddad forces to an end. In this regard, and in
these circumstances, we once more urge the Govemment of Israel to co-operate in this effort and to
terminate its support of the Haddad forces.

58. The current aggressive onslaughts by Israel and
by Haddad’s separatists with the support of Israel
confirm the obvious fact that right now words are
not enough: specific and decisive actions are necessary so that the decisions of the Council on the
question of the situation in southern Lebanon should
not remain mere empty sound, but should finally be
implemented.
59. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interpretation from
French): Barely 48 hours ago, Niger expressed here
its condemnation of the events which had taken place
over the last week on Lebanese territory and which
involved attacks on certain contingents of UNIFIL by
the so-called &facto forces acting in conjunction with
Israeli forces of aggression. Today, our chagrin and
concern are at their height, for we have learnt that,
at the very moment when the Council is at work trying
to allay the world’s fears at the events in Lebanon,
these very forces, acting in defiance or in contempt
of the Council and the international community, are
increasing their pressure in the region and are continuing grossly and barbarously to attack UNIFIL
soldiers, whose situation grows graver daily. This is
proved by the murder, only today, of two Irish soldiers, callously killed on their peace-keeping mission
by the defucto forces seeking thus to show that they
were rebelling against world peace.

64. My delegation joins other delegations in offering
its condolences to the Government of Ireland and
especially to the families of the two soldiers who died
in the service of the United Nations and for the cause
of peace.
65. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
The delegation of the
German Democratic Republic wishes to express its
deep indignation at the fresh criminal acts against
members of the United Nations forces, in Lebanon
about which we have just been informed. We join in
the condolences expressed by other delegations to the
Government of Ireland and the families of the victims.

(interpretation

from Russian):

66. This ‘is a case of cold-blooded murder. The
responsibility for this bloody act lies with those
circles in Israel which established and are maintaining
the Haddad band. Harsh condemnation is also required
for the Israeli attack on the Lebanese town of Sarafand,
which resulted in the loss of numerous lives.

60. Niger deeply deplores these new developments
in southern Lebanon and vigorously condemns the
scandalous and vile attacks against UNIFIL. It
6

75. The Council has no other course than to affirm
the total outrage of the United Nations and of the
international community at the reprehensible behaviour of the illegal de facto forces. The Council
cannot allow those forces to continue to defy with
impunity the collective will of the Member States and
challenge the peace-keeping mission of UNIFIL. This
grave situation undoubtedly complicates and threatens
the search for peace in that region.

67. In our statement before the Council on 15 April
[2215th meefin& we drew attention to the fact <hat
such acts are directly related to Israel’s continuing
aggression in the region.
68. The Council must not fail to take decisive measures to rein in this unbridled aggressor.
69. Mr. R. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): My delegation
views recent developments in southern Lebanon with
the deepest shock and indignation. Major Haddad’s
outlaw forces, taking full advantage of the exemplary
restraint and limited military capacity of UNIFIL,
have once again gone on a rampage of terror, inflicting
brutal murder, assaulting, abducting and threatening
blackmail and reprisal. We cannot but condemn these
despicable acts in the strongest possible terms. They
are an affront to humanity, a direct challenge to the
United Nations and a threat to the future of peacekeeping.

76. My delegation therefore joins the other members
of the Council in expressing in the strongest possible
terms our revulsion against this barbarous act. My
delegation unreservedly supports the forthright statement made by you, Mr. President, on behalf of all
the members of the Council. The Council should take
such determined action as may be necessary in the
days ahead.
77. In conclusion, my delegation extends its deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Ireland and all the bereaved families of the tragic
victims of these atrocities.

70. They demand immediate and forthright action
on the part of the Council. They attest, in particular,
the need to which we have already been alerted for a
serious re-examination by the Council of UNIFIL’s
capability to fulfil its mandate with a view to enhancing
it by more forceful and effective deterrent powers.

78. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, my delegation fully endorses the statement which you made on behalf of the Council.

71. The immediate duty of the Council, therefore, is
to condemn these criminal actions in the strongest
possible terms and the persons that have directly
or indirectly encouraged their perpetration. The
responsibility of Israel in this context is unambiguous.
We believe that the Council must also adopt all measures that will allow UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate,
free and unfettered, in its entire area of operation,
including steps that must lead to the disarming and
disbanding of the outlaw forces.

79. My delegation condemns with the utmost severity
the cold-blooded murder of two unarmed Irish soldiers
of UNIFIL and the wounding of a third by members
of the Haddad militia. This intolerable act of violence
lends further urgency to the already pressing need for
Israel to withdraw its support from those militia forces.
They must be disarmed and disbanded. That act more
than any other would enable UNIFIL to carry out its
mandate throughout the area designated for it and
would permit the resumption of authority by the
Government of Lebanon throughout its territory.

72. In conclusion, my delegation takes this opportunity to express our deep&t condolences to the
Government of Ireland and the families of the Irish
soldiers killed and grievously wounded in the latest
incident. They will remain honoured martyrs in the
cause of world peace.

80. My delegation extends its deepest condolences
and sympathy to the Government and the people of
Ireland, which have contributed so much to United
Nations peace-keeping over many years, and, of
course, to the families of the two men murdered while
doing their duty.

73. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): I have asked to be
allowed to speak to express my delegation’s condemnation of the unmitigated killing and execution of
two Irish soldiers serving with UNIFIL at the hands
of the illegal de &cro forces, which we know to be
under the leadership of Major Haddad, as reported
to the Council this evening by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Special Political Affairs.

81. Mr. OUNAjiES (Tunisia) (inrerpretution from
French): Having taken note of the addenda to the
Secretary-General’s report which have just been distributed, the Tunisian delegation wishes to express
its indignation at the unprecedented act against the
United Nations. Not only does that tragedy come
after a number of acts of aggression against the
observers and the forces of the United Nations in
Lebanon which had already caused loss of life and
limb in their ranks, but it has brought the level of
aggression to the point of blackmail and the murder of
soldiers dedicated to the service of peace.

74. My delegation can hardly find words to describe
this senseless and unprecedented act, which constitutes an insolent and outright challenge to the
authority of the United Nations, even as the Council
is considering the grave and serious developments in
southern Lebanon.

82. Tunisia reaffirms its belief in the purposes and
principles of the JJnited Nations and expresses its
j,:
7

: ’

admiration for all those who have decided on a
voluntary basis to take part in the peace-keeping
operations, thus embodying in the field the moral force
that the United Nations represents in the eyes of the
peoples of the world. Their commitment is truly invaluable. Their faith in their mission and their sense
of sacrifice are the price of the responsibility that we
ourselves assume here in the Council.

90. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
91. Mr. ALLAGANY (Saudi Arabia): My delegation
had intended to participate in the consideration of the
item entitled “The situation in the Middle East”. However, owing to the sad circumstances surrounding this
meeting, I hope that I may limit myself at this point
to expressing my delegation’s sympathy and sincere
condolences to the Government and bereaved families
of the Irish soldiers who lost their lives in the cause of
peace.

83. We thoroughly condemn these crimes in southern
Lebanon and we condemn those responsible for them.
It is clear who profits by such crimes and we feel
repugnance for the cowardice of those responsible;
this is not the first crime they have committed.
84. We salute the memory of the victims. We wish
to convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Ireland and to the bereaved families. The
sacrifice of their children confers upon this Organization an even greater moral strength and is a symbol of
the quest for peace, which is still the first and last
objective of our Organization.

92. We fully share the views expressed by you,
Mr. President, in the statement you made at the
beginning of this meeting. In our view, Israel and its
surrogates bear full responsibility for this reprehensible and barbaric, cold-blooded murder of members
of UNIFIL, who were carrying out a noble mission..
However, we are not unduly surprised by this act of
extreme violence, aided as it was by a Member
State which only a few days ago demolished UNIFIL’s
Norwegian field hospital.

85. Mr. SIKAULU
(Zambia): The news from
Lebanon is most disturbing and saddening. In the very
midst of the Council’s consideration of Israeli aggressicn against Lebanon, an exercise which started
last Sunday, savage raids and vicious attacks against
UNIFIL continue. Today two soldiers of peace,
members of UNIFIL, were taken hostage and-as if
.that were not repugnant enough-were murdered in
cold blood.

93. It is incumbent upon the Council to condemn
this horrible deed in no uncertain terms.
94. We pray that the souls of those who died may
rest in peace.
95. I should like to reserve the right of my delegation
to participate in the debate on the item, as I mentioned
earlier, at a later date.

86. If this is not an unacceptable and unpardonable
affront to the Council, which set up UNIFIL, my
delegation cannot but wonder what further crimes
Israel and its surrogates need to commit in order to
compel the Council to act decisively and effectively.

96. The PRESIDENT (inferpretutionfiom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

87. My delegation strongly condemns the murder
today of the two Irish members of UNIFIL as well as
the continuing acts of harassment and terrorism
against the Force. The so-called de facto forces are
irresponsible elements, nurtured by Israel and solely
committed to serving Israeli interests. Israel, in our
view, cannot escape responsibility for the shameless
incidents of today.

97. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In my statement of 14 April
[2213th meering] it was my sad duty to extend condolences on behalf of the Government and people of
Israel to the Government and people of Fdi on the loss
of the Fijian soldier who made the supreme sacrifice
in the course of the recent clashes in southern
Lebanon.

88. Zambia is ready to join with other members of
the Council in any action to compel Israel and its
surrogates in Lebanon to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon and to desist forthwith
from all savage attacks against UNIFIL. We take the
statement of the President of the Council, which we
support fully, as only a measured response to the
specific events of today.

98. I have now to express with equal sadness condolences to the Government and people of Ireland,
not only on the loss of the Irish soldier who died two
days ago as a result of the injuries he suffered in the
same clashes, but also on the senselessmurder of two
Irish soldiers by villagers in southern Lebanon today.
99. Israel condemns unreservedly these indefensible
acts. Irrespective of their background, there can be no
justification whatsoever for the perpetration of such
unconscionable activities.

89. I should like, in conclusion, to express my
delegation’s condolences to the Secretary-General,
the commander of UNIFIL and to the Government
and people of Ireland for the tragic loss of the two
members of the Force.

100. The Government of Israel shares the grief at the
tragedy which has befallen the families of the Irish
8

soldiers who lost their lives so tragically in the ranks
of UNIFIL.
The people of Israel extend their deepest
and most profound sympathy to the people of Ireland.

109. On this solemn occasion I have confined myself
to expressing our shock and outrage, as well as our
condolences. The martyrs from Ireland join the Palestinian martyrs in their demand for action by the
Council against the criminals, be they called Israel or
de facto forces.

101. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spunish): I now call on the representative
of Lebanon,
who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
102. Mr. TURN1 (Lebanon): This occasion
as I said earlier, be observed with solemnity.

110. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spunish): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as

must,

representative

103. I regret that the representative
of Israel, who
for this occasion has lost his usual cynical smile, should
have felt compelled, in extending his condolences, to
decline the responsibility
of his Government and to put
the responsibility
for the very tragic events on
Lebanese who are simply acting as surrogates of
Israel.

of MEXICO.

111. My delegation pays homage to the members of
UNIFIL
for the fortitude they have shown in the face
of the violence to which they have been subjected.
112. We wish to convey our condolences to the
Governments of Fiji and Ireland for the losses suffered
by their contingents in carrying out their exalted peacekeeping mission.

104.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from SpanThe next speaker is the representative
of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
whom I invite to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

ish):

113. The United Nations forces and the political
authority they represent are being challenged. The
moral authority of the Security Council is thus called
into question, and it is our bounden duty, therefore,
to re-establish it. The mandate conferred by the Council must be strictly carried out and the United Nations
forces rigorously respected, since the viability of this
type of operation in the future will largely depend on
the results that are obtained now.

105. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
It is my sad duty to extend condolences to the Council, to the Secretary-General,
to UNIFIL,
to the people
and Government
of Ireland and to the families of
the martyrs. Our condolences are extended in the name
of Chairman Yasser Arafat, the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the entire Palestinian people.

114. This week it has become clear that the illegal
so-called defucto forces have the material and financial
support of Israel. All the members of the Council
have stood together in forcefully condemning not so
much the incidents themselves-which
would be
absurd-but,
rather, those who perpetrated them or
who directly or indirectly contributed to those events
which we so deeply deplore.

106. The crime committed
today by the disciples
and proteges of the neo-fascist Zionists in Tel Aviv
is yet another heinous crime reminiscent
of that
committed
by the Zionists-the
masters-more
than
30 years ago, when another soldier of peace, the
United Nations Mediator,
Count Folke Bemadotte,
was murdered in cold blood in the Holy City of
Jerusalem.

115. Today we have been informed of new incidents
indicative
of a criminal
attitude. The murder this
morning of two soldiers from the Irish contingent
was unprecedented
in the history of United Nations
peace-keeping operations.

107. In my last statement [221&h meeting], I referred
to Israel’s plan to find “just a major” to act as a
puppet. But this puppet turned out to be more
monstrous than the real Frankenstein monster. Israel
should be held equally responsible for this heinous
crime.

116. For the time being, and because of the urgency
with which the Council felt it should respond in the
face of these recent outrages, we have simply made a
solemn declaration; but we shall not be able to check
this process of deterioration
in southern Lebanon
unless we promptly adopt substantive measures to
strengthen the authority of the Council and engage the
political will of each and every member. Only thus
shall we carry out the responsibility
we all share.

108. It is-no accident that earlier in the day today
the Zionists directly, and without surrogates, committed another heinous crime when they destroyed a
convalescent home in Sarafand, in southern Lebanon,
thus causing the death of a medical doctor and two
medical assistants, in addition to a number of innocent
civilians, including infants.

The meeting

9

rose at 9.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en ventc darts les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des venues. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

H3nanwn

I-IOJIYVMTE.
Opranu3auan

ZI3AAHHII

OPPAHHSAIUiM

O6’be@skeHHblx

OB-LEAHHEHHhIX
HaqwR

rdomsio

amtax
BanreM
HaquR,

H areHTCTuax
no ucex panouax
Mupa. HaBOJJHTe
cnpaanw
KXIIX(HOH Maraauue
nnu nunr~~e
no anpecy:
Opraunaauwn
Cetcqnrr no nponame
nananufi,
Hbm-Mopa
rimi X-kHeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

HAIWR.
B xxtixmdx

nynmb

mara-

06 HanaHWRX
06’bennnennbrx

a

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerlas y casas disttibuidotas
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-61462-August

1986-2.425
